
--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0849 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
SUBMITTED VIA DOCKET  
NO. EPA–HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01-OW  
& EMAIL TO LCRI@EPA.GOV. 
  
  
February 5, 2024  
  
  
Michael Goldberg 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
Standards and Risk Management Division 
EPA Office of Water  
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. N.W.  
NW, Mail Code 4607M 
Washington, DC 20460  
  
Re: 
EPA–HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01—Office of Water – National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI)  
  
Dear Mr. Goldberg,  
  
Denver Water submits this comment letter in response to the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency’s (EPA) request for comments on the proposed National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI).   
Denver Water is committed to delivering safe water to our customers. In 2012, Denver Water’s 
Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) sampling results exceeded the action level measuring the amount 
of lead present in a customer’s tap water under the LCR. After years of public education and 
study, in 2018, the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE) 
designated orthophosphate as Optimal Corrosion Control Treatment (OCCT) for Denver Water’s 
potable drinking water system. Denver Water and many other regional partners came together 
with concern regarding the designation due to downstream impacts that would affect natural 
streams and rivers, source water for drinking water plants, wastewater treatment plants, 
stormwater water providers, and other ecological impacts. These stakeholders assessed the 
loading and cost impacts from the introduction of additional phosphorus to municipalities and 
watershed as compared to a pH adjustment. Denver Water put forth a plan using filters, 
accelerated lead service line (LSL) replacements and pH adjustment for corrosion control, 
providing statistical evidence that this approach was at least as effective at lowering lead levels 
and protecting the health of the community as using orthophosphate for corrosion control 
treatment to protect public health.  
As a result of this stakeholder effort, in 2019, Denver Water became the first in the nation to 
receive approval from the EPA, as well as the CDPHE, for a variance from Rule 40 C.F.R. § 
141.82(e) Subpart I of the LCR. The variance has enabled Denver Water to chart a new path 
with the Lead Reduction Program, one that permanently addresses lead exposure in drinking 
water through an accelerated lead service line replacement program that will remove all LSLs 

Letter From. Denver Water ―  
Docket No. EPA–HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01-OW  
February 5, 2024 
 
Page 2 of 9 
 
within 15 years beginning in 2020. Since 2020, Denver Water has met all metrics of its variance. 
A new variance was granted to Denver Water in 2022 under the Lead and Copper Rule 
Revisions (LCRR). 
The Lead Reduction Program includes five key elements: 1) the development of an online, 
publicly accessible LSL inventory; 2) the replacement of all LSLs in our service area within 15 
years at a 7% annual replacement rate; 3) a filter distribution program to customers who may 
have an LSL; 4) comprehensive communications, outreach and education efforts; and 5) the 
incorporation of equity principles (referred to as health equity and environmental justice, or 
HE&EJ, in official reporting) in all aspects of the program.1 
 
Through the Lead Reduction Program, over the last four years Denver Water reduced lead 
exposure to levels below what was initially projected at the time of the original variance 
approval, and what could be achieved under the LCRR. Denver Water has created a 
comprehensive LSL inventory that is continually being updated, has successfully replaced over 
22,000 customer-owned LSLs, maintained a long-term pitcher filter distribution program, and 
lowered regulatory lead sampling results to below 5 parts per billion through the maintenance of 
pH and alkalinity. Based on the performance under the variance metrics and the results from the 
lead equivalency model, the variance and Lead Reduction Program are objectively more 
effective at lowering lead levels at customers’ taps compared to the use of orthophosphate 
treatment under the LCRR. In addition, the Lead Reduction Program has incorporated HE&EJ 
principles to help prioritize areas and specific properties within Denver Water’s service area to 
investigate and replace LSLs, as well as to maximize outreach efforts with vulnerable 
populations as well as disproportionately affected communities and neighborhoods. 
 
Denver Water appreciates the opportunity to comment on the proposed LCRI and supports the 
efforts to protect public health and the potential exposure of lead in drinking water. Among the 
listed developments in the LCRI, Denver Water supports accelerating the replacement of LSLs, 
lowering the Action Level threshold to 10 parts per billion, the incorporation of connectors or 
lead goosenecks into system inventories, and increasing consumer communication and 
outreach efforts. 
Comments on Costs of LSL Replacement Programs: 
1. 
EPA should consider assuming a higher average cost for LSL 
replacements than is currently assumed. The cost for Denver Water to fully replace an LSL 
can range from $5,000-$12,000 per replacement, which includes required exterior restoration. 
Cost efficiencies are gained when combining LSL replacement with a water main replacement 
project or by grouping hundreds of properties in a single work package. Costs can increase 
when it is a larger diameter pipe, construction activities are occurring in a major roadway, and 
also with the restoration of landscape and hardscape surfaces. Based upon Denver Water’s 
experience, the average cost for contractors to replace LSLs in geographically concentrated 
work areas is $9,600, not including the administrative, management and outreach costs. 
Additionally, Denver Water has found that covering exterior restoration costs (e.g., asphalt 
 
1 Denver Water Lead Reduction Program Plan, Amendment to Original Plan – 2023, available at: 
https://www.denverwater.org/sites/default/files/lead-reduction-program-plan-amendment.pdf 

Letter From. Denver Water ―  
Docket No. EPA–HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01-OW  
February 5, 2024 
 
Page 3 of 9 
 
repair, concrete, landscape) is a necessary cost to comply with permits required to do the work, 
including stormwater and street occupancy permits.  
 
2. 
Financial funding guidance is needed to assist water providers to 
understand what funding options are available to replace LSLs. Denver Water is replacing 
customer-owned LSLs and providing pitcher filters to customers until six months after their LSLs 
are replaced at no direct charge to the customer notwithstanding the fact that customers own 
their service lines from the main to their properties. Protecting the public from the potential 
impacts of customer-owned LSLs that were installed during the first half of the 20th century will 
cost hundreds of millions of dollars over the life of the program. With its variance, which 
approved an alternative treatment technique that Denver Water is required to perform, Denver 
Water was able to use ratepayer resources and bond financing to spread the costs across all 
ratepayers, similar to other water treatment costs. Additionally, Denver Water followed 
accounting standards to capitalize the cost of LSL replacements and pitcher filter distribution. 
The ability to capitalize the cost of LSL replacements and pitcher filters has allowed Denver 
Water to spread the costs for the program with rate increases over time rather than incurring 
them all at once. This has kept rates affordable for Denver Water customers while undertaking 
this important public health effort. 
 
3. 
Federal funding is essential to the successful implementation of the LCRI. 
In 2022, Denver Water received $76,123,628 from the Colorado Drinking Water State Revolving 
Fund, thanks in part to the federal bipartisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act signed into 
law by President Joe Biden in November 2021. The state approved allocation of funds to 
Denver Water in October, and the Denver Board of Water Commissioners formally accepted the 
funds Dec. 7, 2022. The funding Denver Water received is a low-interest loan that the utility will 
repay, with $40 million of the loan’s principle forgiven immediately, as allowed by the legislation. 
The money is being spent 2023 through 2025 and will support the replacement of 6,800 more 
LSLs than we originally planned. Thanks to the new funding, 2,000 lines were replaced in 2023 
— on top of the nearly 5,000 lines completed last year. Denver Water complies with all the 
federal requirements and absorbs the 10%-15% non-reimbursable costs (e.g., meters and 
meter pit fittings) through the program’s normal funding mechanisms. 
 
4. 
Water Providers need additional tools to finance replacement of LSLs. Even 
with existing federal funding, water providers will need additional financing tools to close the 
substantial gap between the costs to undertake this work and available funding sources.  Water 
providers face particular challenges in finding ways to finance the replacement of privately-
owned LSLs.  In Denver Water’s case, we had to obtain a private letter ruling from the Internal 
Revenue Service (I.R.S.) to confirm our ability use tax-exempt debt to pay for replacement of 
LSLs owned by our customers due to the “private use” limitations generally applicable to tax-
exempt bonds.  The Financing Lead Out of Water Act (H.R. 6985) would amend the private use 
test to exempt LSL replacement, allowing other water providers to utilize this important funding 
tool without having to seek costly individual determinations from the I.R.S.  Financing private 
lines over the life of the asset significantly reduces the impact to customers’ bills. EPA’s support 

Letter From. Denver Water ―  
Docket No. EPA–HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01-OW  
February 5, 2024 
 
Page 4 of 9 
 
of this, or revenue ruling to accomplish the same objective, could be instrumental in reducing a 
significant barrier to replacing LSLs while maintaining affordable rates.  
Comments and Recommendations on the Proposed LCRI Requirements: 
The last four years of implementing the Lead Reduction Program have brought many 
successes and challenges. The replacement of LSLs is a permanent solution to addressing a 
major contributor to lead in drinking water, but it is also a heavy cost burden on water utilities, 
and the replacement at individual properties can be a very difficult task. Denver Water has 
evaluated these experiences and submits the following comments and suggested modifications 
to clarify and improve the LCRI:  
5. 
Denver Water supports the proposed lead action level of 0.010 mg/L. 
Denver Water prioritizes public health and the removal of lead in drinking water and 
believes 0.010mg/L is an appropriate action level for the LCR. The action level is a level at 
which water providers must take additional steps to try to reduce lead levels in their system and 
raise customer awareness. The action level was never intended to be a maximum contaminant 
level. Denver Water is concerned that if the action level is set too low, many water providers will 
exceed the action level on a frequent or constant basis. This may have the unfortunate effect of 
reducing the effectiveness of certain actions triggered by an action level exceedance, such as 
customer education. If water providers are communicating with customers on a relatively 
constant basis that they are above the action level, this has the potential to cause customers to 
become desensitized to this important public notice. Water providers may also have to expend 
valuable resources that could be used for LSL replacement programs on OCCT and re-
optimization studies. For these reasons, Denver Water supports an action level of 0.010 mg/L.  
 
6. 
Denver Water is concerned that the proposed maximum replacement 
requirement of 10,000 LSLs per year is not feasible for many water providers and 
recommends EPA instead adopt a maximum limit of 8,000 LSL replacements per year. 
Denver Water supports the proposed minimum LSL replacement rate and replacement 
deadlines, although replacement of all LSLs within 10 years will be difficult for water providers 
that have large numbers of LSLs. Denver Water’s program is a 15-year program, which requires 
the replacement of nearly 64,000 total LSLs at a rate of 7% per year. This is an accelerated 
program that has required additional staffing, contractors, and extensive resources to 
accomplish. Between 2020 and 2024, Denver Water has spent $2.4M on additional staffing to 
administer the program and $308M on the LSL replacements themselves. It has also required 
careful coordination with the City and County of Denver’s transportation department as well as 
other utilities to avoid conflicts related to road construction, utility work, and street paving. A 
program on the magnitude of 10,000 LSLs per year may approach the level where traffic and 
transportation, and general construction is affected. Medium to large systems with large 
quantities of LSLs will have a difficult time replacing all LSLs within a 10-year period and 
reducing the time frame for such systems to less than 10 years would likely not be feasible. For 
water providers that are managing massive capital infrastructure projects and challenges, a 
large 10-year LSL replacement program will be especially difficult to sustain. For these reasons, 
Denver Water believes an annual 8,000 LSL replacement requirement is more realistic, 

Letter From. Denver Water ―  
Docket No. EPA–HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01-OW  
February 5, 2024 
 
Page 5 of 9 
 
although 2024 will be the first year it has attempted to reach this number through its 
replacement program.  
 
7. 
For water providers with a significant number of LSLs, EPA should 
consider excluding the first two years of the LSL replacements from the three-year 
rolling average to give water providers a buffer to gain experience with LSL 
replacements. In Denver Water’s experience, it would have likely failed to replace 10,000 LSLs 
in the first year of its variance. During the first year of its variance, Denver Water achieved 4,800 
LSL replacements which was a monumental effort and a significant learning experience. While 
EPA proposes to adopt a three-year rolling average, if a water provider that has a significant 
number of LSLs only achieved 4,800 LSL replacements in its first year, it would be extremely 
difficult to recover in subsequent years.   
 
8. 
EPA should provide states with the authority to waive the requirement to 
re-optimize again following an action level exceedance regardless of meeting their 
optimal water quality parameters and to provide the state with the authority to waive this 
requirement.  Corrosion control treatment studies can be resource-intensive, costly, and time-
consuming. Denver Water believes that if water providers are able to meet certain metrics, such 
as an accelerated LSL replacement effort or pitcher filter distribution program, resources 
expended toward these efforts can be better utilized to advance public health. Prior to the Lead 
Reduction Program approval, Denver Water, state and local regulators and other stakeholders 
evaluated the downstream impacts and cost that would affect natural streams, rivers and 
wastewater treatment plants associated with using orthophosphate as corrosion control 
treatment.2 The estimated costs of orthophosphate implementation to the Front Range were 
higher than the estimated costs of implementing the Lead Reduction Program, which offered a 
more permanent solution to addressing lead in drinking water by replacing LSLs at an 
accelerated rate. By having the option to implement the Lead Reduction Program in lieu of 
orthophosphate treatment, Denver Water was able to invest resources in the permanent 
removal of lead as opposed to a treatment method that would have required the downstream 
investment in new clean water nutrient treatment removal technologies and contirbuted 
additional phoshorous loading to already nutirent-stressed waters throughout the region.    
 
 
 
2 Documents from this stakeholder process can be accessed using the following link: 
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1QOsD1TFFMQRWsFQz9fpX3_BJl_XgGdvy  

Letter From. Denver Water ―  
Docket No. EPA–HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01-OW  
February 5, 2024 
 
Page 6 of 9 
 
9. 
EPA should adopt clear regulatory pathways that would allow a system to 
defer OCCT using orthophosphate by implementing an alternative treatment technique 
program. Such an option is desirable for water providers in parts of the country with nutrient-
stressed waterways, climate-impacted streams, and strict nutrient-based water quality 
regulations. However, the system should not be required to implement orthophosphate as 
OCCT at the end of its program, as this would eliminate the incentive to adopt such a program. 
Additionally, EPA has requested comment whether, as a condition of deferring OCCT, a system 
should commit to replacement of at least 20 percent removal per year and must have no LSLs, 
galvanized service lines requiring replacement (GRR) , or lead status unknown service lines 
remaining at the end of the five-year period. Denver Water believes that such a level of 
replacement is not a realistic option for most water providers. A 10% removal rate is a much 
more realistic option, coupled with a pitcher filter distribution program.  
 
 
10. 
Denver Water supports the definition of reasonable effort under § 
141.84(d)(3)(i) as four attempts to obtain property owner consent. Water providers should 
be required to make at least four attempts to obtain customer consent for LSL replacement. 
Denver Water was one of the first utilities in the country to adopt a standard operating 
procedure to follow up with customers multiple times to obtain their consent to an LSL 
replacement. Through the first four years of Denver Water’s Lead Reduction Program, Denver 
Water has a consent rate average of 95% with 3-4 attempts at contact. In Denver Water’s 
experience, more than four attempts could become burdensome for utilities to track and 
implement and counterproductive with customers.  
 
11. 
EPA should broaden § 141.84(d)(3)(i)-(ii) by revising references to “property 
owner consent” to “property owner or tenant consent, as applicable.” EPA may want to 
consider making similar changes to §§ 141.85(a)(vi)(E) and (F) as well. Under the common 
law in most states, property owner consent is not required or effective to conduct an LSL 
replacement in a single-family residential property because a landlord has surrendered control 
of the property to the tenant, who has exclusive use over the property, subject to the terms of 
their lease. An exception to this would be situations where systems require access to a common 
area over which the landlord retains exclusive control. This does not mean that a tenant is 
necessarily responsible for the LSL replacement, as in many states, landlords, not tenants can 
be held responsible for upgrades to property required by government action unless the tenant’s 
particular use of the leased space triggers the government order.   
 
12. 
Denver Water supports the proposed requirement to ban partial lead and 
GRR service line replacement unless it is conducted in accordance with emergency or 
planned infrastructure work under § 141.84(g)(1) (excluding planned infrastructure work 
solely for the purposes of replacing lead and GRR service lines as part of a service line 
replacement program). If a system can obtain customer cooperation, a partial LSL 
replacement should never be performed. However, there are times when partial LSL 
replacements are unavoidable, such as when a customer’s property cannot be accessed. 
During both emergency work and planned work, where a customer’s consent cannot be 

Letter From. Denver Water ―  
Docket No. EPA–HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01-OW  
February 5, 2024 
 
Page 7 of 9 
 
obtained or property cannot be accessed, for the sake of protecting and completing work on a 
distribution system, a partial LSL replacement cannot be avoided. Fortunately, in Denver 
Water’s experience, the instances where customers do not provide consent, or their property 
cannot be accessed are few in number. 
 
13. 
Inventory Validation Requirements. Denver Water recommends that EPA 
clarify whether systems currently complying with inventory validation requirements adopted by 
EPA or primacy states under the LCRR will need to be revalidated under §§ 141.84(b)(5)(i)-(ii) 
of the LCRI, or whether validation decisions made under the LCRR will control over the new 
LCRI requirements, i.e., clarify that systems do not have to repeat validation requirements under 
the LCRI where primacy agencies have approved of inventory decisions under the LCRR. The 
LCRI has the potential to create confusion for systems relying on current EPA and state 
guidance to validate randomly sampled pools of customer properties prior to the compliance 
date for the LCRI. The requirement to have a random sample and exclusion of previously 
developed data from the validation pool is also problematic for water providers that are already 
developing inventories through inspections, water quality tests and potholing. Alternatively, EPA 
should make the inventory requirements effective in 2024 to avoid confusion over whether 
validation work done now, will have to be repeated when the LCRI goes into effect.  
  
14. 
EPA should include alternative requirements for systems to validate their 
inventories using predictive modeling to determine the probability of LSLs within a 
service area. Predictive modeling seeks to determine the probability of a location of LSLs within 
geographic areas in a service area, not through a minimum number of random samples, but 
instead through an abundance of samples, and other forms of evidence, such as record 
reviews, water quality testing, potholing, and interior investigations. Some systems, such as 
Denver Water, are already using predictive models developed through abundant data that has 
already been collected. If systems that use predictive modeling are required to meet the same 
data and validation requirements as proposed under Rule §§ 141.84(b)(5)(i)-(ii), such systems 
will be forced to invest resources unnecessarily to develop new data and collect random 
samples where they may already have a reliable model capable of predicting the location of 
LSLs in their service area. For systems that use predictive modeling, EPA should instead 
require their model have a confidence level of at least 95%.  
 
15. 
EPA should reconsider the deadlines for systems to provide sampling 
results to customers. Rules §§ 141.85(d)(2) and (4) would require systems to deliver sampling 
results to consumers within three days of learning of the sampling results. Where systems are 
managing large numbers of consumer tap sample requests, a three-day timeline is not feasible. 
If systems utilize a contract lab, there is typically a 1-2-day timeline to receive results and 
another few days to review, authorize and confirm results. Once that review is completed, a 
letter will need to be mailed, which can take up to 10 days if the mailing service is managed out 
of state. An additional consequence of requiring three days to provide notice is that water 
providers will need to focus on meeting short deadlines to distribute lead water quality results, 
which may detract from attention to other pressing water quality concerns that cause more 

Letter From. Denver Water ―  
Docket No. EPA–HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01-OW  
February 5, 2024 
 
Page 8 of 9 
 
acute health impacts. Denver Water recommends that EPA instead adopt a 14-day time frame 
from when systems learn of sampling results to deliver the results to customers. 
 
16. 
Denver Water supports conducting all public education activities related to 
an exceedance within 30 days. A prescriptive time period to complete all activities may result 
in rushed completion of activities that does not create the greatest opportunity for educating the 
public. Flexibility should be provided to water providers, through consultation and approval with 
the state, to develop an appropriate timeline to complete public education activities. 
 
17. 
Denver Water recommends that EPA keep the requirement for systems to 
provide notice to customers whether their LSL is made of lead, GRR, or unknown 
material to no more than once a year. For large systems, issuing such notices more 
frequently than once a year can become costly and have a desensitizing effect on customers.  
  
18. 
Translation of educational materials. For the Lead Reduction Program, 
Denver Water used local and state information to identify languages spoken within its service 
area. For example, Denver Water was able to incorporate (along with state data), the City and 
County of Denver neighborhood demographics along with language preferences from Denver 
Public Schools to identify language preferences in addition to limited English proficiency. To the 
extent possible, states should support the development of these needs for smaller utilities 
requiring assistance. Denver Water also recommends that EPA require state primacy agencies 
to provide translation services to support systems that are unable to do so for consumers with 
limited English proficiency. For Denver Water’s Lead Reduction Program, translation and 
interpretation costs are ongoing and borne by the utility to ensure access to program information 
and meeting resources. These costs are upwards of $10,000 annually, and the ongoing nature 
of these costs could be burdensome for smaller systems. Denver Water wholeheartedly 
supports states providing resources to meet water providers interpretation and translation 
needs. 
 
19. 
Definition of service line. Denver Water encourages EPA to consider the 
American Water Works Association’s suggested revision to the definition of a service line, as 
shown below: 
Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe 
which directly connects the community water system’s water main to the building 
inlet first fitting inside the building (i.e., connecting the service line to the building 
water system). Relevant service lines are those that supply water for drinking and 
cooking in the building.  The term service line does not include private water mains. 
Where a building is not present, the service line connects the water main to the 
outlet. Where a private main exists between the community water system main 
and a building, associated service lines are not subject to subpart I. (§ 141.2 of 
LCRI) 
Systems should not be responsible for (1) diagraming on-site distribution system piping 
networks or (2) taking responsibility for “distribution systems” maintained by others and only 

Letter From. Denver Water ―  
Docket No. EPA–HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01-OW  
February 5, 2024 
 
Page 9 of 9 
 
connected to the water system by virtue of the sale of water through a mass meter. Many, if not 
most, of these situations either are state-recognized public water systems or are public water 
systems as defined by the Safe Drinking Water Act. Their status as unregulated (or less 
regulated) public water systems (PWSs) should not lead to a burden on regulated PWSs. 
20. 
State Waivers for Previously Performed School and Child Care Sampling. 
To avoid a duplication of efforts and unnecessary cost impacts, EPA should immediately 
implement the proposed rule to allow states to issue waivers to systems from the requirement 
for lead sampling in schools and child care facilities during the five-year period after the LCRI 
compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after Jan. 1, 2021, but prior to the LCRI 
compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver requirements of § 141.92(h). 
Colorado has adopted a school testing program that meets the requirements of the LCRR and 
LCRI, and is already performing testing of schools and child care facilities under the program. 
However, because the LCRR does not currently provide a waiver for such a testing program, 
testing in Colorado will need to be repeated. EPA should accelerate the compliance date for this 
rule to avoid a duplication of resources, as without an accelerated compliance date, Colorado 
school districts and possibly water systems will need to repeat testing.  
Once again, Denver Water appreciates the opportunity to comment on the proposed LCRI and 
supports the efforts to protect public health and the potential exposure of lead in drinking water. 
Replacing LSLs within a 10-year timeframe is an ambitious and proactive approach, and we 
strongly encourage EPA to provide additional funding mechanisms to assist utilities with this 
work. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit public comments on the questions posed. If you have 
any questions regarding this comment letter, please do not hesitate to contact me.    
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Alan Salazar 
Denver Water CEO

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0955 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Jon Niermann, Chairman 
Emily Lindley, Commissioner 
Bobby Janecka, Commissioner 
Kelly Keel, Executive Director 
TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 
Protecting Texas by Reducing and Preventing Pollution 
P.O. Box 13087   •   Austin, Texas 78711-3087   •   512-239-1000   •   tceq.texas.gov 
How is our customer service? tceq.texas.gov/customersurvey 
printed on recycled paper 
February 5, 2024 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Subject: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, Comments on the proposed National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
Dear Sir or Madam: 
The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) is providing the enclosed comments 
regarding the proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements (LCRI), Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, as requested by February 5, 2024.  
TCEQ recognizes the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) important role in managing 
and protecting the nation’s drinking water under the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) and 
supports EPA’s efforts to revise the federal Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR). TCEQ 
recognizes that control of lead in drinking water is a significant public health issue. We 
understand that these proposed improvements are an opportunity to control lead in drinking 
water and increase public health protection. 
TCEQ appreciates EPA’s efforts to simplify and address many of the comments on the Lead and 
Copper Rule Revisions. TCEQ urges EPA to continue to work with primacy agencies to develop 
data management tools to reduce the significant time, effort, and financial resources necessary 
to implement, administer, and enforce this rule. 
If you have any questions concerning the enclosed comments, please contact Ms. Michele Risko, 
Water Supply Division Deputy Director, at (512) 239-1689 or michele.risko@tceq.texas.gov. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Kelly Keel 
Executive Director 
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality 
 
Enclosure 
 

Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Comments on National 
Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Rule Improvements 
(LCRI) Proposed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
Docket ID Number EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
 
I. 
General Comments 
TCEQ appreciates EPA’s efforts to simplify and address many of the comments on the 
Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR). TCEQ fully supports allowing the use of  
Water Infrastructure Improvement for the Nation (WIIN) grant testing to be used 
toward school and child care required testing. 
 
II. 
Specific Concerns with Lack of Implementation Resources, Proposed 
Requirements and Regulatory Language, and Funding 
TCEQ has concerns with some of the proposed regulatory language that would govern 
how these concepts are implemented and enforced. The most concerning issues with 
the proposed requirements are as follows:  
A. Lack of Tools  
TCEQ recommends EPA provide or complete data management tools prior to 
finalizing the rule, including timely data entry instructions and updating 
database applications to ensure the ability to make reliable compliance 
determinations. Without adequate data management tools, requirements cannot 
be effectively implemented. Existing EPA data tools do not have the functionality 
to implement the proposed rule and additional tools are needed to facilitate the 
LCRI. The current version of the Safe Drinking Water Information System-State 
(SDWIS/State) database does not have the functionality to calculate compliance 
reliably and consistently for the complex tiering updates and 90th percentile 
calculations required under the LCRI. For example, data management tools are 
needed in order to implement requirements in 40 Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) Section 141.86(a)(1)(I) and 40 CFR Section 141.86(b)(1)(i). Without proper 
data management tools, states like Texas will be unable to consolidate its more 
than 155,615 historic lead and copper sample sites (and associated materials 
evaluation data) with the proposed sample site tiering criteria and will be unable 
to confirm which samples (1st liter, or 1st and 5th liter) are utilized in the 90th 
percentile calculations. EPA’s modernization of SDWIS/State has been in the 
process for more than a decade and primacy agencies still do not have a reliable 
database to be able to implement the requirements of several newly 
promulgated National Primary Drinking Water Regulations (NPDWRs). Without 
an adequate data management solution, primacy agencies would have to 
perform manual compliance determinations. This will increase the potential for 
errors and delays in timely compliance determinations and communications to 
the public, and potentially impacting public health.  
If EPA cannot provide the necessary updates to SDWIS/State before finalizing 
the LCRI, TCEQ recommends the Drinking Water State Federal Tribal 
Information Exchange System (DW-SFTIES) be completed and supersede 
SDWIS/State with an adequate structure to accommodate compliance 

determination requirements of the LCRI. Updates to SDWIS/State or DW-SFTIES 
are needed by the rule compliance date, to ensure effective implementation of 
the LCRI. 
B. 10-year Replacement Timeline  
TCEQ recommends EPA remove “Lead Status Unknown Service Lines” from 
replacement rate calculations or create an alternative replacement rate 
calculation for systems reporting a significant amount of Lead Status Unknown 
Service Lines. As proposed, the 10-year time period for Lead Service Line 
Replacement creates a “one-size-fits-all” approach that many public water 
systems (systems) in states like Texas will not be able to meet. TCEQ notes that 
if a system has limited records there may not be options available to determine 
the material of service lines other than digging. TCEQ has identified systems 
who have lost historical records due to natural disasters and struggle to identify 
service line materials under the methods approved by EPA. Unless alternative 
means for identification are provided, these systems will likely be forced to 
report a majority of their service lines as Lead Status Unknown in their initial 
service line inventory. The proposed LCRI will create additional challenges for 
these systems as they will likely not be able to meet a replacement rate based on 
their number of Lead Status Unknown Service Lines.  
C. Service Line Ownership and Replacement Liability  
As proposed, liability issues could arise if systems are responsible for customer’s 
service line replacement, or if they require or manage funding for customers to 
replace their lines. The proposed rule requires full lead service line replacement 
regardless of ownership. TCEQ continues to caution that liability issues could 
arise if systems are responsible for the customer’s service line replacement, or if 
they require or manage funding for customers to replace their lines. The 
possibility that lead service line replacement could cause damage to 
foundations, premise plumbing, and landscaping and yard disturbances should 
be addressed.  
D. Pipe Loop Study Requirements  
TCEQ recommends pipe loop studies be required only for large systems (i.e., 
>50,000 in population) who are better equipped to accomplish the study, and for 
guidance to be developed to accomplish the studies. 
Proposed revisions to 40 CFR Section 141.81(d)(1) that require pipe loop studies 
to be conducted for systems with a population of 10,000 or more, a lead action 
level exceedance (ALE), and lead service lines will impose a huge financial 
burden on systems. These systems, due to lack of scale, may not be equipped to 
meet this requirement themselves and will need to hire consultants. TCEQ is 
concerned that this requirement diverts resources from the goal of getting the 
lead out of water supply systems, and recommends the study requirement be 
focused on systems that may have more resources to comply with the 
requirement.  
Additionally, an official guidance for pipe loop studies has not been developed. 
At a minimum, a pipe loop study will require the ability to design a protocol, 
develop piping materials to simulate the piping environment, measure corrosion 
activity, analyze data, test secondary impacts and maintain quality control of 

the testing program. Many groundwater system operators do not have the 
training to develop a pipe loop study. In states like Texas, groundwater systems 
are approximately 94% of systems subject to the LCRI. Pipe loop studies also 
require several months or years to obtain accurate comparisons and would 
likely require a system to dedicate one operator full time to the endeavor. Only 
large systems with many operators are likely to have the personnel with the 
expertise to design and perform a pipe loop study. Small and most medium 
systems, regardless of source type and operator training, are unable to perform 
pipe loop studies due to the amount of time that must be dedicated to 
collecting and analyzing the data. Systems will be forced to spend thousands of 
dollars to hire consultants to conduct the studies, but the impact of these 
requirements will be most detrimental to small and medium groundwater 
systems.  
The LCRI should include guidance with flexibility on study approaches - with all 
studies being maintained as valid options. Desk-top, coupons, and pipe loop 
studies all have value and can provide different types of information in 
different timeframes. It would also be beneficial to provide some options that 
are faster to implement, especially if lead is considered an acute contaminant 
since pipe rigs and loop studies can take years to complete. Time, resource, and 
cost intensive studies divert valuable resources from the stated goal of “getting 
the lead out.” 
E. Consecutive System Requirements  
TCEQ recommends removing wholesaler optimal water quality parameter 
(OWQP) requirements for consecutive systems. Proposed language in 40 CFR 
Section 141.82(g) suggests that if a system operates under OWQP ranges, any 
system that purchases from that system must also operate under the same 
ranges. Many water systems in states like Texas are intertwined and use 
comingled water. 
TCEQ recommends removing OWQP requirements due to the inability to directly 
apply OWQPs developed for the wholesaler to each consecutive system’s unique 
characteristics or limit the scope of the requirement. The existing definition of 
consecutive system indicates that a “consecutive system is a system that 
receives some or all of its finished water from one or more wholesale systems. 
Delivery may be through a direct connection or through the distribution system 
of one or more consecutive systems.” If a consecutive system receives all of its 
finished water, unaltered from a wholesale system, the monitoring of optimal 
corrosion control treatment through OWQPs could provide valuable information 
regarding the protection of the downstream customer. However, if a consecutive 
system only receives some of its water from a wholesaler, receives water from 
multiple wholesalers, receives water through multiple consecutive systems or 
alters the water upon receipt, the OWQPs of the originating wholesale system 
would not be optimized to the unique characteristics of the consecutive 
system’s blended, augmented, or altered water. TCEQ continues to recommend 
removal of this requirement. Should the requirement be retained, its scope 
should be limited to situations where the water characteristics of the 
consecutive system and wholesale system can be documented as equivalent due 
to the wholesaler being the sole source to the consecutive system and no 
additional treatment is being performed. 

Without revision, it may not be possible to implement and comply with the 
requirements. Should the provision not be altered, some states like Texas may 
be unable to implement this aspect of the proposed rule due to the 
interconnected nature of many of our systems. Systems have taken significant 
efforts to expand resilience and enable the flow of water within their region 
through interconnections, symbiotic contractual relationships, and joint 
partnerships. As an example, one large system in Texas is directly connected to 
more than 100 unique community and non-transient, non-community systems. 
These first-tier consecutive systems then serve more than 200 interconnected 
second-tier systems that also serve more than an additional 250 systems. Many 
of these systems receive water from more than one wholesale provider, 
therefore, under the LCRR they could be required to monitor and comply with 
different OWQPs associated to the unique wholesalers. The ability for each 
consecutive system to monitor OWQPs and the expectation that these 
parameters would accurately represent the water quality of the wholesaler, first- 
or second-tier system and the implied protection of public health lacks 
continuity. 
TCEQ requests EPA provide specific information regarding consecutive systems 
that do not currently have constructed treatment facilities, and any options that 
may be available, including requiring cooperation with the wholesale provider. 
Many consecutive systems within states like Texas receive water under direct 
pressure from one or multiple wholesale providers and do not already have 
constructed production, treatment, storage, or pressure facilities. It is unclear if 
EPA intends to require consecutive systems without current treatment facilities 
to install corrosion control treatment (CCT), and make capital improvements 
(including constructing facilities to house and administer this CCT). 
Additionally, for systems who receive water under direct pressure at multiple 
locations, is it EPA’s intention for treatment facilities to be constructed and CCT 
to be installed at each location the consecutive system receives water? The 
requirement to have consecutive systems install CCT when they do not already 
have facilities where treatment may be administered will place a very heavy 
burden on these systems, both financially and relating to operator training and 
education. The operators for these consecutive systems may only have 
experience in managing distribution systems, and no experience with treatment. 
F. Loss of Funding 
TCEQ requests EPA emphasize the importance of funding to the Drinking Water 
State Revolving Fund (DWSRF) to restore allocations to historic levels and 
maintain the intent and impact of the DWSRF. In state fiscal year 2023, Texas’ 
Base Capitalization grant experienced a new loss of $31 million due to 
congressional earmarking. Although there is funding currently available through 
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, this funding is limited and will not remain 
available in perpetuity. Therefore, it is important to protect the long-term 
viability of the DWSRF base program funding for the additional resources 
needed to implement the LCRI and other newly promulgated federal regulations, 
to ensure equitable funding access to all eligible systems and safeguard the 
intended self-sustaining nature of the DWSRF.  
 

III. 
Carryforward of Concerns with the LCRR 
In addition to the issues named above, TCEQ raised many concerns with the proposed 
LCRR which still remain with the proposed LCRI. These concerns include the following: 
A. Burden of New Requirements 
TCEQ remains concerned about the significant burden of new requirements put 
forth in the proposed LCRI. These changes create additional burden to the 
primacy agency as well as the systems. A recent data review projects that 
lowering the lead action level to 10 ppb will increase Texas’ ALEs by 50%. As a 
result, this increase in ALEs will lead to an increase in corrosion control 
activities (e.g., corrosion control studies (CCST), optimal corrosion control 
treatment (OCCT), source water treatment (SOWT), etc.) by systems as well as 
associated reviews by the primacy agency. 
TCEQ recommends removal of the requirement to provide pitcher filters. TCEQ 
remains concerned that systems who conduct lead service line replacements are 
required to provide customers a pitcher filter certified to remove lead and 
replacement cartridges. Filter efficacy is dependent on proper installation, 
cartridge age, and storage conditions. Many manufacturers recommend unused 
cartridges be stored in a cool, dry place prior to use. The homeowner being 
provided the filter may not use it or may feel it is an inconvenience and throw it 
away. TCEQ recommends removing this requirement. The Safe Drinking Water 
Act (SDWA) public notification requirements are intended to allow consumers to 
make informed decisions regarding the use of water. Informed consumers may 
choose to use filters, obtain bottled water, or seek alternative treatment options. 
It is outside the intent of the SDWA for the state to determine consumer action. 
TCEQ recommends requirements to issue notices of potential elevated lead be 
revised in order to improve communication with customers and reduce confusion. 
States like Texas routinely experience natural disasters (i.e., hurricane, tornado, 
flood, drought, fire, etc.) where water systems work diligently against difficult 
situations to provide potable water. Often, systems will issue a boil water notice 
out of an abundance of caution for protection of public health. TCEQ is 
concerned that issuing the “potential for elevated lead” notification when 
pressure and capacity decline, or when water is turned off due to emergency 
work, will confuse customers if the notice is required to contain language that 
encourages flushing and opposes boiling. TCEQ proposes that notice of 
potential for elevated lead only be issued to customers if a water system turns 
off water at a customer’s meter and not if emergency or routine maintenance is 
conducted affecting more than one customer. If EPA determines a “disturbance” 
includes emergency maintenance on service lines in accordance with 40 CFR 
Section 141.84(h)(1)(i-iv), it may be impractical to require systems to maintain a 
surplus of filter pitchers and cartridges in the event of emergency repair. 
B. “Designation” versus “Review and Approval”  
 
TCEQ recommends changing the “state designates” language in the proposed 
rule to “the state will either designate or review and approve treatment proposed 

by the system.” TCEQ continues to request that EPA recognize that many states, 
including Texas, review and approve a system’s treatment recommendations 
and OWQPs, and do not “designate” treatment or OWQPs based on the state’s 
own analysis of the system.  
 
C. Re-optimization 
 
TCEQ requests that EPA provide a definition for “re-optimization.” This definition 
is important because the proposed rule requires re-optimization when a system 
has already installed corrosion control treatment and then has an action level 
exceedance. The definition should clarify that re-optimization is only applicable 
for treatment that has been reviewed and approved (or designated) by the state. 
A guidance document should be developed by EPA that would aid a system in 
troubleshooting problems with their treatment such as proper dosing or 
changes in the treatment product or method itself. In addition, this term will 
need to be added to SDWIS and DW-SFTIES for documenting the “deeming” of 
each system under milestones.  
 
IV. 
Recommended Revisions  
TCEQ proposes revisions to several areas of the proposed LCRI to streamline activities, 
standardize information, or add clarity. These areas include:  
A. Premise Plumbing Replacement 
TCEQ recommends expanding flexibility afforded in the LCRR. In the LCRR, TCEQ 
concurred with and appreciated the premise plumbing replacement option for 
lead exceeding non-transient non-community systems. TCEQ recommends 
expanding this flexibility option to address copper exceedances. 
B. Service Line Replacement 
TCEQ recommends revising language within 40 CFR Section 141.84(d)(3)(ii) to 
state that water systems must offer full service line replacement once the water 
system becomes aware of an ownership change. As proposed, requirements 
would put an undue burden on water systems to continuously obtain data on 
property ownership which is outside their purview. TCEQ’s recommendation to 
revise the proposed language is underlined below:  
“Within six months of becoming aware of any change in ownership of the 
property, the water system must offer full service line replacement to any new 
property owner and make a “reasonable effort” to obtain the property owner’s 
consent…” 
C. Optimal Water Quality Parameters (OWQPs) 
TCEQ recommends a definition be added to 40 CFR Section 141.2 for the term 
“optimal water quality parameters” to allow for standardization of the term, and 
to consider TCEQ’s recommended definition. Currently the term is noted more 
than 10 different ways within rule language, without being clearly defined. 
Definition of and consistent use of the term will ensure systems and primacy 
agencies are clear on specific citations related to OWQPs and their associated 
obligations. TCEQ’s recommendation for the definition is underlined as follows:  

“Optimal water quality parameters (OWQPs) for the purpose of subpart I of this 
part only, means water quality parameters reflecting optimal corrosion control 
treatment that is approved or specified by the state.” 
TCEQ recommends that additional information be provided on Step 6 described 
in 40 CFR Section 141.82(j)(6). Current language does not indicate a timeline for 
water systems to submit OWQP recommendations to the state. TCEQ 
recommends sampling results and corresponding recommendations be 
submitted to the state within six months of completing the requirements of Step 
6 described in 40 CFR Section 141.82(j)(6). 
D. Distribution System and Site Assessment 
TCEQ recommends that additional information be provided on Step 3 described 
in 40 CFR Section 141.82(j)(3) regarding the Distribution System and Site 
Assessment (DSSA). Current language does not address how this step and 
subsequent steps apply to systems with no existing CCT. TCEQ recommends 
EPA revise this portion of the rule to acknowledge that site specific actions, 
beyond installing CCT, are available to systems which trigger the DSSA but do 
not currently utilize CCT.  
E. Replacement Program Year 
TCEQ recommends that EPA define “program year” as it relates to the 
mandatory service line replacement schedule within 40 CFR Section 141.84 and 
40 CFR Section 141.90, and consider TCEQ’s suggestion for a definition. TCEQ 
suggests defining “program year” as the 12-month period that starts from the 
promulgation of the final rule. This will allow the inventory updates to be made 
at the same time as the replacement rates are being calculated. Such a revision 
would streamline activities by both the state and systems.  
F. Sample Collection Methods 
TCEQ recommends revising language in 40 CFR Section 141.86(b)(1) to specify 
the maximum amount of time water can stagnate before sampling. Current 
language does not encourage best management practices by residents, 
especially when combined with the requirement that “if a system allows 
residents to perform sampling, the system cannot challenge the accuracy of 
sampling results based on alleged sample collection errors.” If residents are 
expected to collect samples properly, additional information must be provided 
to ensure their success. TCEQ’s recommended revision is underlined below:  
“Sample collection instructions provided to customers cannot direct the 
customer to remove or clean the aerator or flush taps prior to the start of the 
minimum six-hour (not to exceed 24 hours) stagnation period.” 
TCEQ recommends allowing preapproved backup sites within tiered categories. 
40 CFR Section 141.86(b)(2) sets requirements for water systems to collect 
samples from the same sampling sites in consecutive monitoring periods. With 
property ownership changes or current residents being unwilling to continue to 
participate, TCEQ recommends that the rule be revised to allow systems to 
request preapproved backup sites within each tiering category. 
 

G. Standard Monitoring 
TCEQ requests EPA allow certain water systems to continue tap monitoring 
schedules under certain conditions. The requirement within 40 CFR Section 
141.86(c)(2)(i) for all systems with lead, galvanized requiring replacement, 
and/or lead status unknown service lines to begin standard tap monitoring 
poses a burden on laboratories and may lead to the potential exceedance of 
laboratory capacity. Increased sample frequency, combined with increased 
sampling requirements (i.e., 1st and 5th liter sampling) creates an increased 
workload for laboratories and demand for limited supplies. TCEQ requests EPA 
allow water systems currently on reduced monitoring to continue that schedule, 
unless increased monitoring is prompted by objective events (e.g., due to an 
ALE, change in source, change in treatment, etc.). This change will enable 
laboratories to accommodate the rule modifications without outpacing the 
ability to expand capacity and allow systems to concentrate efforts on sampling 
warranted through objective evidence.  
H. Seasonal Sampling 
TCEQ requests revising proposed language for seasonal sampling, and to 
consider TCEQ’s recommendation to increase clarity. TCEQ finds the proposed 
language in 40 CFR Section 141.86(d)(3)(iii), which allows states flexibility in 
seasonal sampling, to be unnecessarily long and confusing. TCEQ recommends 
the entire citation be revised as follows: 
“Systems who alter the seasonality of their reduced sampling period must 
receive written pre-approval by the State. Sampling for the approved period 
must be completed during the next scheduled sampling period.” 
I. 90th Percentile Calculations 
TCEQ recommends revising 40 CFR Section 141.80(c)(3)(i)(A) to clarify that 
concentrations of lead and copper are treated separately when ranking sites for 
calculation of 90th percentile concentrations. These revisions can be simply 
made adding the word “respectively” at the end of the first and second 
sentence. Proposed language is underlined below:  
“The results of all lead or copper samples taken during a tap sampling period 
must be placed in ascending order from the sample with the lowest 
concentration of lead or copper to the sample with the highest concentration of 
lead or copper, respectively. Each sampling result must be assigned a number, 
in ascending order beginning with the number 1 for the sample with the lowest 
concentration of lead or copper, respectively. The number assigned to the 
sample with the highest concentration level must be equal to the total number 
of samples taken.” 
TCEQ requests EPA provide options for systems who have locations served by lead 
lines, but whose residents are unwilling to participate in sampling. The 
requirement for systems with enough Tier 1 or Tier 2 service lines in their 
inventory to meet their minimum sampling requirements to only use these sites 
for calculating their 90th percentile is overly burdensome for systems. It is 
often a challenge for water systems to find homeowners/residents who are 
willing to participate in sampling. TCEQ requests EPA provide options for 

systems who have locations served by lead lines, but whose residents are 
unwilling to participate in sampling. 
J. Typographical Error 
TCEQ requests EPA correct typographical errors with certain tables. The table 
referenced in the narrative of 40 CFR Section 141.87 is Table 5, while the Table 
provided is labeled “Table 1.” TCEQ requests EPA correct this typographical 
error. 
K. Implementation Dates 
TCEQ requests EPA review compliance dates within the LCRI, in order to ensure 
dates are consistent and implementation is achievable. Several provisions in the 
proposed LCRI reference implementation prior to the LCRI compliance date in 
the rule narrative, but are not cited for earlier implementation. For example, 
inclusion of written service line inventory statements in the Consumer 
Confidence Report (40 CFR Section 141.153(d)(4)(xi)) and Tier 2 lead public 
education requirements (40 CFR Section 141.85(a)(1)(ii)) are not included in 40 
CFR Section 141.80(a)(4). TCEQ requests EPA review if these citations should be 
included within the 40 CFR Section 141.80(a)(4) language for implementation 
prior to the LCRI compliance date. Consistency is needed between the rule 
narrative and associated citations. 
 
V. Request for Additional Information 
TCEQ is concerned that several areas of the proposed LCRI do not contain sufficient 
information for understanding subsequent implementation. TCEQ requests EPA 
provide additional information in the following areas: 
A. Service Line Replacement 
TCEQ requests additional and updated information on the definition of “service 
line” as proposed in 40 CFR Section 141.2 Definitions, in order to account for 
EPA’s alternative configurations provided in guidance. In EPA’s guidance 
document “Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory: Small Entity 
Compliance Guide” (https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-
06/Final%20Small%20System%20Entity%20Inventory%20Guide_508.pdf), exhibits 
3 and 4 (pages 7 and 8 of the document) illustrate examples of service line 
configurations for community water systems and non-transient non-community 
water systems. However, these configurations do not conform with the 
definition “…a portion of pipe which connects the water main to the building 
inlet…” in the proposed rule. TCEQ requests the definition of a service line be 
updated to account for EPA’s alternative configurations. 
B. Corrosion Control Treatment  
TCEQ requests that EPA provide additional information to clarify inconsistent 
requirements. TCEQ also requests that EPA remove the requirement for a system 
to establish OWQP ranges in response to a DSSA, and instead allow the system to 
correct the issue on a site-specific basis. 40 CFR Section 141.81(a)(2)(ii) 
establishes requirements for medium sized systems to set OWQP ranges when a 
system exceeds the practical quantitation limit (PQL). 40 CFR Section 141.82(j) 

requires systems to also set OWQP ranges as part of the DSSA. Requiring 
establishment of OWQP ranges in response to a DSSA is not consistent with the 
requirement to establish those ranges in response to a 90th percentile result 
exceeding the PQL. The requirement in 40 CFR Section 141.81(a)(2)(ii) is based 
on a system’s entire set of tap sample data, while a DSSA is triggered by a single 
data point. Additional information is needed to clarify these requirements and 
reconcile these inconsistencies. TCEQ request that EPA remove the requirement 
for a system to establish OWQP ranges in response to a DSSA, and instead allow 
the system to correct the issue on a site-specific basis. 
TCEQ requests additional information on the timelines outlined under 40 CFR 
Section 141.81(e)(2). Specifically, TCEQ requests that EPA include additional 
information on the following: 
• 
40 CFR Section 141.81(e)(2) Step 2 states, “within one year after the end 
of the tap sampling period during which a water system exceeds the lead 
or copper action level….” TCEQ requests EPA provide additional 
information if this refers to the timeframe in which water systems must 
perform corrosion control activities, or the timeframe in which the state 
must notify them of the requirement.  
• 
40 CFR Section 141.81(e)(3)(ii) states, “the water system must complete 
the studies […] and recommend OCCT within 18 months after the end of 
the tap sampling period during which it exceeds the lead or copper action 
level, or the State notifies the system in writing that such studies must be 
conducted.” TCEQ requests EPA provide additional information on which 
timeline takes precedence: the tap sampling period, or the date the state 
notifies the system. 
C. Sample Site Tiering Criteria 
TCEQ requests additional information regarding the new sample site tiering 
criteria. Specifically, regarding the following items: 
• 
40 CFR Section 141.86(a)(4)(i) amends the definition of a Tier 1 sample 
site to include premise plumbing made of lead. While 40 CFR Section 
141.84 describes the steps to verify/validate service line materials, EPA 
must provide additional information on what is needed to document 
verification of premise plumbing material.  
• 
40 CFR Section 141.86(a)(4)(iv) Tier 4 references sites served by copper 
lines with lead solder but does not discuss premise plumbing which was 
proposed in the criteria outlined for Tier 1, 2, and 3 sites. TCEQ requests 
EPA not include premise plumbing in the site tiering criteria, but if 
retained, TCEQ requests that language regarding premise plumbing be 
included consistently across all tiers. 
D. Service Line Inventory 
TCEQ requests additional information on what constitutes a “two point 
verification” as referenced in 40 CFR Section 141.84(b)(5)(i). Specifically, TCEQ 
asks if a visual investigation in the meter pit, examining the material of the 
system portion of the service line, as well as the material of the customer owned 
portion of the service line constitutes a two-point verification. 

 
E. Reduced Monitoring 
TCEQ requests EPA provide additional information and maintain the current 
pathway for systems to qualify for reduced tap monitoring. The pathway(s) 
described in 40 CFR Section 141.86(d)(2) for systems to qualify for reduced 
annual and triennial tap monitoring contradict each other and are unclear. The 
pathway from initial six-month, non-action level exceedance six-month/annual, 
action level exceedance six-month to annual and after installation of optimal 
corrosion control treatment unnecessarily adds complexity to an already 
complex rule and stands to only confuse systems.   
F. 90th Percentile Calculations 
TCEQ requests additional information to clarify 40 CFR Section 141.86(e), 
pertaining to the number and tiering of samples used to calculate the 90th 
percentile lead and/or copper levels for systems with lead service lines (LSLs). 
Additional information is needed to clarify this section, in order to improve the 
assessment of corrosion control treatment efficacy. Specifically, more 
information is needed to determine whether samples from non-LSL sites that 
have higher lead concentrations (rather than samples from LSL sites), should be 
included in the 90th percentile calculation; and whether these higher values 
should replace lower values from LSL sites in the 90th percentile 
calculation. TCEQ requests that EPA specify the highest values, regardless of 
location tier, be used. 
G. Alternative School and Child Care Lead Sampling Programs 
TCEQ requests additional information regarding the requirements of 40 CFR 
Section 141.92(h)(1)(v), and consider TCEQ’s request to retain the existing schema 
in grant programs. Specifically, TCEQ asks whether the frequency and protocol 
of outlets described in 40 CFR Section 141.92(f) are required for sampling under 
a WIIN grant awarded in accordance with Section 1464(d) of the SDWA, or if 
grant programs may retain their existing sampling schema. TCEQ requests grant 
programs retain their existing schema.  
TCEQ requests EPA provide flexibility for water systems to re-apply when waivers 
expire. 40 CFR Section 141.92(h)(2) describes criteria that would cause lead 
testing in school and child care facility waivers to expire. Current language is 
not clear as to whether a water system could re-apply for, and be granted, 
another waiver once a waiver has expired. TCEQ requests allowing systems the 
ability to reapply to encourage mutually beneficial relationships with state’s 
voluntary Lead Testing in Schools and Child Care Facilities programs.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0919 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
Mr. Michael Goldberg 
Standards and Risk Management Division 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Mail Code 4607M 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
 
Re:  Comments to National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (Docket 
Number EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
 
Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal: https://www.regulations.gov/ 
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg, 
The Suffolk County Water Authority (SCWA) is pleased to present our comments on the above referenced 
Federal LCRI regulation. As the largest water supplier on Long Island, serving over 1.2 million people, we are 
pleased to see that the EPA, through these regulatory changes, is making improvements and attempting to 
streamline what was already a very complex rule (the LCRR). We are concerned however, that some of the 
details of these changes may have the unintended consequences of undermining confidence in the water supply 
and those on the front lines that work tirelessly to uphold that confidence. While our comments are unique to our 
utility, through our contacts with other suppliers and those within our industry, we recognize that this rule and 
the implementation of it will have vastly different impacts on suppliers based upon their size, the age of their 
infrastructure and the economic circumstances of their customer base. It is because of this that we urge the EPA 
to exercise caution in the rule making process as one size clearly does not fit all. We remain confident however, 
that if thoughtfully crafted, this rule can have a profound impact on the quality of our nations drinking water.  
We have carefully reviewed the proposed regulations and offer the following comments and recommendations: 
 
Service Line Inventories 
 
- 
EPA was looking for comments on the requirement to document all previously replaced LSLs and 
connectors. It is not feasible for SCWA as we have only partial paper records of these previous activities. 
 
- 
In the SCWA service territory we have over one thousand private communities with private distribution 
networks and service lines. The community water supply (CWS) should not be responsible for inventorying 
private piping networks and service lines on the customer side of master meters. 
 
- 
Remove fire service lines from inventory and replacement requirements providing there is a clear safeguard 
to prevent potable use of them. 
 
SUFFOLK COUNTY WATER AUTHORITY 
Joseph M. Pokorny, P.E. 
Deputy CEO for Operations  
4060 Sunrise Highway, Oakdale, New York 11769
(631) 563-0202
Fax:  (631) 563-0358

 
 
 
 
 
- 
Since records for connectors and their length are very limited and since the rule requires them to be changed 
out when they are encountered, there seems to be little benefit to inventorying them. Our suggestion would 
be to remove any requirement to inventorying connectors.  
 
- 
The as-drafted rule language to include connectors in the inventory does not align with the past inventory 
requirements. As such, water utilities that have expended significant efforts to complete their inventories 
may not have collected the service line connection data in a manner that complies with the proposed 
regulatory requirement. Furthermore, the distinction between “never lead” and “no connector” is unclear, as 
copper services do not have connectors, and thus are both. Significant rework is likely required for those who 
proactively began their inventory. 
 
Service Line Replacement 
 
- 
The LCRI maintains the requirement that when replacing a connector, the customer is notified, provided 
educational materials and a pitcher with 6 months of cartridges. This is onerous especially when SCWA 
performs main replacements. Entire streets and all the homes could require pitchers. In a system such as the 
SCWA, where there has never been a documented exceedance, a better approach would be to provide 
educational materials to the homeowner related to flushing of their service lines after construction has been 
complete and flushing stagnant water from their service line as a matter of routine practice for some period 
of time following a main replacement project or a simple connector replacement. 
   
- 
What happens if a connector is disturbed or replaced during an emergency or main break at night? Is the  a 
supplier expected to wake customers and provide them with pitchers? This is not practical. How does the 
EPA envision this being managed? 
 
- 
The LCRI indicates that the simple disturbance of a lead connector the replacement of a meter or meter 
setting on a galvanized service line with a lead connector will require the provision of a filter and educational 
materials to the customer? As is above, this provision seems onerous and should be replaced with the 
requirement to simply provide educational materials. 
   
- 
Like much of the rest of the country, many SCWA customers already have refrigerator filters that meet 
NSF/ANSI 53 requirements and will not want pitchers in their refrigerators. If the EPA determines that there 
are circumstances where pitchers are required to be distributed, why not offer an alternative to a pitcher for 
these customers such as a credit on their water bill for replacement refrigerator cartridges in lieu of a pitcher? 
 
- 
The minimum average annual lead service line replacement rate is calculated by counting the number of 
replaced service lines divided by the “replacement pool.” However, a Utility that is acting in good faith to 
comply with the rule could identify large quantities of unknown service lines as non-lead, which would not 
contribute towards the calculated compliance percentage. This could result in the rolling average for 
replacements dropping below compliance through no fault of the utility and despite progress identifying 
unknowns. 
 
Action Level and Trigger Level 
 
- 
We appreciate the efforts of the EPA to simplify compliance with the LCRI. The use of a single 0.010 mg/L 
action level, rather than using an action level and a separate trigger level, improves the rule by reducing 
complexity. 
 
Lead and Copper Tap Monitoring 
 
- 
A three day turn around on notification of sample results to customers is unreasonable. The SCWA 
anticipates that due to laboratory internal processes, working hours and staffing, we will need more time and 
flexibility in the method of notification. A more realistic approach would be to allow for 3 to 5 business days 
for the notification of sample results. We believe this is an acceptable alternative as there is little, short-term 
threat to the public. 
  

 
 
 
 
 
- 
It is unclear whether supplemental and “distribution system and site assessment” samples count toward the 
90th percentile calculations. This should be clarified. 
 
- 
The LCRI includes several instances where the CWS is assumed to know the premise plumbing material in 
consumer’s homes. This is included in revisions to sampling sites, “EPA is proposing to correct the 
definition for Tier 1 and Tier 2 sites to include sites with premise plumbing made of lead due to the high risk 
of lead exposure associated with premise plumbing made of lead.” Requiring utilities and/or water suppliers 
to enter consumer’s homes to identify pipe material extends likely extends beyond their authority and would 
be difficult, or impossible, to comply with. 
- 
Aligned with the previous comment, the LCRI does not provide instruction regarding how water systems 
would continue to sample after lead and galvanized requiring replacement (GRR) service lines are replaced. 
Would only samples with homes where the pipe materials are confirmed as lead or galvanized only be used 
for premise plumbing material? 
 
Corrosion Control (CCT) and Water Quality Parameters (WQPs) 
 
- 
We are pleased to see that EPA is providing suppliers more latitude with respect to requiring reoptimization 
of previously OCCT in the event of an exceedance. We feel strongly that systems that have voluntarily 
optimized their corrosion control treatment and demonstrated 90th percentile lead concentrations below 
0.005 mg/L should be recognized and given the opportunity to have an extended schedule for identifying 
unknowns and service line replacement.  
 
Public Education and Outreach 
 
- 
Public education and notification efforts required to comply will be significant. More should be done to 
streamline and reduce this burden. 
 
- 
The rule does not provide guidance or instruction related to sample delivery other than postal mail. Many 
utilities and water suppliers find mail an unreliable method to effectively delivering communications and 
information to their customers and consumers. Sample result delivery options such as customer emails or text 
messaging should be allowed. Water utilities have found these methods to be more effective at delivering 
information and are often preferred by consumers. 
 
- 
Hard copy mailings of results should be limited to samples that exceed the lead action level to prevent 
overwhelming consumers with frequent mailings. Notification of other sample results should be made 
available through other means as mentioned above. 
 
Public Notification 
 
- 
Requiring annual notification of customers served by a lead connector is excessive. Requiring notification for 
unknown service materials is also unreasonable. This is because all customers are exposed to lead and copper 
from their homes plumbing system (especially those with lead solder plumbing) a better approach would be 
to educate all customers on methods they can take to reduce their lead exposure. The record keeping and 
systems needed to notify a select group of customers would be more complicated than simply delivering 
educational information to all customers on an annual basis. 
   
- 
Requirement to notify all customers when AL is exceeded in a system like SCWA’s is unreasonable. SCWA 
has over 40 pressure zones and 250 entry points. A localized lead and copper problem should not require 
notification of every customer.  
  
- 
Providing pitchers to every household after three AL exceedances is excessive. The SCWA has thirty plus 
years of LCR data showing our CCT works for households without LSLs or GRRs. Pitchers should only be 
offered to households with lead service lines of galvanized lines requiring replacement.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lead in Schools and Childcare Facilities 
 
- 
Within the text of the LCRI, the EPA acknowledges that States are better prepared to apply for and receive 
funding for programs that impact these facilities. In addition, the rule encourages states to develop their own 
testing programs for these facilities. Why burden water suppliers with this requirement especially when the 
rule only covers facilities served by the CWS. In our service territory, there are many of these facilities that 
operate their own water supply systems and as a result, those facilities would have their testing performed 
and reported through some other mechanism. This will bifurcation of sampling and reporting can only lead to 
regulatory confusion. 
 
- 
It is our understanding that Schools and Day Care Facilities are beyond EPA’s authority. As such, how can 
these regulations apply to these facilities? 
 
The Suffolk County Water Authority appreciates that we have been given the opportunity to comment on this 
proposed rule. We appreciate your attention to these important matters and the opportunity to provide our input.  
We strongly encourage the development of regulations that strike a balance between protecting public health and 
the practical challenges faced by us. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. We look forward to continued collaboration and the opportunity to 
contribute to the development of effective and scientifically lead and copper rule regulations. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Joseph M. Pokorny P.E 
Deputy CEO for Operations 
 
 
 
CC: 
C. Lefkowitz 
  
J. Szabo 
  
T. Schneider 
  
B. Warner 
  
G. Marsden

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2275 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
SSOCIATES
urry
ENGINEERS INC
FEB 0 1 202^
22 January 2024
BY: 
Via certified mail/return receipt requested
Re:
Postmarked
9 9?0ZL|
• I
Center
Greetings:
Telefax: 618-327-3576
Nashville, IL 62263
PO Box 246
There are many public water supply systems, albeit smaller systems utilizing groundwater 
sources, which operate with a free chlorine residual in their distribution systems and limiting 
CCT decisions solely on pH and alkalinity is not responsive to those systems.
Public Comment, LCRI
Docket I.D. No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
“Public water systems that use free chlorine residual as a primary disinfectant and as a 
secondary disinfectant in the water distribution system shall monitor and record mg/L free 
chlorine residual concentrations and mV Oxidation Reduction Potential.”
“If free chlorine residual is maintained above 2 mg/L and Oxidation-Reduction Potential is 
maintained above +0.7 V, it is expected that lead dioxide (PbOz) protective film will be 
formed at the interior surfaces of lead connectors and lead service lines, and no further 
CCT will be necessary.”
i
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
EPA Docket Center
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, D.C. 20460
I respectfully recommend that the LCRI water quality parameter assessment and corrosion 
control treatment sections be modified to incorporate the following:
Reason:
If the free chlorine residual is maintained above 2 mg/L and the Oxidation-Reduction Potential is 
maintained above + 0.7 V, it is expected that lead dioxide (PbCh) protective film will be formed 
at the interior surfaces of lead connectors and lead service lines.
Telephone: 618.327.8841

Page 2
“Eh Value
Reference
apt. Michael D. C
; P.E.
cc:
The electrical as measured by an oxidation-reduction potential (ORP) probe. The 
higher the Eh values the more oxidizing conditions.” (USEPA, 2019 p. A-2)
Darren Lytle, Ph.D. - USEPA, Office of R&D Facilities, 26 W. Martin Luther King Dr., 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45268
Simoni Triantafyllidou, Ph.D., USEPA, Office of R&D Facilities, 26 W. Martin Luther 
King Dr., Cincinnati, Ohio 45268
Jenny Larsen, Illinois EPA Division of Public Water Supplies, Springfield, IL
USEPA 2019
“Optimal Corrosion Control Treatment Evaluation Technical Recommendations for Primary
Agencies and Public Water Systems”, updated July 2019, USEPA Office of Water (4606M), EPA 
816-B-16-003.
Justification:
“Exhibit 2.4 shows that Pb(II solids exist theoretically at low Eh values at typical pH levels in 
drinking water. At higher Eh values (>0.7 V) and in the absence of corrosion inhibitors or other 
interfering surface deposits. PbO? (a Pb(lV) solid) could form on lead pipe surfaces. PbO? is 
insoluble and would prevent lead from being released to the water." (USEPA 2019, p. 16-17) 
“The high Eh values needed for PbO2 formation may be found in systems that have a high 
chlorine residual (i.e.„ > 2 mg/L as free chlorine) for extended periods of time. PbO? has been 
observed to form between pH 7 and 95, with formation occurring more quickly at higher pH 
values. Field testing has shown that the amount of lead released from PbO? scales is very low 
and closed to lead levels for non-lead pipes (Schock, Triantafyllidou, et al.,2014; Triantafyllidou 
et al.,2015).” (USEPA 2019, p. 17)
Respectfully yours,
------------- . SS0CIATES ENGINEERS INC
CU^&^SSOJ
Ci

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0793 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0753 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: US EPA's Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water <drupal_admin@epa.gov>  
Sent: Thursday, January 18, 2024 2:24 PM 
To: safewater <safewater@epa.gov> 
Subject: Public Inquiry from EPA's Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Website 
 
Submitted on January 18, 2024 2:23 pm EST Submitted by: Anonymous 
 
Submitted values are: 
Name: Dana Sherwood 
Email Address: dana.l.sherwood@cbp.dhs.gov 
Topic: Lead and Copper Rule/Lead Service Line Replacement 
City: Arlington 
State: Virginia 
Zip Code: 22207 
Describe Your Drinking Water Inquiry: 
Has the EPA released additional guidance for NTNC water systems and creating a service line inventory 
under the LCRR and proposed LCRI?   If not, could you address the following example:  If water from a 
well is piped to one building on campus (Building A) where treatment occurs, then treated water is 
piped to additional buildings on campus (Buildings B and C), how many service lines are there?  One or 
three?  Thank you.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0865 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
500 West Monroe Street, Suite 3600 
Chicago, Illinois  
USA 60661 
 
T 847.498.6440 
 
www.corix.com  
 
 
 
Date February 2, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Mail Code 28221T1200 Pennsylvania Avenue 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
RE: Comments by the Corix on EPA National Primary Drinking Water Proposed Regulations for Lead and 
Copper Improvements; Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801.   
 
 
Corix Infrastructure Inc., (Corix) on behalf of itself and its operating subsidiaries, respectfully submits 
this comment letter regarding the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s proposed National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulation Rulemaking published in the Federal Register on December 6, 2023, and 
referred to as the Lead and Cooper Rule Improvements (LCRI).   
 
Through its operating subsidiaries, Corix provides drinking water to approximately 800,000 people in 
18 states and two Canadian provinces. Corix is a member of the National Association of Water 
Companies (NAWC) and agrees with the NAWC in its support for the EPA taking action to the health risk 
posed by the presence of lead in drinking water supplies.  Corix supports EPA’s commitment in the 
proposed rule to improving public health and reducing lead exposures in drinking water by requiring the 
replacement of all lead service lines regardless of the lead levels occurring in taps. We believe that 
several important adjustments are necessary as discussed below to make implementation of the rule 
achievable and workable for water systems, without compromising the protections afforded to consumers 
under the proposed rule. 
 
Generally, it can be acknowledged that setting a standard does not protect public health. It is the 
implementation of the standard that does. The implementation must be feasible for water systems to 
adequately comply. The proposed LCRI addresses many concerns and confusion found in the LCRR, 
however it still has remaining requirements that are complex and overly burdensome with no clear sign 
those requirements address the risk posed to consumers.   
 
Corix works on a daily basis to protect our customers and communities by providing high quality 
drinking water that is compliant with the Safe Drinking Water Act.  Corix respectfully submits the following 
comments in response to the EPA’s request in addition to a request to review and revise elements of the 
proposed rulemaking to ensure the rule is feasible for all water providers. It is important that the EPA 
carefully tailors its approach to reducing the levels of lead in water supplies without imposing 
unnecessary costs and restrictions because the costs and the impacts of reducing the presence of lead in 
the water supply will be substantial and will place a heavy burden on communities, households and 
ratepayers at a time when other new regulatory measures addressing contaminations such as PFAS will 
be adding to the financial burden on communities. 
 
Corix urges the EPA to ensure that this rulemaking and other actions related to removing 
contaminants from the water supply treat all water systems be treated equally regardless of whether the 
systems are publicly or privately owned or operated.  All water providers should have equal access to any 
and all federal and state funding related to removing lead from the water network.  
 
 
Comments  

500 West Monroe Street, Suite 3600 
Chicago, Illinois  
USA 60661 
 
T 847.498.6440 
 
www.corix.com  
 
 
 
1. Most urgently, EPA must extend compliance deadlines under the LCRR so that water utilities can focus 
on the requirements of the LCRI.  
 
EPA’s proposal creates confusion about compliance deadlines under the LCRR due to the 
uncertainty of when the LCRI will be “promulgated.”  (88 Fed. Reg. 84881).  Even so, extended 
deadlines are necessary under the LCRR for several reasons.  CWS’s are now investing time and 
resources into programs that may be delayed or revised and efforts are better focused now on 
the requirements of the proposed LCRI.  Additionally, adding connectors to the inventory is 
problematic and will require more time because states do not have the connectors in the 
computer inventories for LCRR and water systems will need additional time to develop new ways 
to submit inventories compared to LCRR. 
  
 
2. The proposal to require water systems to replace service lines “under the control of the water system” 
should be changed to “owned by the water system.”  
 
EPA’s proposal to require water systems to replace service lines “under the control of water 
systems” is vague and subject to different interpretations.  EPA states that it intends to treat a line 
as under the control of a water system “whenever a water system has adequate access” to 
conduct replacement but declines to delineate the prerequisites or elements of access.  (88 Fed. 
Reg. 84920).  “Adequate access” is too vague a standard for regulated parties to know their 
requirements under the proposed rules.  Regulated parties need a clearer and predictable 
standard to make important decisions regarding access.  Corix proposes that a better, clearer 
standard for which lines are to be replaced would be when the lines are “owned by the water 
system.”  This standard is clear, predictable and allows the regulated parties to understand the 
regulatory requirements. 
 
3. The service line replacement rate requiring ten percent (10%) of service lines of unknown composition is 
not feasible due to the expected large number of lines of unknown composition.  An approach that 
requires 10% of known lead lines first, followed by 10% of unknown lines is preferable.  
 
EPA’s proposed approach to identify and replace service lines of unknown composition in parallel 
with the replacement of known service lines.  EPA states it is proposing to consolidate these 
deadlines for identifying all lead status unknown service lines and replacing all LSLs and GRR 
service lines.  (88 Fed. Reg. 84934).  This approach would pose implementation difficulties 
because it is expected that there will be large number of lines of unknown composition and doing 
both replacements simultaneously would present an unreasonable burden on water systems and 
further stretch limited labor and material resources.  Focusing on each category individually would 
allow water systems to set realistic and achievable goals for replacement and at the same time 
reduce the number of unknown service lines.  
 
 
4. EPA’s proposed approaches present difficult implementation issues and rely too heavily on homeowners 
or residents to collect data and grant access.  
 
Several of the approaches EPA proposes rely heavily on homeowners or residents to achieve the 
goals of the proposed approach.  EPA’s updated tap sampling protocols, for example, rely on 
homeowners or residents to fill five (5) liter bottles and maintain them in a certain order, which will 
almost certainly lead to some confusion and inaccurate results.   
 
It is an ongoing challenge in every Corix facility, even with ongoing education and incentives, to 
get customer participation and the additional demands on the customer for sampling which, in 

500 West Monroe Street, Suite 3600 
Chicago, Illinois  
USA 60661 
 
T 847.498.6440 
 
www.corix.com  
 
 
addition to causing confusion, may place a strain on customer relations, and will pose even 
greater challenges in complying with the proposed sampling requirements. EPA needs to 
consider other approaches for the tap sampling such as requiring the use of a timed approach for 
sampling.   
 
EPA also needs to define the following terms: customer; consumer; resident; and non-owner 
resident – and be careful in their use.  The LCRI should not require notification to an owner of a 
property since water systems may not have that information. 
 
 
5. EPA’s proposed approach should recognize the limits of the authority of private water companies to carry 
out replacement programs and inventories in some instances when local authorities refuse to provide 
access.  
 
Because private water companies do not own or manage the streets where their water mains are 
located, they may be prevented by local laws or authorities from conducting the actions required 
under the LCRI.  EPA must recognize this issue and state its intention not to penalize private 
water companies when those companies are prevented by local governments from taking actions 
to comply with the LCRI.   For the same reason, EPA’s proposal to add connectors to the 
inventory requirement is problematic because some communities will not permit private water 
companies to dig up street to determine whether connectors are present. 
 
In addition, not every property owner may be amenable to replacing a service line, even when the 
water system bears partial or full cost. In many states, water systems do not have legal authority 
to access private property without the owner’s permission and lack clear authority to spend 
ratepayer funds to remove lines on private property. In other places, water systems will face 
logistical challenges as they coordinate lead service line replacement with street improvement 
projects or incorporate it into large capital projects. Lining up trained contractors in a tight labor 
market and acquiring necessary materials introduces additional complications.  
 
Corix requests that EPA provide more guidance on how to access private property and allow 
flexibility to meeting replacement deadlines when constraints beyond the control of the water 
system (e.g. access to property, available skilled labor or necessary materials) are present. 
 
 
6. EPAs proposed requirement to publish the replacement plan should be clarified to reduce confusion and 
promote education to the consumer. 
 
The replacement plan is constructed and built to be an internal planning document that is shared 
with and approved by the state. Without context and training, the material is very likely to cause 
confusion with the customer and potential frustrations in how the plan is being implemented. The 
proposed CCR requirement to publish information about the availability and description of the 
replacement plan could be modified to ensure relevant and necessary information is provided to 
consumers in an easily understood format, without having the need to provide a more technical 
document to the customers, which may not serve the purpose of customer education as intended. 
 
7. EPA’s proposed requirement for water systems must deliver consumer notice of lead and copper tap 
sampling results to consumers whose tap was sampled as soon as practicable but no later than 3 days 
after receiving the results creates unnecessary burden to the water system without reducing risk to 
consumers. 
 
Corix agrees that the requirement to send results to customers is essential to reduce the potential 
health risk of consuming lead in drinking water. However, if there is no risk (e.g., there is no 
detects) or very minimal risk (low copper levels) then the 3-day requirement would not serve the 

500 West Monroe Street, Suite 3600 
Chicago, Illinois  
USA 60661 
 
T 847.498.6440 
 
www.corix.com  
 
 
purposes as intended by EPA and would only add additional administrative burden to water 
systems. Corix proposes the proposed rule be modified to allow more time to send the 
information where there is no lead detection.  
 
8. EPA’s proposed requirement that water systems with multiple lead action level exceedances (at least 3 
action level exceedances in a 5-year period) must conduct additional public outreach activities, submit a 
filter plan to the State and make filters available to all consumers should be reconsidered or modified. 
 
The 3-action level exceedance over a 5-year period measurement is not a true representation of 
risk and the associated requirements are unnecessary.  The number of exceedances should be 
based on the number of customers.   If this requirement is included in the final rule, then Corix 
proposes that filters be provided only to consumers that may be exposed to lead, those 
downstream from the lead exceedance.  
 
9. EPA’s proposed requirement that water systems validate the accuracy of the non-lead service line 
category in their inventory no later than 7 years after the compliance date should be clarified, as it could 
cause confusion and potentially non-productive efforts. 
 
The proposed rule requires that all service lines be identified by the deadline of the replacement 
(10 years after the rule is finalized). It is not clear how the 7-year validation requirement would 
apply in cases where a significant number of unknown lines remain and if, in that case, the efforts 
would serve the stated purpose of the validation activity.  
 
States are providing guidance on what information and efforts are acceptable with regards to 
determining material of service lines.  Validation efforts should not be required where there is no 
risk of lead lines, particularly where there is evidence that the building was built after the state 
implementation of the Federal Lead Line ban of 1986.  
 
In addition, and potentially most burdensome, validation efforts such as potholing would trigger 
the proposed addition of notification and filter distribution under the expanded definition of 
disturbance with “inventorying efforts”. Where water systems have reduced capacity to complete 
identification of unknown service lines before the 7-year deadline to validate non-lead service 
lines, this would create a significant and potentially untenable burden to notify and provide filters 
to customers as validation efforts are underway. The inventorying efforts should not be included 
in the definition of ‘disturbance’ that triggers notification and filter distribution and/or clarification is 
needed on how this cyclical process is to be handled that will not overwhelm water system 
resources.    
 
Conclusion 
 
Corix appreciate EPA’s efforts to protect public health and the environment from the harmful impacts 
of lead in drinking water that poses a risk to many individuals.  We support EPA’s proposal requiring the 
replacement of all lead service lines regardless of the lead levels occurring in taps but urge EPA to 
consider these comments to ensure that the agency produces a rule that is protective, feasible and 
affordable.   
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Kendra Rose 
Director, Health, Safety & Environment

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0936 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
 
 
VIA ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION 
 
Mr. Michael Goldberg 
Standards and Risk Management Division 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE: 
Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead  
and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) (Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg:  
 
The Laborers’ International Union of North America (LIUNA) submits the attached 
comments in response to the request for comments on National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI).  
 
Your time and attention to the attached are appreciated. Should you have any 
questions, please contact this office. 
 
With kind regards, I am 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely yours, 
 
 
 
BRENT BOOKER 
General President 
 
bks 
Attachment 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
COMMENTS OF THE LABORERS’ INTERNATIONAL UNION OF NORTH 
AMERICA ON THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY’S PROPOSED 
NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATIONS FOR LEAD AND 
COPPER: IMPROVEMENTS (LCRI) 
 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
On behalf of the more than 500,000 members of the Laborers’ International Union of 
North America (“LIUNA”), we submit these comments in support of the Environmental 
Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) proposal to reduce copper and lead exposure in drinking water, 
both for our members who are affected and the communities that they serve.1 The EPA’s 
proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (“LCRI”) will protect children and adults from 
lead contamination in drinking water with the ultimate goal of 100% lead service line (“LSL”) 
replacement within the next 10 years. This aggressive goal will not only accelerate local lead line 
replacement programs, but will also provide valuable job opportunities for LIUNA members 
who are trained for this work. We encourage the implementation of these changes as quickly as 
possible, and we support the EPA and Biden Administration in making lead abatement a top 
public health priority. 
 
LIUNA SUPPORTS THE REDUCED ACTIONABLE LEVEL FOR LEAD 
REPLACEMENT AND THE TEN-YEAR REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENT 
 
LIUNA supports the EPA proposal to lower the lead action level from 0.15mg/L to 0.010 
mg/L as it will ensure that we are setting a higher standard for what we allow in our 
communities’ drinking water. EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan has plainly stated, “There is 
no safe level of exposure to lead.”2 Even at low levels, lead particles in the environment can 
cause developmental delays and other health issues to our nation’s children. The negative effects 
of lead in drinking water on overall health are well known. Small children and pregnant women 
are especially at risk of being harmed by lead exposure from water lines. Permanent cognitive 
                                                
1 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Cooper: Improvements (LCRI), 88 Fed. Reg. 84878 
(proposed Dec. 6, 2023).  
2 U.S. Envtl. Protection Agency, EPA and HHS Encourage States to Utilize Federal Resources for Lead Detection 
and Mitigation in Early Care and Education Settings, (Mar. 28, 2023).  

2 
 
impairment and cancer have been linked to overexposure to lead particles.34 Additionally, there 
are significant health and safety concerns in the handling of LSLs for the workers involved in 
pipe replacement activities.5 
Protecting LIUNA members who reside in areas with lead lines, as well as everyone in 
the communities they serve, is a priority for our union. The available data on lead service line 
inventories are notably incomplete and state-by-state LSL estimates vary significantly – a gap 
which this proposed rule intends in part to remedy.6 Nonetheless, we know the number of union 
Laborers directly affected by LSLs is significant. The EPA’s 2021 needs assessment survey 
produced an estimate of 9.2 million lead service lines.7 This number is consistent with an earlier 
survey conducted by the National Resources Defense Council (“NRDC”) which arrived at an 
estimated range of 9.7 million to 12.8 million LSLs, albeit with significant differences in 
respective state-by-state numbers.8 There are a combined thirteen states that appear on one or 
both of the EPA and NRDC “top ten” lists for existing LSLs inventory estimates.9 In these 
thirteen states, LIUNA represents 189,663 active members.10 Given the direct consequences to 
our members, we support all reasonable efforts to address the health threat caused by lead 
contamination in drinking water. 
                                                
3 U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Lead in Drinking Water and Human Blood Lead Levels in the 
United States, Supplements, pp. 1-9; (Aug. 2012).  
4 Stanek, L. W. et al., Environmental Science & Technology, Modeled Impacts of Drinking Water PB Reduction 
Scenarios on Children’s Exposures and Blood Lead Levels, 54(15), pp. 9474-9482. (2020).  
5 U.S. Dep’t of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health, Pub. No. 2023-141, Reducing Workers’ Lead Exposure During Water Pipe 
Removal and Replacement, (Sept. 2023)  https://doi.org/10.26616/NIOSHPUB2023141. 
6 The Government Accountability Office (GAO) noted in its 2018 report: “The total number of lead service lines is 
unknown and while national, state, and local estimates exist, approaches used to count lead service lines vary. The 
total number of lead service lines is unknown because, among other things, the Lead and Copper Rule does not 
require all water systems to collect such information. National, state, and local estimates exist, but the methods used 
to arrive at these estimates vary, making it challenging to compare estimates.” (emphasis added). U.S. Gov’t 
Accountability Office, Drinking Water: Approaches for Identifying Lead Service Lines Should Be Shared with All 
States, (Sept. 2018), p. 8,  https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-18-620.pdf. 
7 U.S. Envtl. Protection Agency, Off. of Water, Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment, 7th 
Report to Congress (Sept. 2023), pp. 21-22. 
8 Olson, Erik D. & Stubblefield, Alexandra, NRDC, Lead Pipes Are Widespread and Used in Every State, (July 8, 
2021) https://www.nrdc.org/resources/lead-pipes-are-widespread-and-used-every-state. 
9 Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, 
Pennsylvania, Texas, Wisconsin. 
10 LIUNA membership data as of September 2023. 

3 
 
LIUNA supports complete lead service line removal as the preferred public health 
strategy to reduce lead exposure in drinking water. Determining lead levels in household 
drinking water remains difficult and imprecise. Removing lead lines remains the safest and surest 
method to eliminate the risk of lead exposure from this source. EPA’s proposed ten-year 
requirement for water systems to remove lead lines is an appropriately aggressive yet practical 
goal. As EPA notes in its preamble, there are numerous examples of water systems that have 
successfully implemented LSL replacement programs with aggressive timelines and exceptional 
results. 88 Fed. Reg. 84911-84913. Illinois, Michigan, New Jersey, and Rhode Island have 
required replacement of LSLs through state law, and the latter two states require systems to 
conduct such replacements in ten years unless granted an extension. The proposed rule is 
therefore consistent with the trend in legislative action among states with the highest lead line 
inventories.  
The feasibility of implementing a complete removal of LSLs in ten years is evidenced in 
part by the individual systems that have successfully undertaken removal programs. EPA offers 
notable examples of water systems that have replaced LSLs in a ten-year window. The large 
systems that responded to crises – Newark, New Jersey and Flint, Michigan – have successfully 
removed nearly all of the lead lines in their systems, in four years and seven years, respectively. 
During its peak, Newark replaced several hundred lines per day for 4-5 days per week. Other 
systems that took leadership on lead include Madison, Wisconsin and Lansing, Michigan, which 
successfully inventoried lead lines, developed a program, and successfully contracted the work 
for thousands of LSL in just over a ten-year period (11 and 12 years, respectively). 88 Fed. Reg. 
84912.  
LIUNA has been at the forefront of lead service removal across the country. On nearly all 
of the water system examples of successful LSL programs described in the NPRM, the relevant 
construction work was performed predominately or exclusively by union craft labor. Each 
residential LSL replacement project is generally performed by a composite construction crew 
comprised of Laborers and other crafts. In Newark, New Jersey and Flint, Michigan, local 
LIUNA leaders established job pathways for local workers that included training programs for 
the applicable skills need to perform underground and pipelaying activities for LSL, as well as 

4 
 
health and safety instruction related to the work.11 12 In Milwaukee, LIUNA Local 113’s 
apprenticeship program was incredibly successful in generating interest in LSL removal and 
prepared a well-trained workforce ready to implement the program rapidly.13 This collaboration 
with employers and water systems to train and employ Laborers to replace LSLs continues in St. 
Paul, Minnesota where its Regional Water Services (SPRWS) is implementing its portion of 
$240 million in the state’s dedicated LSL funding by partnering with LIUNA Local 363 on a 
training program tailored for entry-level jobseekers.14 In Wassau, Wisconsin the city recently 
entered a public-private partnership to remove approximately 8,000 lead lines from its system. 
Wassau’s collaboration includes LIUNA’s national training program to address contractor 
capacity issues and ensure an adequate local and skilled workforce to replace LSLs.15 
 
LIUNA RECRUITING AND TRAINING INFRASTRUCTURE IS CAPABLE OF 
DELIVERING A SKILLED WORKFORCE NECESSARY FOR LSL REPLACEMENT 
PROGRAMS  
 
 
LIUNA is dedicated to providing invaluable training and administering effective local 
hire programs to ensure the availability of laborers to perform LSL replacement. LIUNA’s sixty 
affiliated training facilities in the United States operate as national network of local providers 
which operate under our Construction Craft Laborer registered apprenticeship program standards 
and have access to common curricula covering the broad range of tasks performed by 
construction laborers. The requisite skills required for LSL replacement include pipelaying 
basics, OSHA safety training, and in some cases lead awareness. These classes are commonly 
                                                
11 Cunningham, M., Environmental Policy Innovation Center (EPIC), Echoing Newark: How American Cities Can 
Replicate Newark’s Success in Replacing Over 23,000 Lead Pipes in Under Three Years, (Feb. 10, 2022). 
https://www.policyinnovation.org/blog/echoing-newark-how-american-cities-can-replicate-newarks-success-in-
replacing-over-23000-lead-pipes-in-under-three-years. 
12 Young, M., Local Union Seeks Flint Workers to Train for Water Line Replacement, Mlive.com, (June 23, 2016) 
https://www.mlive.com/news/flint/2016/06/flint_residents_needed_for_tra.html. 
13 Fitzgerald, Joe & Diaz, Richard. Hiring Workers is Vital to Speeding Up Lead-Pipe Replacement in Milwaukee. 
The Madison Times, (Oct. 7, 2023) https://themadisontimes.themadent.com/article/hiring-workers-is-vital-to-
speeding-up-lead-pipe-replacement-in-milwaukee/ 
14 State to Invest $240 Million in Replacing Lead Pipes, Union Advocate, (May 17, 2023) 
https://advocate.stpaulunions.org/2023/05/17/state-to-invest-240-million-in-replacing-lead-pipes/. 
15 Zaal, E. & White. S., New Partnership Created to Eliminate Over 8,000 Lead Service Lines in Wausau, WSAW-
TV, (Oct. 12, 2023) https://www.wsaw.com/2023/10/12/new-partnership-created-eliminate-over-8000-lead-service-
lines-wausau/. 

5 
 
taught throughout the LIUNA training network but are also available on as needed basis when in 
demand. Such flexibility proved invaluable in the case of Flint, Michigan as LIUNA Training of 
Michigan (LTM) offers multiple in-depth courses related to the pipelaying and underground 
work required for LSL replacement.16 A similar program was quickly implemented in Newark to 
meet the City’s aggressive LSL replacement schedule goals.17 These initial large-scale programs 
demonstrate that LIUNA training centers across the country have the capacity to ensure complete 
LSL removal within the next 10 years. Beyond improving the quality of life by helping to 
remove LSL’s, LIUNA has shown it can help these communities by training and recruiting 
unemployed locals as well as giving them skills that will continue to be invaluable even after this 
work is completed.  
EPA notes in the NPRM that “concerns about limited workforce and shortages of 
materials and supplies as factors that could impede service line replacement progress, especially 
when all systems in a geographic region are conducting replacement simultaneously.”18 LIUNA 
has shown that these can be addressed with robust training and apprenticeship programs and 
proper implementation.  
 
CONCLUSION 
LIUNA supports, in general, EPA’s approach to removing the risk of lead in the nation’s 
drinking water. The proposed reduction in the lead action level and the required ten-year window 
to replace all lines in each water system are appropriate policy strategies needed to address this 
public health crisis. Numerous water systems have demonstrated the EPA’s proposed timelines 
are feasible at both the small and large-scale system level. LIUNA’s own experience in this 
sector provides confidence that the workforce capacity to meet this challenge is adequate. Our 
affiliated unions and their contractor partners in this sector will be capable of implementing LSL 
                                                
16 Carah, J., Flint Begins Lead Pipe Removal, The Detroit News, (Mar. 4, 2016). 
https://www.detroitnews.com/story/news/michigan/flint-water-crisis/2016/03/04/flint-begins-lead-pipe-
removal/81333670/; LIUNA Training of Michigan, Course Offerings, https://www.lt-mi.org/course-offerings/. 
17 LIUNA Local 472 Newark Lead Service Line Replacement Project. (Jan. 27, 2020). 
https://www.facebook.com/LiUNAEasternReg/videos/liuna-local-472-newark-lead-service-line-replacement-
project/472097573465427/. 
18 88 Fed. Reg. 84913. 

6 
 
replacement programs in most geographic areas within the ten-year required window. Our 
members look forward to supporting these implementation efforts nationwide.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0864 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0911 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
777 NORTH CAPITOL STREET NE, SUITE 300, WASHINGTON, DC 20002 
MWCOG.ORG    (202) 962-3200 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of the Administrator, Mail Stop 1101A  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20004  
 
Re: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead 
and Copper: Improvements 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
I am writing on behalf of the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments (COG) Chesapeake 
Bay and Water Resources Policy Committee (CBPC) to provide our committee’s comments on the 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations (NPDWR) for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI). 
COG is a nonprofit association, with a membership of 300 elected officials from 24 local 
governments, the Maryland and Virginia state legislatures, and U.S. Congress. Every month, more 
than 1,500 officials and experts connect through COG to develop solutions to the region’s major 
challenges and plan for the future. Established in 1998, the CBPC is comprised of local elected 
officials and representatives from COG's member governments and water and wastewater utilities in 
the metropolitan Washington region. The CBPC recommends water resources policies to the COG 
Board of Directors, addressing issues related to water and wastewater treatment, local water quality, 
stormwater management, flooding, and more. 
 
COG and our member jurisdictions and utilities have a long history of partnership with the federal 
government, including strong support for environmental regulations based on sound science and 
equity. We share the same goal as EPA to ensure the delivery of clean, safe drinking water to the 
public. Considering the continuing challenges of lead in drinking water and the known human health 
effects, COG supports EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. COG believes 
wholeheartedly in EPA’s shared objective to swiftly identify, remove, and replace lead service lines 
with the ultimate goal of complete removal of all lead service lines. 
 
The replacement of lead service lines from the main, to the residence, including connectors such as 
goosenecks is vital to the success of this rule. Additionally, we believe that partial service line 
replacement must become a practice of the past and should be rectified under the revised LCRI.  
 
Changing the lead action level from 15 μg/L to 10 μg/L is an important step toward improving public 
health protections. Furthermore, COG is pleased with the increased public education and public 
notification (PE/PN) requirements. This component is essential for our residents to understand the 
rule and participate in our efforts to remove lead in drinking water. 
 

The Honorable Michael S. Regan 
February 5, 2024 
 
2 
Regarding the proposed NPDWR, our comments must emphasize the need for flexibility in the final 
rule. COG believes and EPA acknowledges the goal of removing 100% of lead service lines in 10 
years may not be universally attainable for every utility. 
 
While significant federal funding has been approved by Congress, additional direct federal funding 
for local governments and water utilities should be provided to help offset the high capital and 
operations costs expected at the local level. The cost of compliance with the LCRI needs to consider 
the potentially high expenses for PFAS and microbial and disinfection bi-products (MDBP) treatment 
and other NPDWR actions. These come at a time when local governments and water utilities are 
facing double and triple digit increases in the prices of essential supplies, equipment, and electricity. 
Additionally, we face the high costs to address regional water security and resilience needs, climate 
change mitigation, meeting Chesapeake Bay TMDL restoration requirements, and more. Ultimately, 
all these costs will fall on ratepayers who are already facing higher costs for necessities such as 
food, housing, and transportation. These are affordability and equity challenges for our members 
and residents. 
 
We thank you for your consideration of these recommendations and look forward to continuing to 
work together on environmental restoration efforts. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Natali Fani-Gonzalez 
Montgomery County 
Chair, Chesapeake Bay and Water Resources Policy Committee  
 
Cc: Bruno Pigott, Principal Deputy Assistant Administrator 
 
Adam Ortiz, EPA Region III Administrator 
Catherine A.  Libertz, Director, EPA Region III Water Division

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0780 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
To Whom it May Concern,
Save the Dunes, on behalf of itself and its members, strongly supports U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency’s (EPA) revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation
(NPDWR) for lead and copper under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA).
We support the agency requiring water systems to replace lead service lines, remove the lead
trigger level, reduce the lead action level to 0.010 mg/L, and strengthen tap sampling
procedures. We also support the many other improvements to public health protection and
simplifications to the rules relative to the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR).
Although our organization is grateful for these new changes, we also offer these changes in
addition to the rules. We recognize that even low levels of lead present a risk to our drinking
water and the public health, and request that the current level of remediation decrease from 10
ppb to 5 ppb. We also ask for the agency to establish more long-term multi-year grants that
focus on lead service line replacement, especially in smaller communities such as the ones in
our region of Northwest Indiana.
Due to the large amount of industrial activity in Northwest Indiana and our organization’s leading
role in creating a culture of pollution prevention in our region, we know with certainty that this
regulation is an absolute necessity to ensure environmental protections. We hope to see this
rule go into effect as soon as possible. We believe that this will address public health concerns
that affect our organization and our membership who live, work, and recreate in Northwest
Indiana. Thank you for considering these comments. If you have any questions, please contact
Advocacy Coordinator Harshini Ratnayaka at 219-879-3564 ext. 101 or
harshini@savedunes.org.
Sincerely,
Harshini Ratnayaka
Advocacy Coordinator
Save the Dunes
Save the Dunes · 444 Barker Road ·Michigan City, IN 46360 · (219) 879-3564

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1337 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0925 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
2800 U.S. Hwy 281 North • P.O Box 2449 • San Antonio, TX • 78298-2449 • www.saws.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Mail Code: 4607M 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Administrator Regan, 
San Antonio Water System (SAWS) is grateful for the opportunity to comment on the proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). SAWS is, has been, and always will be an advocate for any rule or 
regulation that will provide the safest water to the community in the most cost-effective and affordable 
manner. SAWS stands with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in safeguarding our water quality 
and safety for future generations by updating necessary infrastructure. As one of the largest public water 
systems (PWS) in the country with over 650,000 service lines supplying over 2 million residents, we strive 
to be a leader in customer service and protection of public health.  
The new LCRI makes great strides in accomplishing its goals of a lead-free system, and many of the 
proposed rules not only put the health and safety of American citizens at the forefront, but also take into 
consideration some of the capabilities and limitations of the PWS.  
• 
The lowering of the lead action level to 10 ppb is a perfect example of finding a balance. This 
benchmark will improve the health and safety of the community while keeping the capabilities 
and limitations of a PWS in mind.  
• 
SAWS would also like to applaud the EPA for updating language throughout the LCRI; 
specifically, the change from “find-and-fix” to “distribution system and site assessment” due to 
its accurate depiction of the legal restraints on a PWS.  
• 
The clarity of street addresses to be included within the public facing inventory to make a 
consistent and transparent product for all PWS and their rate payers. 
• 
Including sampling waivers for school sampling taking place ahead of the proposed 2027 
deadline. This allows PWS and schools to be proactive with their programs to better ensure the 
water quality within their facilities. 
Although there are many proposed rules of which SAWS approves, there are also aspects that will inhibit 
the PWS and ultimately put rate payers at a financial disadvantage. The main topics of concern are listed 
below with specific examples from the SAWS inventory, current contracts, and real-world experiences 
within our distribution system. 
Feasibility of 10-year deadline and deferment eligibility categories 
SAWS has over 650,000 service connections within our system. The current estimation of unknown 
service lines categorized in our inventory is greater than 380,000. While the majority of the publicly 

2800 U.S. Hwy 281 North • P.O Box 2449 • San Antonio, TX • 78298-2449 • www.saws.org 
 
owned side is identified and has shown no presence of lead, there are many locations which will 
require investigations on both sides of the meter. 
Under the LCRI, SAWS will be faced with determining the material for all of these service lines within 
10 years. Over 50,000 inspections will need to be completed annually or approximately 150 
inspections every day. This effort would require at least five potholing crews working every day for 
this 10-year period. Additional staff will be needed to obtain right of entry to private property ahead 
of the potholing crews. Based on the disappointing customer participation SAWS has had to date, we 
do not anticipate we will be able to gain access at a rate to support 150 daily inspections.   
The customer participation rate is also an indicator that we will likely have low participation and 
willingness for private property owners to agree to replace their existing service lines if lead is found. 
Requiring investigation and assessment of private property service lines and saddling a PWS with 
responsibility for replacement of private service lines that are not within its control or ownership is 
inconsistent with the legal authority given to SAWS and creates an impossible and unrealistic burden. 
If EPA persists in the requirement for investigation of private service lines, each investigation will cost 
$2,000 on average taking into consideration all the above-mentioned tasks. This anticipated cost will 
ultimately be passed on to our customers and ratepayers within our service area in an estimated 
amount of $1 billion over 10 years. The considerable cost and practicality of having enough manpower 
and materials for this one daily task is unfeasible.  
EPA states that the 10-year deadline is feasible for 96-99% of the systems in the United States. In the 
proposed rule, the two categories eligible for deferred deadlines are supposed to encompass the less 
than 5% of systems not able to meet this deadline.  SAWS believes this is likely true but considers that 
systems with substantial unknowns also fall in the estimated 5%. SAWS strongly suggest another 
category for deferred deadline eligibility be created for systems with substantial unknowns. This 
would allow for systems of any size and situations to meet the compliance goals established in LCRI.   
Formal acceptance of predictive modeling by EPA 
In the validation pool section of the LCRI, EPA provides a pathway that would help validate 
alternative methods for determining service line material types. SAWS applauds EPA for taking a step 
in the right direction to make the strict LCRI timelines potentially feasible. However, the clarity of the 
methods that can be used prior to this validation step are vague. SAWS strongly encourages EPA to 
clearly support the use of predictive models. 
Prior to the inception of San Antonio Water System, an effort was made to remove all utility owned 
lead service lines in the distribution system. Through our records review and initial inspections, we 
have yet to uncover any documentation of a lead line within our system that has not already been 
replaced. While this effort was very successful in removing the lead within the SAWS system, its 
intent was not to record all pipe materials. This is a large data gap within the SAWS inventory leaving 
the system with the burden of proof. A predictive model is a cost-effective method to fill in these 
gaps. While the conditions of a predictive model should be carefully stipulated, the research supports 
it as a valuable statistical approach. 
In the case of SAWS, the application of predictive modeling to complete our non-lead service lines is 
the only feasible or economical way a 10-year inventory deadline may be reached. With over 380,000 

2800 U.S. Hwy 281 North • P.O Box 2449 • San Antonio, TX • 78298-2449 • www.saws.org 
 
unknowns in the SAWS service area, it has the potential to save the rate payers of San Antonio an 
estimated $800 million dollars. The primacy of the state agencies should be respected; however, a 
clear approval from the EPA will give state agencies the confidence to accept modeled inventory 
results. 
Separate Replacement Rate and Unknown Rate 
As it currently stands, SAWS has over 380,000 unknown service line material identifications. The 
previous section discussed the feasibility of uncovering these unknowns, but an additional factor is the 
use of these unknowns in the replacement rate calculation. This approach skews the required 
calculation by over-inflating the denominator. Per this calculation, SAWS would have to replace over 
38,000 complete services lines a year. At present, SAWS has no identified lead service lines that need 
to be replaced.  Nonetheless, the use of unknowns as a driver for replacement rates would require this 
excessively high number of line replacements when there is no supporting evidence that anywhere 
near that number of service lines require replacement.   
Aside from the lack of a tangible connection between unknowns and replacements, the negative 
impact of the current requirements is compounded because deferment of this requirement is not 
available despite the fact that the replacement rate value is greater than 10,000 lines. SAWS would not 
be eligible for deferment as these lines are unknown rather than lead service lines (LSL) or galvanized 
requiring replacement (GRR). Given how this calculation is currently completed, SAWS will be required 
to expend considerable time and resources to needlessly replace service lines in a futile effort to chase 
an unattainable goal.  
EPA should consider separate calculations for uncovering unknowns and replacement rates. The latter 
should be calculated annually from those lines with known material to give PWS a potentially 
achievable goal. Including unknown service lines does not incentivize larger PWS, but instead further 
diminishes our resources to complete a service line inventory and raise rates for the customer. 
Penalizing a PWS for failing to replace a service line that may not need replacing is counterproductive.  
Acceptance of Partial Replacement 
EPA’s changing of “partial service line replacement” to not include partial replacements towards the 
LCRI replacement rate is a roadblock backed by property rights and laws beyond the control of many 
PWSs and will result in a PWS not maintaining a compliant replacement rate. In the case of Texas 
utilities, private property is legally protected by the Texas Private Real Property Rights Preservation 
Act. As a municipal entity, SAWS does not have the legal standing to complete a full replacement of 
service lines to include both the public and private side without homeowner consent. In the event a 
customer refuses or does not respond, a partial replacement should count towards the PWS 
replacement rate as long as the PWS has done their due diligence to engage the property owner. SAWS 
can provide all the necessary information to inform its customers of the dangers of a LSL and the 
importance of replacement, but ultimately the decision belongs solely to the property owner. 
Customer Response Attempts 
In the LCRI, EPA made progressive efforts towards recognizing where the legal rights of a PWS end and 
the rights of the property owner begin. SAWS applauds the proposed language describing the aspects 
of a service line which are under the control of the system. However, the use of the word “control” 

2800 U.S. Hwy 281 North • P.O Box 2449 • San Antonio, TX • 78298-2449 • www.saws.org 
 
lacks in clarity where the word “ownership” or “access” may be more appropriate. In fact, an 
argument can be made that the shift to “control” has lessened the ability to access meter boxes and 
public service lines that are located within the bounds of someone’s private property as a PWS does 
not technically “control” that private property. Reverting to “own” or “access” would provide a clearer 
means to identify and acknowledge that through established easements or rights of entry, a PWS 
could inspect meters or PWS lines within that private property that are owned by the PWS. 
Notwithstanding the above, service line inspections cannot be conducted without the property 
owner’s consent. Under the LCRI, a PWS is required to make a “reasonable effort” to gain property 
owner’s consent. SAWS has concerns about what dictates a “reasonable effort”. Four contact 
attempts, by any means, may be overzealous to a customer. Additionally, the time and expense in 
attempting communication through various means could be substantial.  Spam and malicious calls or 
messages are a prevalent nuisance for many. It is our concern that four calls or messages to our 
customers would only irritate them and could lead to more ignored attempts and even build a 
mistrust in future communication efforts.  
Tap Sampling Protocols 
EPA requested comment on whether in-home sampling is the most appropriate method to identify 
situations where the water is too corrosive. SAWS recommends EPA consider a sampling protocol that 
does not rely on residents. First liter sampling is already a challenge to complete due to the locations 
requiring the cooperation of the homeowner and are strictly on a volunteer basis.  Updating the 
sampling protocol to include 5th liter sampling along with 1st liter sampling could realistically 
compromise the quality of a sample collection and will likely increase the cost of sampling supplies 
that must be provided.  Although homeowners are given instructions their lack of experience may 
compromise the quality of the samples taken by introducing contamination, incorrectly filling out the 
paperwork or not disclosing water treatment within their home that influences the results.   
A resident does not have an obligation to respond to a PWS’s questions on their internal plumbing nor 
is there any means for a PWS to validate a resident’s material. In many cases, a resident may not have 
an accurate assessment of their internal plumbing or may give a false declaration to become eligible 
for further sampling at no cost.  
In either of these cases, the results taken by the resident would inaccurately skew the sampling pool 
as well as the intent behind tap sampling. This is further complicated by the use of whole house filters 
and water softeners. Both systems are very prevalent within customer homes in the SAWS distribution 
system. They alter the chemistry of the water and its corrosivity. This is yet another process with 
which the PWS does not have any right to be involved. However, based on the tiered sampling the 
PWS is being held accountable for the water quality results sampled under these conditions.  
SAWS has previously completed sampling efforts to determine the potential corrosivity influence of 
water softeners given their prevalence in San Antonio. Water quality samples were taken inside and 
outside of a residence with a water softener in use. The water quality results of the water going into 
the home were just as would be expected for the water source at that time with minimal metal 
concentrations. While the customers were not noticing any discolored water, the chemistry results 
after the water softener had substantial increases in metals concentrations. This specific home was 
built in the latter 1990s with copper plumbing throughout.  

2800 U.S. Hwy 281 North • P.O Box 2449 • San Antonio, TX • 78298-2449 • www.saws.org 
 
We also have water samples from customers with full plastic-based service lines as well as elevated 
lead concentrations due to their choice in fixtures. While the U.S. has strict lead concentration limits 
for the manufacturing of fixtures, those produced in other countries do not. When they are imported, 
the potential lead concentrations are not known, and the risk is then passed onto the customer. These 
types of fixtures, with or without a water softener, could easily skew the tap sampling results by 
highlighting a problem that can never be fixed by the PWS.  
All the above situations could lead to an action level exceedance (ALE) resulting in increased sampling 
schedules, potential systemwide treatment and increased communications effort as outlined in the 
proposed LCRI. Introducing sample results impacted by customer private property leads to inaccurate 
representation of a whole system’s water quality. The associated costs would increase a ratepayer’s 
bill while not necessarily improving the condition of their water or health risks. 
Premise Plumbing included in tiering 
The overall goal of including premise plumbing in the tap sampling protocols is admirable, however, it 
is not feasible for a water system to be held accountable for the customer’s private property that it 
does not own nor for which it does not have control. We have strict private property laws here in 
Texas.  We are having difficulty gaining access for simple pothole inspections of private service lines 
and anticipate access will be exponentially more difficult to obtain for assessing internal plumbing to 
private homes. In the event a lead-based component is in place, the LCRI does not give the PWS any 
authority to have it removed. This means that if a customer exercises their right not to replace a lead-
based pipe or fixture, the PWS and its rate payers may be forced to pay for more frequent sampling, 
as well as systemwide treatment solutions for personal decisions regarding their private property. 
SAWS strongly suggests that EPA reconsider holding the water system accountable for private 
property without legal access or authority over a customer’s decision. 
Distribution of filters after Action Level Exceedance 
With the proposed LCRI rules, SAWS strongly feels the requirement for filter distribution to all PWS 
customers in the event of an ALE is unfeasible, inefficient, and financially irresponsible. Typical PWS 
infrastructure framework includes pressure zones and the ability to isolate portions of the distribution 
as needed to meet demand requirements and address emergency conditions of all kinds including 
suspected water contamination. A current regulatory example in Texas exists within the Revised Total 
Coliform Rule (RTCR). This rule allows a system with a positive bacterial sample to look at water sources, 
pressure zones and all available resources to resolve the issues without unessential expenses. 
This is a Tier 1 notification of a contaminant with acute exposures risks which allows the flexibility for 
the system to use all the tools it has at its disposal to isolate the areas with potential risk. The LCRI 
describes distributing filters to the entire city under a Tier 1 notification for a contaminant with chronic 
exposure risks. SAWS urges the EPA to consider consistency within their water regulatory programs. 
This would reduce the complexity of all the regulatory rules a PWS must manage for overall compliance.   
In the event of a lead ALE, SAWS would be able to conduct the same procedures as outlined in RTCR to 
isolate the point of potential contamination, collect appropriate samples, and if needed disperse filters 
and cartridges to customers within that service area and/or pressure zone only. Under the proposed 
sampling requirements in the LCRI, premise plumbing could trigger a lead ALE. Premise plumbing is an 
issue that lies solely in control of the homeowner. If for any reason that private citizen decides to not 

2800 U.S. Hwy 281 North • P.O Box 2449 • San Antonio, TX • 78298-2449 • www.saws.org 
 
correct any lead issues within their home, it should not pass the burden of cost onto the PWS and 
ultimately all other rate payers.   
Under the proposed LCRI, if a lead ALE were to occur, it could cost SAWS an estimated $32.5 million to 
distribute filters where the vast majority of these filters would go to customers without potential risk. 
In order to comply with a potential distribution of filters within the currently established timeframe, it 
would likely require the purchasing, warehousing, and periodic replacement of a stockpile of pitchers 
and filters that may never be used.  Considering the other added costs attached to the LCRI, this is 
another financial burden that will ultimately trickle down to the customer and would be an 
unconscionable waste of resources. As an alternative to the EPA’s proposal, SAWS suggests limiting filter 
and cartridge issues to customers within an isolated service area, customers identified as having a lead 
service line awaiting replacement of that service line, or customers whose household meets a certain 
criterion. By limiting the dispersal of filters, EPA would not only ensure sufficient supplies for those who 
need the filters but would also greatly reduce the costs of the overall filter proposal. 
Sample Results Notification Timeline 
Following a tap sampling event, it is important to provide the results in a timely manner. The proposed 
rule requires notification to residents within three calendar days of the PWS receiving the results from 
the lab. This timeline is not practical nor is it feasible. Despite a PWS maintaining operations every day 
of the week, most staff work a traditional work week and hours. If sample results are received Friday, 
this leaves a small window of time to process and prepare for the customer notifications. Additionally, 
with this proposed timeframe, employee requested time off and city, state, and federally recognized 
holidays would leave a PWS vulnerable to LCRI violations. EPA should consider expanding this to a more 
achievable and reasonable timeframe such as five business days.  
Risk mitigation and disturbances 
Risk mitigation on disturbances to unknown service line investigations is impractical and built upon a 
fundamental assumption that lead is present throughout system service lines that does not appear to 
be supported by any data.  This misconception underlies multiple requirements of the LCRI and presents 
repeated scenarios where a PWS is required to expend considerable resources to establish that lead is 
not present in its system.  This approach does not make the best use of resources and is not based on a 
true mitigation of risk.   
SAWS is a very large system with multiple departments performing various functions on the distribution 
system including dead-end main flushing, water quality sampling from various fire hydrants, main 
repairs, flushing for water quality complaints, opening and shutting of valves, and other daily system 
maintenance.  These essential duties in addition to disturbances from external sources such as fire 
department hydrant checks, and outside contractor’s use make it difficult to track system impacts back 
to any single one of these activities. It is unfeasible for a PWS to manage all potential disturbance 
sources and correlate them back to the everchanging service line inventory.  
This is further complicated by the vague definition provided in the LCRI for a disturbance. SAWS suggests 
that EPA clarify all potential activities that would constitute a disturbance as well as the specific 
conditions around the disturbance that would trigger a filter distribution. 

2800 U.S. Hwy 281 North • P.O Box 2449 • San Antonio, TX • 78298-2449 • www.saws.org 
 
An example of how difficult and costly this provision will be for the PWS can be found during main 
break season. In San Antonio, main break season runs from about April to October every year with an 
average of 400 main breaks a month. On average, SAWS repairs 2,500 main breaks every year with 
approximately 40 residences without water per main break. This is in a city with over 7,000 miles of 
potable water mains over more than 470 square miles. A PWS is not given any advanced notice before 
a break occurs but has become efficient at fixing the problem quickly to restore the needed water 
back to their customers. Through the LCRI, filters would then need to be supplied in all of these 
instances. This would further delay the return of water service to our customers and dramatically 
increase our costs. If we assume 40 residences without water due to the average water main break, at 
the 60% unknown rate for SAWS, that will equate to 60,000 filters supplied annually. While most 
events will vary depending on the area of town and distribution of unknowns, at a cost of $50 each, 
this is an additional $3,000,000 for which our rate payers will be responsible. Additional 
considerations include the PWS’ ability to have enough filters on hand, store them until they are 
needed, tracking the filters distributed as well as the physical activity of filter distribution. While the 
intent behind this section of the LCRI is noteworthy, it is not feasible for a PWS to complete this task 
from multiple points of view.  
Distribution system and Site Assessment 
SAWS supports the renaming of this section within the LCRI. This change gives a more accurate and 
realistic representation of the required actions. However, the half mile radius for a water quality 
parameter sampling location may not be realistic for very large systems as well as rural systems 
whose distribution covers a large area. These site locations must be approved by the state. Within 
our distribution area, we would be required to have over 100 established sites. Expanding this radius 
would make this requirement more attainable for systems of all sizes and configurations.   
Consumer Confidence Report increased frequency 
In regard to the Consumer Confidence Report (CCR), we support the EPA’s effort to update the health 
effects language about lead in the CCR to improve completeness and clarity.  However, issuing the CCR 
twice per year is not significant in advancing the goal of protecting children and adults from the 
irreversible health effects of lead in drinking water.  Customers have already been receiving an annual 
CCR.  The increased frequency merely adds unnecessary costs of materials and manpower to our 
already stretched resources. Increased communications and a second annual report could inundate 
our customers with notifications and increase distrust in the water systems’ ability to provide safe 
drinking water.   
Requirements for PWS’s to accommodate customer requests  
The LCRI allows customers to request both reinvestigations of their service line material and 
individual tap sample collections. However, the EPA’s proposal for any customer-initiated request is 
not feasible for SAWS. These events will put a burden on the PWS outside already strict timelines 
proposed in other areas of this rule.  
The 60-day timeframe for a customer-initiated service line reinvestigation is disorganized and 
uneconomical. SAWS supports the intent behind this stipulation; however, this aspect will greatly 
hinder a PWS’s ability to reach the inventory and replacements deadlines within the LCRI. The PWS 
will be actively making plans for unknown identification efficiently using system resources. In the 

2800 U.S. Hwy 281 North • P.O Box 2449 • San Antonio, TX • 78298-2449 • www.saws.org 
 
event a customer requests a check of their service line, the PWS will have to redirect crews to a single 
location. This will reduce the efficiency of this crew and would not be an economical use of rate-
payers funds. The PWS should be allowed to accommodate the customer request within the existing 
investigation schedule outside of a 60-day window to make this additional work as feasible and 
economical as possible.  
Additionally, SAWS recommends EPA consider allowing a PWS to provide documentation and 
pictures of the inspection to the customer prior to completing another inspection. A PWS should be 
held accountable by their customers to the accuracy of their inventory, but at the same time the 
existing data should be provided and reviewed with a customer before requiring the scheduling of 
additional work. By approving this additional option for compliance, a system would be able to satisfy 
this requirement without compromising the investigation schedule and allowing for an economical 
alternative.  
The LCRI also requires a PWS to collect a water quality sample on request from a customer with an 
unknown, GRR or lead service line. While it is important the customer feels confident in the quality of 
the water, a PWS is likely to be over-whelmed with sampling requests especially when updates to the 
inventory are made. SAWS currently sits at 385,000 unknown service lines. If EPA enforces this aspect 
of the rule, it will further stress a system’s resources including manpower, time, laboratory 
capabilities and capital.  
As the cost of this sampling efforts will fall on the PWS, this is a potentially large budgetary item 
without any means of control or planning. Based on the average cost of these tests, the rate payers in 
San Antonio could pay multiple millions of dollars depending on response. SAWS suggests that EPA 
reconsider this requirement to make it feasible for all systems which may face a flood of these types 
of requests. 
Lack of large system flexibility 
Just as EPA has accommodated small systems and some of their cost and operational challenges, we 
encourage the EPA to consider large systems as well for these same challenges.  SAWS serves a 
population over 30 times larger than what is defined as a large system under the LCRI yet is still in the 
same category as a large system that serves only 50,000 customers.  A system of our magnitude with 
few expected lead lines estimates it will cost well over $1 billion dollars over ten years to maintain 
compliance.  Ultimately our rate payers would carry the burden of this unreasonable cost. The EPA 
fails to acknowledge the practical impact of the rule and the fact that our budgets, which may be 
larger than a small system, also carry proportionately larger costs.  
Small systems serving 3,300 or less under the LCRI have been given flexibilities to have options after 
ALEs and exemptions from conducting pipe loop studies because they often lack the technical 
expertise and could better focus limited resources on replacing their LSLs.  We urge the EPA to 
include flexibilities for very large systems as well, including acceptance of predictive modeling and 
incorporating another category for deferred deadline eligibility. These supplements would help SAWS 
meet the requirements of the LCRI more efficiently and would save the citizens of San Antonio 
substantial funds.  
LCRI Costs and Funding 

2800 U.S. Hwy 281 North • P.O Box 2449 • San Antonio, TX • 78298-2449 • www.saws.org 
 
The cost estimates listed in the LCRI appear to be underestimated based on our experience with the 
current costs from existing SAWS contracts as well as communications with other PWSs. We 
estimated the cost of LCRI compliance for SAWS will be between $1.5 and $2 billion. As an unfunded 
mandate, this burden falls on the rate payers of San Antonio resulting in multiple rate increases over 
the next decade to fund these efforts.  
We understand there have been efforts to make governmental funds available, but unfortunately 
due to our superior size we do not qualify for those funding and grant initiatives. Rate payers across 
the country have clearly stated they do not wish to pay for these required LCRI activities through rate 
increases and the citizens of San Antonio are not any different. In order to ease the burden on our 
residents, funding needs to become more available to larger systems as well as smaller.  
SAWS values the effort and resources the EPA has placed towards developing this proposed rule. The 
LCRI attempts to correct the mistakes of the past and to secure a safe and healthy future. Many of the 
proposed rules in the LCRI will update our nation’s infrastructure placing the health and safety of its 
citizens as the priority. However, there are many aspects of this proposal that will divide a PWS’ loyalties 
between its customers and the EPA. SAWS appreciates the consideration that the EPA will give to these 
comments and all others presented. Thank you for your time and attention. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scott R. Halty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resource Protection and Compliance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
San Antonio Water System

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1333 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 2, 2024
Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801,
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements
Michael S. Regan, Administrator
US Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
Dear Administrator Regan,
The Missouri State Conference of the NAACP submits the following comments
regarding the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) proposed “National
Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”).
The NAACP Missouri State Conference provides leadership for local branches, youth
councils, and college chapters for environmental and climate justice needs in Missouri.
The NAACP and its Center for Environmental and Climate Justice have a longstanding
interest in ensuring that issues of community engagement and environmental justice
center Black communities and frontline communities most impacted, including
communities throughout Missouri.
The Missouri State Conference applauds EPA for proposing stronger regulations to
protect communities from lead in drinking water. Lead in drinking water has been a
historically prevalent issue in Black communities, posing extreme risks to the health of
young people, mothers, and their families. In Missouri, estimates suggest that there are
as many as 330,000 lead service lines, threatening families across our state with
exposure to a potent and irreversible neurotoxin which even at low levels of exposure is
linked to damage to the brain and nervous system, learning disabilities, shorter stature,
impaired hearing, and harm to blood cells. In Missouri we would derive more than 7
billion dollars in public health cost savings from full lead service line Replacement.
4002-SC Missouri State Conference of the NAACP
111 W High St. • Jefferson City, MO 65101 • 573.616.2537 • www.monaacp.org

In Missouri, a strong rule is especially needed. In our state, 82% of children have
detectable lead levels in their blood.
For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong
elements of the proposed LCRI such as the requirement for the removal of all lead
service lines in ten years, the requirements for water systems to sample both the first
and fifth liter of water passing through lead pipes and a lower action level; but also
ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes which undermine their goals and
ensure that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened.
Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule
does not leave black communities in Missouri behind:
Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it is a fundamental
injustice that the communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed 40 or
more years to fix this issue.
Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines: Removal
can cost thousands of dollars, and putting the financial burden on impacted
communities will result in mostly wealthy and white neighborhoods having lead service
lines replaced. Removal and replacement do not make up major proportions of utility
budgets, and utilities should be expected to maximize the use of available federal water
infrastructure funds and other non-ratepayer sources of funds to prioritize solving this
crisis.
Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who spend many hours
there daily are not at risk of exposure: Black children face an increased risk of lead
exposure when compared with white children. The proposal’s suggested testing
program does not differ from past ineffective programs, and EPA should move towards
incentivizing the installation of filters and protecting children.
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components would
allow for environmental injustice to persist. Black communities and frontline
communities have long suffered from disinvestment and lack of resources. Past
NAACP analysis has demonstrated that race, ethnicity, or language spoken had the
strongest relationship to slow and inadequate enforcement of the SDWA of any
4002-SC Missouri State Conference of the NAACP
111 W High St. • Jefferson City, MO 65101 • 573.616.2537 • www.monaacp.org

sociodemographic characteristic analyzed. The final LCRI is a rare opportunity to make
significant changes in the lives of millions of people in [state], and to provide a measure
of environmental justice which these families are owed, and we encourage this
administration to build on the progress made in the proposed rule by strengthening the
final rule further.
Sincerely,
Nimrod Chapel, Jr.
President,
Missouri State Conference of the NAACP
4002-SC Missouri State Conference of the NAACP
111 W High St. • Jefferson City, MO 65101 • 573.616.2537 • www.monaacp.org
/s/ Nimrod Chapel, Jr.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1124 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
400 W. Wilson Bridge Rd, Ste. 120 | Worthington OH 43085 | 844.766.2845 
www.oawwa.org | oawwa@assnoffices.com  
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
Michael S. Regan  
Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
 
RE: 
Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations (NPDWR) for Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements (LCRI) 
Public Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
To United States Environmental Protection Agency,  
 
The Ohio Section of the American Water Works Association (OAWWA) represents over 4,500 water utilities that serve 
Ohio’s population of 11.5 million.  The Ohio Water Utility Council (OWUC) of the OAWWA has a primary purpose of 
advocating on matters that affect the water industry, treatment and delivery of safe, clean drinking water.   
The OWUC appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the proposed drinking water standards for Regulations 
for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) to the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) during this 
comment period of the rulemaking process.  We recognize the importance of a collaborative effort between the EPA and 
the water utilities in United States and Ohio when evaluating the impacts of these rules.  OWUC is focused on providing 
operational context to the regulatory requirements being proposed by EPA.   
The OWUC would like to acknowledge the efforts the EPA has made to address the potential lead exposure in drinking 
water.  There are several positive elements in the proposed rules that the OWUC supports including:  
• 
Maintaining the treatment technique regulatory framework for the control of lead and copper in drinking water.  
• 
Establishing a program for lead service line replacement rather than based on triggered requirements.  
• 
Recognizing that public water systems (PWSs), specifically community water systems (CWSs), continue to face 
legal constraints outside of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) that limit our access to customer properties.  
• 
Delaying changes to the optimized corrosion control treatments until lead services line materials (LSLs) and 
galvanized requiring replacement service lines (GRRSLs) are replaced as directed by the LCRI are completed.  
Eliminating potentially redundant work.  
• 
Importance of customer education, especially in lead risk reduction of PWSs customers.  
• 
A goal of simplifying the rule for effective implementation.   
  
 

 
 
 
 
400 W. Wilson Bridge Rd, Ste. 120 | Worthington OH 43085 | 844.766.2845 
www.oawwa.org | oawwa@assnoffices.com  
 
There are, however, critical revisions to this rule that need to be addressed prior to the final version becoming 
promulgated.  Without these modifications the PWSs of Ohio would be subject to regulations that are not legally sound, 
as they would be beyond the scope of the SDWA.   
• 
EPA must act to immediately extend the compliance date for the provisions under the LCRR that will not be 
continued 
in 
the 
LCRI. 
 
The 
PWSs 
in 
Ohio 
continue 
to 
work 
towards 
meeting 
the  
requirements of the LCRR, including service line inventory, tap sample monitoring, etc.  But our PWSs should not 
be expending resources on compliance requirements with no guarantee from EPA that the LCRI final rule will be 
published prior to the compliance date of the LCRR. 
• 
In the LCR revisions in 2000 the definition of “control” was based on ownership.  With the proposed change of 
this definition, the EPA is creating access issues for PWSs in Ohio to meet the requirements of the LCRI. The 
definition of what is “under the control” of water systems as described in SDWA does not include piping not owned 
by the water system, even when the actual owner uses their “control” to grant “access” to a water system.  
• 
The EPA needs to simplify the compliance path for systems with no or few LSLs and/or GRRSLs.  There are a number 
of PWSs within Ohio that have no known LSLs on the public side, which have been certified to the state agency, 
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (OEPA) and based on predictive modeling, have completed to comply with 
the LCRR deadline of October 16th, 2024, a very low probability of LSLs on the private side.  The proposed rule 
does not allow for an alternative method for PWSs to have a second path to compliance that focuses primarily on 
(1) having a procedure for the rare occurrence of a LSL or GRRSL is discovered and (2) the validation study to 
assure the initial characterization of the system’s inventory is correct. 
EPA has requested comment on the feasibility of a 10-year replacement period for all PWSs.  Based on the experience of 
Ohio PWSs and what has been presented by EPA in this rulemaking this timeframe is not feasible.  A shorter timeframe, 
as a possible option for systems, is not feasible either with the potential for expanding requirements in the proposed rule.  
Should a 10-year timeframe be finalized in the rule it would create a strain on utilities; financially, skilled labor wise and 
physical resources.  The supply chain would be strained as more than 4,500 public water systems in Ohio, not to mention 
the thousands of other PWSs in the United States, who would be working towards meeting the same goal, in the same 
time period, using the similar if not the exact same materials.  The final LCRI should have mechanisms for water systems 
to extend past the 10-year time period for their LSL replacement programs dependent on that particular water systems 
circumstances. The examples given in the proposed rule all were completed outside of the proposed regulations of the 
LCRI and did not have the concerns detailed above that systems under this new rule would encounter.  Therefore, it is 
hard to rationale the use of those examples to justify the feasibility of the 10-year timeframe.  
Funding continues to be a major concern to PWSs as increased regulations are placed on Ohio PWSs.   The ratepayers of 
our systems are ultimately the payers of these regulatory changes, whether through direct charges or through increased 
water rates.  With the majority of water infrastructure funding available coming in loans, this means that the upfront cost 
is again, coming from the ratepayers.  The Ohio Section’s parent organization, American Water Works Association as 
estimated that the average cost for full lead service line replacements as defined in the proposed rule would be $12,000-
$15,000 per service line.  This cost is a significant burden that will require more than reimbursement loans and the 
Administration should seek Congressional appropriations to support the LSLR programs.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
400 W. Wilson Bridge Rd, Ste. 120 | Worthington OH 43085 | 844.766.2845 
www.oawwa.org | oawwa@assnoffices.com  
 
 
The OWUC continues to recognize the efforts being made to improve the Lead and Copper Rule.  We support a proposed 
rule that would create a simplified path to eliminating lead in drinking water, provide funding for these programs and 
rational, feasible time periods to comply with these requirements.  As water professionals, we want to be involved in 
these changes and continue to be good stewards of our water resources and to our customers we service.  
   
Thank you again for the opportunity to comment on these proposed rules.  Should the USEPA have additional questions 
or in need of clarification, the OWUC is available for discussion.  Contact information is provided below.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Sarah C. Van Frank-Affrunti 
Ohio Water Utility Council, Chair 
Ohio American Water Works Association 
Affruntis@swwater.org

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1838 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
We the People of Detroit 
P.O. Box 7033 
www.wethepeopleofdetroit.com 
 
Detroit, MI 48207 
 
 
 
 
 
February 5 , 2024 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
We the People of Detroit (WPD) submits the following comments on U.S. EPA’s proposed Lead 
and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). The state of Michigan has, and continues to see, some 
of the worst impacts of lead-poisoned water. From Flint to Benton Harbor, our most vulnerable 
Michiganders are still reeling from lead catastrophes that will have lasting impacts in the years to 
come. As a result of one of these unfortunate, and preventable, crises the Great Lakes State 
adopted the strongest lead and copper regulations on drinking water at the time in 2018 to protect 
its residents and we applaud the U.S. EPA’s work to prioritize this issue nationwide. We seek to 
further strengthen the rule with the nation’s most lead-burdened communities in mind and look 
forward to supporting the administration to a lead-free future. To that end, we hope to see the 
following: 
 
Prioritizing the most impacted, low-wealth communities. 
 
The final rule should mandate that water utilities are responsible for paying the full cost of lead 
service line replacement (LSLR). The inability to pay for full LSLR may put an already 
vulnerable household in further debt or inhibit the removal itself, given the loose definition of 
“Water System Access to Full Service Line”. Both of these outcomes would lead to furthering 
the social, financial, and health gap between low- and high-wealth communities and ultimately 
fail to meet the nation’s goal to remove all lead service lines in an equitable way. We must 
maximize the combined benefits of federal and state programs and initiatives like the Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law, State Revolving Funds, Justice40, and more to make the necessary funds 
available for full LSLR at no direct cost to the resident. 
 
Supporting and incentivizing equitable workforce development in accelerating lead service 
line removals. 
 
As stated in the proposed rule, stakeholders have cited concerns of limited workforce. This 
should not be seen as an insurmountable obstacle but rather an opportunity for the EPA rapidly 
expand its partnerships and incentivize participation under the Lead Service Line Replacement 
Accelerators. The newly launched American Climate Corps is a recognition that updating the 

We the People of Detroit 
P.O. Box 7033 
wethepeopleofdetroit.com 
 
Detroit, MI 48207 
nation’s infrastructure to protect against climate change through equitable workforce 
development is essential and the approach to LSLRs are no different. Cities and states across the 
country have already adopted workforce development plans to recruit, hire, and train their own 
residents to develop the skilled workforce needed to meet the demands of nationwide lead 
removal and this effort should be elevated nationwide.  
 
Ensuring the nation meets the 10-year timeline goal. 
 
While we recognize the EPA’s effort to address certain stakeholder concerns of feasibility, it is 
clear that this administration believes the timeline and process are achievable for 96-99 percent 
of community water systems nationwide. However, rather than providing deadline extensions for 
those 1-4% of systems, EPA should remove the extension options and work closely with systems 
of concern to find solutions that will meet the 10-year timeline rather than potentially allowing 
full lead pipe removal to be pushed out by decades.  
 
Better protections for children. 
 
Lead is a highly dangerous neurotoxin, widely accepted as having no safe level of exposure. In 
late 2023, Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer signed bipartisan bills to prevent lead 
contamination in schools and childcare centers. These institutions are now required to install 
filtered-faucets certified for lead removal, develop a drinking water management plan, and 
conduct routine sampling and testing to ensure safe and accessible drinking water for children. 
This effort should be elevated across the country to protect all children to bring immediate 
protections against lead in schools.  
 
 
Research done by the We the People of 
Detroit Community Research Collective 
(CRC) demonstrates the breadth and 
concentration of lead risk across metro 
Detroit in the map to the right. And WPD’s 
work with communities has found that 
catastrophic contamination can lead to a 
distrust in the water utility and supply, 
making it very difficult for impacted 
households to return to the tap. It is critical 
that we move aggresively and thoroughly to 
remove this dangerous toxin from our water 
supply.  
 
We commend the administration’s plans and actions to remove lead from our infrastructure once 
and for all. The proposed rule builds on the layers of work this administration has done to 
prioritize environmental justice and brings us a step closer to realizing a healthy, lead-free future. 
We must now ensure that there is no room for technicalities that allow lead pipes to remain in the 
ground and in our homes. Thank you for the opportunity to comment. 
 

We the People of Detroit 
P.O. Box 7033 
wethepeopleofdetroit.com 
 
Detroit, MI 48207 
Respectfully, 
 
We the People of Detroit

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1328 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
An Equal Opportunity Employer 
 
City of Cleveland 
Justin M. Bibb, Mayor 
 
Department of Public Utilities 
Division of Water 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1201 Lakeside Avenue 
Cleveland, Ohio  44114-1175 
216/664-2444    Fax: 216/664-3330 
www.clevelandwater.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
Michael Regan, Administrator 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
Washington, DC 
 
Re: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements – Cleveland Water Comments 
 
Docket ID No. EPA‐HQ‐OW‐2022‐0801 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
The Cleveland Division of Water (CWD) provides drinking water to the City of Cleveland 
and surrounding communities. It is the 10th largest public water system in the United 
States, the largest in the State of Ohio and the largest system to source its water from 
Lake Erie. Cleveland Water treats and delivers water to more than 1.4 million people and 
thousands of businesses in the area. While CWD likely has the second or third largest 
number of lead service lines in the nation, we have Optimal Corrosion Control Treatment 
(OCCT). CWD is in compliance with the Lead Copper Rule (LCR) action level of 15 ppb, will 
be in compliance with the proposed LCRI action level of 10 ppb, and has maintained an 
exceptionally low level of less than 5 ppb in our water system for the last five triennial 
monitoring periods. We anticipate that we will continue to be significantly under the 
action levels in the proposed LCRI. This success is longstanding and is the result of an 
optimized corrosion control plan that we have had in place since 1997. 
 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
(LCRI) proposal, while well intended, falls short in its goal to protect human health, 
presents unrealistic replacement timeframes, will create extreme financial hardship for 
water  systems  and  their  customers  who  collectively  are  the  rate  payers  funding 
replacement  programs.  The  proposal  also  ignores  sustainable  infrastructure 
improvements while hyper‐focusing on one task which may, or may not, result in a change 
in water quality. Since first implemented more than 30 years ago, the Lead and Copper 
Rule construct has been corrosion control and subsequent tap sampling was used to 
determine if replacement of LSLs was necessary. With the LCRI, the EPA is changing the 
rule construct to require LSLR, regardless of the effectiveness of corrosion control.  
 
Cleveland Water believes extensive changes are necessary in the LCRI to make it possible 
for utilities to implement. We have attempted to keep our comments at a high level to 
ensure USEPA has time to review and address all comments submitted and still try to stay 
on the intended schedule for rule implementation. Please note for the purpose of our 
comments, we are not differentiating between customer‐owned lead and customer‐

owned  galvanized  requiring  replacement  since  the  cost  and  implementation 
considerations are the same. 
 
Cleveland  Water  supports  the  removal  of  all  lead  service  lines  (LSLs)  and  has  been 
implementing a proactive Lead Service Line Replacement (LSLR) program for multiple 
years in which both city‐owned and customer‐owned LSLs are replaced when disturbed by 
the PWS at no cost to the customer. Still, significant changes need to be made to the LCRI 
or hundreds of PWS nationwide will be in violation of the rule for circumstances beyond 
their control. Issues beyond the control of a PWS include supply chain issues, customer 
refusals, lack of contractor capacity to take on more work, and simply not enough funding 
to be able to maintain safe drinking water treatment and distribution operations while 
also trying to remove LSLRs at the proposed rates without grant funding to cover the cost. 
The costs of implementing the LCRI are staggering – with the latest tallies for Cleveland 
Water alone at over $2.6B with normal inflation factored in but without accounting for 
effects such as LSLRs on main roads, replacing water mains that fail when excavated to 
remove LSLs and rebuilding foundations of buildings that also fail during LSLRs. This price 
tag also does not include price increases and price gouging that are likely to occur in a 
similar fashion to that which the nation experienced during the initial year of the COVID 
pandemic when prices of products like N95 masks, hand sanitizer and bleach, and even 
toilet paper, skyrocketed. This regulation will pose a financial hardship for many utilities 
with the competing financial requirements. USEPA needs to be realistic about the cost 
impact on customers. The price tag also does not include the cost of the proposed filter 
distribution if multiple Action Level (AL) Exceedances were to occur, which would be 
greater than $56M every six months for Cleveland Water.  Water utilities do not have 
unlimited financial resources. Therefore requiring filters to be distributed to all customers 
in the event of multiple (AL) Exceedances, regardless of whether they have a LSL, will take 
financial resources away from LSLR or result in additional rate increases.  
 
Furthermore, the proposed rule requires public water systems – regardless of the actual 
safety and quality of the water – to provide customers with information that draws into 
question the quality of tap water. This results in more customers turning to bottled water 
sources,  which  may  be  of  lesser  quality,  can  cost  1,000‐times  more,  and  creates 
voluminous plastic waste which will negatively affect source water quality. Our comments 
presented herein will outline some of the challenges the LCRI presents to public water 
systems. Our comments represent decades of experience in water quality, treatment and 
distribution system maintenance – and with the knowledge of the level of skill, the degree 
of labor, and the dozens of challenges that it takes to just remove one LSL.  
 
Lead Service Line Replacement should target utilities that are actually experiencing 
elevated lead in drinking water. For a system like Cleveland that has not had a 90th 
percentile exceedance since implementing orthophosphate treatment, the expense of 
replacing LSLs in such a short time frame does not justify the cost to our customers with 
an improvement to public health. 
 
Changing  the  sampling  protocol  and  lowering  the  AL  will put more utilities in the 
position of the 90th percentile exceeding the AL. CWD questions the accuracy of USEPA’s 
estimates of how many utilities will exceed the new 10 part per billion AL with a new 
sampling protocol. Corrosion control effectiveness and pipe scale are very utility specific. 
CWD  requests  clarification  and  additional  information  on  how  USEPA  derived  these 

estimates and how they are valid for the entire country. Cleveland Water believes that 
USEPA’s estimates of utilities that might exceed the new action level are not accurate and 
suspect that actual numbers of utilities exceeding the Action Level may be much higher 
than  estimated.  By  requiring  a  new  sampling protocol  as well as LSLRs, the pool of 
samplers will be continuously changing from one monitoring period to the next. These 
two factors will introduce considerable uncertainty in what the results might be for any 
given monitoring period. Customer tap sampling works to determine corrosion control 
effectiveness if you sample the same locations over time. The new rule construct does not 
allow this.  
 
Filters 
CWD recommends USEPA encourage water utilities to test certified filters to determine 
which ones actually work for their water. Cleveland Water testing, following the protocol 
provided by USEPA’s ORD in Cincinnati, has shown not all certified filters effectively 
remove lead from our water. Blanket acceptance of filters will result in a false sense of 
security of improving the safety of water.  
 
USEPA repeatedly states they “assume” the market will adjust and supplies will become 
available for all utilities. CWD believes this will only happen on a limited basis and will be 
economically painful for utilities. Our belief is based on experience. In preparation for 
implementing the LCRR, we attempted to find a restock of the pitcher filters originally 
acquired to distribute to customers following Ohio EPA 2018 rule changes and since then 
tested using the USEPA ORD protocol. The manufacturer discontinued production of the 
pitcher‐filter combo that works on Cleveland water. Meanwhile, when we retested filter‐
pitcher combinations available in the fall of 2023, only two products consistently met 
standards. One of the companies stated they are not taking bulk orders at this time, retail 
only. The other manufacturer did not have enough supply to fulfill our order – which was 
a mere 6,000 pitchers. This experience is an indication that the USEPA needs to prioritize 
where filters will do the most good for a customer and only require them in those 
circumstances.  Otherwise,  PWS  will  not  be  able  to  remove  full  LSLRs  due  to  the 
unavailability of filters.  
 
CWD data consistently indicates that lead levels at customers’ kitchen faucets are below 
the method reporting level, even after a temporary partial LSLR. Even so, we believe this is 
a good use of a filter. We also believe a customer experiencing high lead levels (exceeding 
the AL) in their water for unknown reasons should get a filter while the cause is being 
determined.  
 
In the event of repeated AL exceedances (3 w/in 5 years) a water utility is supposed to 
provide filters to all customers, not just those with LSL or unknown material service lines. 
For CWD, we assume providing 450,000 filters (this is a low side assumption) at $125 each 
(assuming no price gouging), it would cost a minimum of $56,250,000 for a 6 month filter 
supply. For that same money, CWD could replace more than 8,000 LSLs @ $7,000 each. 
No utility has unlimited operating funds. Therefore a cost like providing filters to all 
customers would result in fewer LSLs being replaced. This is assuming we could actually 
find that many filters. Furthermore, if we do have funding to replace LSLs, but no filters 
are available, should we stop replacing LSLs? This seems contrary to the goals of the 
proposed rule. Assuming we would have to hand out filters for at least 3 years to run 
through the cycle of getting enough monitoring periods under the action level, CWD 

would spend $338,000,000 for filters. For the same amount of money, we could perform 
more than 48,000 LSLRs.  
 
Any large utility having multiple AL exceedances would exhaust the nation‐wide supply of 
filters. Use of filters needs to be prioritized. CWD recommends USEPA calculate the actual 
number of filters that would be needed on a national basis and survey the manufacturing 
capacity of the needed filters, factoring in which ones actually work for different types of 
water quality. In addition, in the event of an AL exceedance, the 60‐day timeframe for 
getting filters to all customers could be a major challenge to complete in such a short 
timeframe as the procurement process of cities, dictated by local laws, can take much 
longer.  As  such,  it  would  be  in  the  interest  of  cities  with  the  potential  to  have  AL 
exceedances to have as many filters on hand as possible, but they may not be able to get 
enough, have enough storage space, or obtain the required amount in time. The potential 
hoarding of filters by PWS in preparation for a potential AL exceedance would also then 
strip away the supply of filters from other PWS and people with well water that have 
actual water quality issues, including those who have no LSLs but are dealing with other 
forms of water contamination. Another factor to consider is driving the price of filters up 
through the demand created by LCRI compliance would disproportionally affect low‐
income consumers because they would not be able to afford to purchase them for 
personal use, such as private well treatment. Many would likely purchase unsustainable 
bottled water or unknowingly purchase a less expensive filter that does not actually 
remove the contaminant of concern. 
 
Definition of a Service Line 
Service lines need to be defined consistently throughout the LCRI. The new definition of a 
service line in the LCRI only works for a service line going to an individual premise. The 
current definition could make water utilities responsible for large swaths of site plumbing 
on or in private property, which is not what we believe the USEPA intended. For example, 
a large industrial site could have multiple buildings with a meter in a vault near the street. 
The service line likely splits out in the yard with piping going to each building spread 
throughout the site. Most water utilities, including ours, do not have the authority to be 
on private property verifying site plumbing materials that lead to each building. The term 
“outlet” in the proposed rule is problematic and needs a clearer definition so that water 
utilities  are  not being given responsibility for site plumbing  over which we have no 
authority. For a location where a single building is not present, the service line would end 
where the piping splits. This is how Cleveland Water defines the extent of the service line 
in our engineering standards. If we were forced to go into the property to determine 
piping materials, we would be relying on customer cooperation. Our only recourse for 
noncooperation is shutting off water service. This does not contribute to good customer 
relations and possibly result in negative economic implications. 
 
LSLR in Conjunction with Water Main Replacement 
CWD  believes  the  most  fiscally  responsible  way  to  replace  lead  service  lines  is  in 
conjunction with water main replacement (WMR). A utility is already opening the street 
and will need to address each service line, therefore the incremental cost of LSLRs would 
be significantly less. However, the LCRI, as proposed, will not allow this approach due to 
the timeline requirements. In the Cleveland Water system, water mains on streets with 
LSLs are at least 70 years old since the last year we allowed LSLs was 1953. Replacing LSLs 
on brittle, old water mains results in many water main breaks both during and after the 

replacement work. However, local funding is not available to replace hundreds to more 
than a thousand miles of old water mains in such a short timeframe. Currently, CWD uses 
the factors of break rate and the presence of LSLs to choose which water mains to replace 
next. The proposed LCRI will force us to replace fewer mains and instead dedicate capital 
dollars to just removing LSLs, no matter what the break rate is on the section of water 
main. This is not a fiscally responsible way to operate, but it is what will be required by the 
LCRI. CWD recommends USEPA extend the timeframe for LSLRs to allow utilities that have 
good, stable corrosion control to continue replacement at a lower rate and operate their 
capital programs in a fiscally responsible manner. 
 
Partial Lead Service Line Replacements 
The LCRI proposes to prohibit partial LSLRs unless they are conducted as part of an 
emergency repair or in coordination with planned infrastructure work (excluding planned 
LSLR). CWD opposes this proposal. Our proactive and voluntarily LSLR Program has taught 
us some valuable lessons about the obstacles a utility encounters. Water utilities have no 
control over private property. A variety of situations can be found in customers’ premises 
that create unsafe working conditions for our employees and contractors. In the last five 
months alone, we’ve found basements with raw sewage inches deep, infestation by bugs 
(bed bugs, fleas, roaches, etc.), failing foundations with mud collapsing into the basement, 
and  black  mold  covering  basement  walls.  As  an  employer, we cannot force staff or 
contractors into these conditions and in some cases would create financial liability far 
beyond the scope of prescribed work. Since we do not own the property, there are limits 
as to what CWD can do to make the conditions safe for our crews to perform the work. 
CWD suggests that a partial LSLR both be allowed and count as a full replacement if the 
water utility documents unsafe conditions and submits this documentation to the State.  
 
Water utilities cannot force property owners to allow us to replace their portion of a LSL. 
USEPA has requested comment on whether or not four times, using at least two different 
communication methods, is sufficient to try to gain their cooperation. CWD believes this is 
more than sufficient for attempting to reach a property owner who is going to cooperate. 
The problems of this nature do not usually stem from owner occupied properties, but 
rather with rental properties. When absentee owners do not wish to be bothered, it is 
nearly impossible to find updated contact information for them. In the event the contact 
information is accurate, it does not matter how many letters we mail or times we call, 
they simply do not respond with a signed LSLR Agreement, which is needed for us to 
replace the customer side of the service line. The amount of hours one PWS spends trying 
to track down one absentee property owner to get an agreement signed is hard to 
calculate and as well as the $7,000 to $10,000 cost of replacing the LSL. For this reason, 
we do not believe the annual outreach to property owners who failed to respond to our 
multiple offers for LSLR should be required. For these properties, a change in ownership is 
the best time to gain cooperation. Water utilities should also be permitted to replace the 
utility side of the connection in these cases and leave filters for occupants as currently 
prescribed for in Ohio regulations. CWD suggests that a partial LSLR both be allowed and 
count as a full replacement if the water utility can document customer refusal and/or 
nonresponse.  
 
The  most  efficient  way  to  replace  LSLRs,  if  not  in  conjunction  with  a  water  main 
replacement,  is  working  down  a  street  prior  to  road  repaving.  In situations when a 
customer refuses or does not respond to repeated offers for LSLR work, the water utility 

should not be mandated to go back to that home within a designated period when the 
same person owns the property. If a property owner refuses the offer for an LSLR (i.e. gets 
out of line) they should not be able to cut the line of waiting customers and demand the 
utility take the LSLR out at a later date. Situations such as this are not fair to the rest of 
the customers who are patiently waiting and have signed agreements in place. This is also 
not efficient to pull a contract crew from one side of the city where they are replacing 
LSLRs working down a street to go all the way to the other side of the service area, which 
is sometimes an hour drive or more, just to replace one customer’s home that refused 
replacement.  It  is  not  just  the  time  of  the  LSLR.  It  is  also  the  time  it  takes  for  site 
restoration  that  the  contractor  would  be  pulled  from.  An  alternative  would  be  if  a 
property owner changes their mind and signs a replacement agreement, they would be 
placed back in the pool of LSLR locations for the next scheduled time the water utility is 
replacing services in that part of the service area.  
 
Replacement Rate 
Cleveland Water does not believe either the 10,000 or 8,000 per year replacement rates 
are achievable on a nation‐wide basis. CWD is presently using BIL funding to replace LSLs. 
Currently, some of the brass fittings that are necessary to replace LSLs have a 27‐40 week 
lead‐time for CWD when we are completing 4,000 replacements per year on a voluntary 
basis. The current lead‐time for parts is when just CWD and other utilities using the BIL 
funding, are replacing lead lines.  
 
As additional utilities move into LSLRs, the domestic manufacturing capacity will have to 
be addressed for all necessary supplies. Those include brass, copper, couplings, seals, curb 
boxes and pipes that must be on hand prior to excavating soil. Utilities will not be able to 
meet the mandated number of replacements with a lead‐time for critical parts that 
extends to 10 months or longer. While we can plan for a higher replacement rate per 
year, if required by rule, four elements must harmoniously function in order for our plan 
to work. Those are 1) funding, 2) contractor capacity to take on the work, 3) supplies of 
copper, brass, curb stop boxes, etc. and the supplies of other materials such as filters (if 
required under the LCRI after changes are made), and 4) technical expertise within the 
PWS to run an effective and efficient LSLR Program. The technical expertise to run an LSLR 
program is another area that the USEPA assumes exists; however, the level of expertise 
within each PWS to implement necessary parts of an LSLR program has not even been 
presented. Those roles range from communication and community planning, to fiscal, GIS 
and work management tracking. It also includes hydraulics (valve surveys and test shuts) 
and personal experienced in distribution system maintenance to make effective decisions 
during emergencies which occur while trying to replace connections on water mains that 
are more than 70 years old. Additionally, meter installers, water samplers, laboratory 
staff, and clerical staff to assist with the extensive and excessive customer notifications.  
The sheer number of staff that CWD will need to implement the LCRI is estimated to be 
more  than  35  new  positions.  This  is  also  during  a  time  when  PWS  nationwide  are 
experiencing staff shortages and it takes years to hire and train staff in key positions. For 
some PWS, they cannot offer high enough salaries to attract qualified candidates. While 
using consultants can assist a PWS in implementing a LSLR Program, this would cost at 
least 3‐times more than staffing a program from within.   
 
Looking  collectively  at  the  four  elements  to  a  successful  LSLR  Program  (funding, 
contractors, supplies and PWS experts), if any one element fails to come through, despite 

the PWSs best planning and attempts, the plan does not bear fruit. Additionally, from 
experience we know that many other supplies are needed that have not been brought 
into the LCRI discussion as of yet. These include ductile iron pipe to replace failing mains 
that are too fragile to re‐tap and replace the LSLs. Additional items include: sand to 
properly bed the main and service lines, street restoration materials including asphalt and 
concrete, tree lawn restoration materials, and the heavy construction equipment needed 
to create road cuts, excavate asphalt, cement, brick, rebar and soil, move the copper 
through the soil, which may require open trenching, and then restore all surfaces. Utilities 
will also have to take into account incidental damage to other buried infrastructure such 
as gas lines, sewers, electric lines, storm water, fiber optics, etc. Finally, USEPA seems to 
be assuming that workers would relocate to parts of the country where the need for more 
service line replacements is mandated. This is not realistic.  
 
The proposed rule would allow water utilities to count disconnecting a service line as a 
replacement, if it is not in active use. CWD supports this proposal. Large water systems, 
such as ours, can have thousands of vacant and/or abandoned properties. The property 
may be redeveloped and the new use may require a larger connection than ¾” service 
used for a majority of residential LSLRs. Forcing a water utility to place a new connection 
when there is no user/account ready for service would many times result in a waste of 
funds. The LCRI has proposed that all utilities remove LSLs as soon as possible. This means 
that utilities need to be efficient by removing lead thoroughly from an area, not leaving 
too many exceptions scattered around for cleanup. 
 
The  proposed  rule  would  allow  state  primacy  agencies  to  approve/require  quicker 
replacement rates if they decide these are feasible based on local conditions. CWD 
recommends that state primacy agencies should also have the authority to approve fewer 
than the proposed 10% per year or 10,000 per year if the primacy agency determines the 
LCRI‐rate  is  not  feasible  based  on  local  conditions.  Local  conditions  that  limit  the 
maximum  achievable  per  year  include  funding,  contractors,  supplies  and  PWS  staff. 
Experience in cities referenced in the proposed rule has shown when LSLR becomes 
required, contractor prices for the work go up. This will increase the economic impact on 
water utility customers. 
 
Once primacy has been transferred to the states, U.S. EPA does not mention anything 
about the ability/feasibility of state regulatory organizations to have adequate staffing 
levels to be able to process reporting data, plan reviews, and compliance issues. This 
problem  is compounded by the variation in each State’s funding  and organizational 
capacity, which could lead to inequities in individual water utility’s ability to comply with 
regulation through no fault of the PWS.   
 
Factors Driving up LSLR Costs 
CWD believes USEPA estimates for the cost of compliance with this program are far too 
low. This is based on lessons learned during our LSLR program.  Road restoration in and of 
itself can actually be the most expensive part of a LSLR. For instance, many communities 
ban utility cuts in newly restored and newly resurfaced streets. These are referred to as 
moratorium streets. When an emergency street opening occurs to repair an underground 
utility  in  a  moratorium  road  surface,  many  cities  as  well  as  county  and  state‐level 
departments of transportation, require a more extensive road restoration. This makes the 
cost of pavement restoration significantly higher than just the cost of the new service line. 

We are grateful for federal ARPA funding for street repaving, but unfortunately, for LSLRs 
the needed influx of funding to repave roads has come at the WRONG time. Roads 
repaved with ARPA funding are now in a “moratorium” status for the next 5 to 7 years in 
many cities. Any road that will be paved by any community will also subsequently be 
included as a moratorium street. This means we have to scramble to get the lead out now; 
or wait 5 to 7 years for LSLR work; or double the cost per service connection replacement 
on those roads. Another expense is the additional time and resources that are used when 
a previous utility repair has occurred in the same excavation needed for LSLR work. For 
example, Cleveland ordinances require road cuts to be restored with flow fill in the street 
excavation. When hardened, flow fill is nearly impossible for a pneumatic mole to create a 
channel that the new copper service can be pulled through. In these cases, the street 
must be open cut with a trench. This not only takes extra hours for each replacement, it 
requires a much more expensive and time‐consuming road restoration process. As CWD 
moves forward with our LSLR Program, we are working closely to collaborate with cities in 
our service area to attempt to replace LSLs prior to road repaving. However, this is not 
always possible due to the limited LSLR funding currently available.  
 
In addition to road conditions, busy roads require increased safety measures to control 
and direct traffic with an average cost of $400 per hour in addition to the cost of the LSLR. 
When LSLRs on busy multilane roads require open trenching to install the new copper, 
entire roads may need to be shut down for not only the replacement, but also for the 
street restoration. This further increases the cost of these replacements and can push 
arterial road traffic to residential roads for extended periods of time. For efficiency and 
cost effectiveness, the above listed factors are taken into consideration when planning 
LSLRs.  
 
There are other factors that also drive up the expense of LSLRs. Some customers refuse, 
even though we are offering to do the work at no cost to them. Other customers do not 
want us to disturb their landscaping, sidewalk, driveway, tree lawn grass or finished 
basement. Additionally, customers who are not directly impacted are calling both the 
utility as well as local cities service departments with complaints about the steel plates, 
which are left on site as part of the street restoration process, and complaints about tree 
lawns and wanting grass to be planted in the middle of winter. Dealing with these types of 
problems is a drain on valuable staff time trying to find the appropriate person to give 
permission  for  the  work,  persuading  the  homeowner  to  allow  us  to  disturb  their 
basement, and dealing with the complaints – which are rarely about the actual LSLR but 
about the side effects and required parts of LSLR work. All of these scenarios make LSLR 
Programs much more labor intensive than one might suspect from the 30,000‐foot level.  
 
Another  related  issue  water  utilities  can  run  into  involves  contaminated  soil  at  an 
abandoned site. As proposed, the LCRI would require us to dig up and remove customer 
LSLRs on all sites regardless of the property’s past use. From the USEPA’s own website, 
“Land  contamination  can  result  from  a  variety  of  intended,  accidental,  or  naturally 
occurring activities and events such as manufacturing, mineral extraction, abandonment 
of mines, national defense activities, waste disposal, accidental spills, illegal dumping, 
leaking  underground  storage  tanks,  hurricanes,  floods,  pesticide  use,  and  fertilizer 
application. Nationally, there are thousands of contaminated sites of varying size and 
significance in settings ranging from abandoned buildings in inner cities to large areas 
contaminated with toxic materials from past industrial or mining activities.” With this in 

mind, various levels of federal, state and local plans and permits may be needed prior to 
disturbing potentially contaminated soil. This type of work is far beyond the scope of a 
LSLR program and the water utility should be granted exemptions from customer‐owned 
LSLRs anytime the customer property may have contaminated soil as disturbing the soil 
would pose a risk to the employees involved. All of the conditions explained here have 
happened and continue to happen and therefore drive up the cost of LSLRs to account for 
these and other unknown conditions that may be encountered at the site. 
 
With all of the information laid out in this comment submittal, Cleveland Water does not 
believe the number of replacements required by the LCRI are achievable nation‐wide. 
Large water systems will likely suck up available supplies and contractors. Ramping up to 
8,000 to 10,000 LSLRs/year also takes time. Once a known sustainable funding source has 
been identified (and thus far it has not), PWS need a minimum of 2 years based on budget 
cycles, to hire and train staff to implement a program. For example, CWD will need 
approximately 35 new FTEs to plan, oversee, and implement system‐wide LSLR of 10,000 
annually.  This  does  not  include  the  contractors  who  will  actually  be  doing  the 
replacements. If we do not have the proper time to hire our own staff, consultants will 
need to be used, which further increases the costs. Even without the added costs of 
consultants, implementing the LCRI as written will likely result in a rate increase for our 
customers of approximately $20 per month per connection. For some residents, this will 
be more than a 50% increase in their water bill. 
 
A better implementation approach would be to fast‐track LSLRs at utilities that have 
higher 90th percentile lead levels. A phased approach based on 90th percentile levels 
might actually allow the market to adjust and make supplies more readily available and 
reduce the price gouging that is likely to occur without federal price controls on the 
necessary LSLR supplies. This type of approach would provide the most public health 
benefit the soonest and in the most affordable way.  
 
If all utilities are mandated to replace all LSLRs at the same time, utilities will be forced to 
compete against each other for materials, supplies, and human resources regardless of 
their customer’s exposure risk. Each PWS will have the incentive to get as much of the 
products as fast as they can, taking significant resources from other communities that may 
need them more due to their percentage of lead lines or testing results indicating level 
exceedances. As such, a ranking system should be used to ensure municipalities with the 
higher lead levels at customer taps could get access to the materials they need to address 
the immediate public health concern, rather than municipalities with lower lead levels at 
customer taps taking all the materials to make sure they can comply with regulations 
regardless of the public health benefit. If the rule is implemented as proposed, large water 
utilities will likely get priority over small ones due to more buying power. In contrast, the 
small utilities may be the ones who have poor corrosion control treatment and therefore 
would benefit the most from LSLR. 
 
Compliance Timeframes 
Starting  in  the  middle  of  a  calendar  year  is  very  confusing.  For  less  confusion  for 
customers, water utilities, and state primacy agencies, compliance should be based on 
calendar years. USEPA asked for comment on whether some portions of the LCRI could be 
implemented sooner. CWD does not believe this is possible. So many of the changes are 
interconnected that this would lead to more confusion and many additional violations for 

no purpose. According to our experience, the materials and supplies are not currently 
available to make this feasible. The 3‐year compliance deadline allows a little more time 
for market conditions to (hopefully) adjust. 
 
In this proposed rule, USEPA is proposing to delay the majority of the compliance dates in 
the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR). CWD supports this action for clarity and 
simplification for both state primacy agencies and water utilities. However, both entities 
will need this issue clarified before the LCRI becomes final, which is anticipated to be the 
same month, and possibly the same day, the LCRR would become effective. The amount 
of planning and logistics needed for compliance with one of the rules is a heavy lift, even 
for utilities with multiple full time equivalents (FTEs) working on the project. Planning for 
potential implementation of both rules at the same time, not knowing which one will 
actually be effective is not realistic. Utilities and states need clarification on this issue 
months prior to October 2024. 
 
Faucet Sampling at Schools and Childcare 
CWD supports the concept of offering faucet sampling to K‐8 schools and childcare 
centers. However, CWD does not believe it is a good use of water utility resources to try 
to track down school and childcare personnel to try to get them to agree to test and then 
document either their refusal or lack of acknowledgement. CWD’s experience in replacing 
LSLs at childcare facilities taught us how difficult it can be to get their participation, even 
for a FREE LSLR. Most childcares declined or did not respond to the follow‐up offers of 
free water sampling in their childcare after the LSLR. Even when a program is free, PWS 
have  no  regulatory  authority  over  schools  or  childcares  and  cannot  force  them  to 
participate. USEPA needs to work with other federal agencies such as the Department of 
Education and Health and Human Services to make testing part of their programs, not 
pass the responsibility on to water utilities. If this becomes a requirement for these 
facilities, due to the sheer number of them in our service area, Cleveland Water will spend 
in excess of $11 million per year on the faucet‐sampling program for schools and day care 
facilities. As previously stated, utility budgets are not unlimited. For $11,000,000 per year, 
we could replace 1,570 LSLs, but we will not be able to afford both. Furthermore, for 
water utilities that have already replaced all lead service lines at state‐licensed childcares 
and schools, or confirmed that the childcares/schools never had a LSL, even if a faucet 
comes back with an elevated lead level, the source of lead is either stagnated water in the 
faucet or premise plumbing. Each of these factors are beyond the scope of a water utility’s 
authority. A better approach to ensure faucet sampling and ensuring the water quality in 
schools and childcares is safe would be a simple three‐step process.   
1.) Provide water utilities with a list of schools and state licensed childcares in their service 
area and create and document the service line material just for those facilities. For all sites 
with lead connections, those would be prioritized for replacement.  
2.) Have the school/childcare develop a water management program for their building, 
which  includes  flushing  faucets  used  for  consumption  after  extended  closures  as 
stagnated water poses the highest risk for elevated metals.   
3.) After steps one and two have been implemented by the school/childcare, then the 
school/childcare can request the water utility assist with faucet sampling in the facility if 
needed.   
 
USEPA requested comment on whether results of school and childcare faucet sampling 
should be public. If public water systems perform the sampling and analysis for the 

facility,  the  results  are  already  a  public  record  and  available  via  any  public  records 
request. It is possible this fact could discourage some facilities from participating in this 
public water system sampling. PWS should not be mandated to share the records online 
as this could be burdensome to the customer (i.e. parents of children attending the 
school/childcare) as they may not know which water utility provides water to their child’s 
school/childcare.  
 
Customer Notifications 
The timeframes required for customer notifications following a LSLR are not realistic at 24 
hours  afterwards.  If  the  home  is  owner‐occupied,  then  it  may  be  doable.  Materials 
notifying the customer that the LSL has been replaced can be left on location. Still, water 
utilities have no way of knowing when a customer may come back to view the left 
materials. When the premise is rented, the materials can be left with or for the renter. 
However, when a rental property is involved, it may be impossible to track down the 
owner at all, let alone in a 24‐hour period. Additionally, there are many rental properties 
where the property owner lives in a different state and in some cases a different country. 
While the property itself may have a local property management company, this is not 
information  the  PWS  has  access  to  use.  Additionally,  a  necessity  of  all  utility  work, 
including SLR work, is to be able to perform it 24‐hours a day 7‐days a week including 
holidays many government holidays. In some cases work it is completed on evenings, 
weekends and holidays to prevent shutting off water to a school, childcare, or other 
critical facility during normal business hours. In other cases, contractors are not paid for 
government holidays, therefore they would rather work. Even if the USEPA requirement is 
a letter postmarked within a certain timeframe after the LSLR, the 24‐hour requirement is 
not realistic. If contractors cannot perform LSLR work any day of the week, the cost of 
LSLR  work  will  increase.  USEPA  must  add  clarity  to  this  section  in  if  the  24‐hour 
notification requirement is for the occupant, not necessarily the owner, since these are 
frequently not the same person. 
 
Additionally, the requirement to notify a customer 45 days in advance of performing LSLRs 
poses a planning nightmare. This does not allow a water utility to be as efficient in 
replacement as we might be otherwise since it limits our flexibility in LSLR work when we 
take out lead faster than anticipated. The challenge in this planning is that sometimes one 
contract crew of four people can remove four LSLs in one eight to ten hour day. Other 
times,  the  same  four‐person  crew  can  only  remove  one  LSL  in  one  day  due  to  the 
technical challenges found during and after excavation. While we can send letters out far 
longer  than  45  days,  if  customers  are  notified  too  far  in  advance,  then  it  GREATLY 
increases  the  number  of  phone  calls  to  the  utility  asking  when  the  work  is  to  be 
performed or the customers forgetting about it. From our experience in implementing our 
Childcare LSLR Program with WIIN funding and our LSLR Program with BIL funding, we 
have found mailing customer “welcome” letters with information about the upcoming 
LSLR opportunity about two weeks before OUPS markings for underground utilities appear 
is the perfect time for information. This is because if a customer has not yet opened their 
mail for the past few weeks, once the OUPS markings appear they will look through their 
mail to find out why. Additionally, CWD has started including Customer LSLR Agreements 
in all welcome letters. In this way, we can have more timely access to replace customer‐
owned service line material. While we are always successful in mailing letters to the 
residence where the LSLR work will take place, it is a time consuming challenge to find the 
address of a property owner if a location is not owner‐occupied. While CWD relies on 

public available data from the county auditor’s office for most property owner addresses, 
not  all  water  utilities  may  have  online  access  to  this  type  of  timely  and  updated 
information.   
 
Notifying a “resident” within three days of obtaining their sample results can be done. 
However,  it  is  important  to  differentiate  between  a  resident  and  a  customer.  The 
customer is the person who pays the bill which is not necessarily the person(s) living in the 
home. CWD thinks USEPA probably intends that the results be provided in this tight 
timeframe to the resident. The rule should be clarified to reflect this. 
 
Funding 
Every utility has other capital needs, not just LSLRs that must be accounted for in capital 
budgeting. When looking at a program of this magnitude, the fiscal health of a water 
utility has to be taken into account. By requiring this work to be completed in such a short 
timeframe, it limits a utility’s ability to address other capital needs, even with stiff rate 
increases. In order for a utility not to pass this cost of LSLRs on their customers, the 
funding needs to be grants or principal forgiveness. Please note the current available BIL 
funding is only approximately half principal forgiveness. The rest is a loan that must be 
paid back and thus does impact water utility rates. 
 
In the absence of increased federal or state funding, utilities will need to rely on rate 
increases to fund the significant cost of this program. This type of funding structure 
impacts lower income customers the most, and some of them do not even have a LSL, 
resulting in increased costs to many customers without any direct benefit. While there are 
rate assistance programs, those costs are then passed on to the rest of the customers, so 
the customers who make just enough not to qualify for rate assistance, will be impacted 
the most.  
 
Distribution System Site Evaluation (Find and Fix) 
CWD has always assisted customers with determining the cause when a lead result over 
the action level is obtained. The prescriptive method required by the proposed rule is not 
the right approach to efficiently assist the customer. Finding the source of lead and fixing 
the problem starts at the location the water sample was taken with the faucet from which 
the water sample was taken. Then, after the faucet has been resampled, the aerator 
cleaned off, etc. you move outward toward the rest of the premise, if needed. Only after 
that would you move out into the distribution system. Nearly all of the high results that 
CWD has historically seen were due to particulates on a faucet’s aerator screen. These 
particulates may have been collecting on the screen for decades. When the aerator screen 
was cleaned off, then the lead in the new sample goes away. The remaining others were 
due to problems with electrical grounding or very extended stagnation, such as when an 
owner was out of town for weeks or longer. None of our small number of samples over 
the Action Level since installing effective treatment techniques have been due to water 
quality conditions in the distribution system. This knowledge is also a portion of the 
reason that our outreach materials as pertains to lead focus on the three simple things 
that all customers can do to improve water quality at their tap, which are Clean, Flush, 
and Consume Cold (you can find them online at www.clevelandwater.com). CWD has 
been using these three steps in our lead awareness outreach materials for more than five 
years  because  they  are  effective  and  reach  consumers  at  a  linguistics  level  they 
understand. Other systems in Ohio and some other out of state utilities have also adopted 

this language as a way to reach customers with messaging that actually improves the 
water quality coming out of their tap.  
 
Sample Bottles 
Cleveland Water believes that USEPA is being too prescriptive by specifying that “wide 
mouth” sample bottles be at least 55mm outside diameter. It is our understanding that 
the whole point of specifying wide mouth sample bottles was to improve ease of use and 
therefore sampling accuracy. There are other factors that are just as important as the 
mouth size in making the bottles easy to handle such as using rectangular bottles instead 
of round ones. Based on sampler feedback, CWD purchased rectangular shaped wide 
mouth bottles and have received good feedback regarding their use. Since samples must 
be 1 liter, not everyone can easily grasp a round bottle and the squared off bottle is easier 
for people to handle. However, the outside diameter of our rectangular bottles is around 
52 mm and therefore these would not be valid bottles to use. Other round bottles we 
have in use were probably nominally 55 mm, but actual measurement shows they vary 
and a high percentage can be 54 mm, or slightly less in diameter. Technically, these would 
not meet the rule requirements either. CWD suggests that USEPA use an inside diameter 
of 45 mm, at a minimum, to define a wide mouth bottle. Being too prescriptive on what 
constitutes a wide mouth sample bottle will mean fewer options meet the specification 
and the cost will go up dramatically on the fewer ones that meet this requirement. 
 
Inventory  
USEPA has proposed when a customer informs the utility that the listed material for their 
portion of the service line is inaccurate that the utility inspect the service line within 60 
days. Cleveland Water suggests there are more cost effective ways to accomplish this than 
the utility going to visit the home. One method CWD has found to be very efficient is to 
have the customer take picture(s) and send them to us via email, text messaging, or our 
Customer Service Line Reporting webpage. We have also used FaceTime to connect with 
customers in real time as they walk to the basement and show us their service. We have 
instructions on our website explaining how to use a magnet and a penny to check pipe 
material. Knowledgeable staff can also view submitted photos and in in less than a minute 
accurately identify more than 99% of service pipe material. If a CWD staff had to physically 
go to a customer’s home, it would take longer than an hour at most individual locations, 
which  does  not  take  into  account  the  time  to  organize  schedules  and  make  the 
appointment possible. Utilities should be permitted to use other means to validate when 
a customer points out an error in the inventory. 
 
As  CWD  implements  our  LSLR  program,  starting  first  in  disadvantaged  communities 
through  the  BIL  funding,  our  replacements  are  strategically  planned  to  maximize 
efficiency and resources. Every home we investigate for lead is because our records 
indicate that home has a city‐owned lead service line. However, we are missing repair and 
replacement records for 30 years of our water systems history and therefor sometimes 
the city‐owned connection has already been replaced with copper. Because there is no 
technology yet on the market that can accurately identify pipe material without hydro 
excavation or potholing, we will continue to find some non‐lead service lines that were 
originally lead. Those lines are factored into the required rate of replacement based on 
the entire service line material inventory. Currently, the proposed LCRI discounts does not 
give credit toward the required removal rate of checking those lines off the inventory as 
not requiring replacement.  The effect on utilities is that the number of service lines that 

they have to pothole or hydro excavate that year will continue to grow through the year.  
Utilities have finite resources and cannot react in time to an end goal that continues to 
move  farther  away.    CWD  requests  that  USEPA  count  toward  the  required  rate  of 
replacement  all  service  lines  that  were  identified  as  lead,  galvanized  requiring 
replacement,  or  unknown  and  are  then  verified  as  non‐lead  through  the  utilities’ 
replacement program. 
 
Customer Sampling 
USEPA is proposing that water utilities offer all customers served by a LSL testing for their 
water, regardless of whether or not the AL is exceeded. There is a difference between 
actively offering testing to customers versus testing upon their request, which many 
utilities already do. For large utilities having a significant number of LSL, offered system‐
wide sampling can have a significant budgetary impact. Cleveland Water has more than 
180,000 LSLs. Each sample will cost CWD approximately $175 in staff time for getting a 
bottle to the customer, analysis, and notifications to the customer and the State. If only 
100,000 customers would like their water tested, this will cost $31,500,000. Water utilities 
do not have unlimited budgets. This would equate to 4,500 LSLs that could be replaced. 
We cannot afford to do both. In addition, it is very difficult to determine how this will 
increase costs and staff needed until the program is already started and utilities are able 
to get data on their customers’ wants. This creates yet another factor of uncertainty by 
which utilities will need to respond in a short timeframe, which can be very challenging for 
both small and large systems to stay within their operating budgets. 
 
Public Education 
USEPA should focus on allowing water utilities to make public education effective, not just 
fast. A special mailing to all residents served by a large public water system takes time to 
accomplish. It is not realistic to expect a water utility to accomplish this in less than 60 
days. Additionally, states should have the authority to approve changes that make the 
material  more  understandable.  While  indirectly,  this  makes  the  efforts  to  educate 
customers more protective of public health.  
 
USEPA is also proposing the educational material include information informing customers 
that using an ANSI accredited filter will be effective in reducing lead exposure. CWD 
objects to including this blanket language. Testing we have done using USEPA’s ORD 
protocol has shown that not every filters works with every utility’s water quality. Including 
this language is misleading to customers. 
 
USEPA has proposed very specific public education language. In addition to our objection 
to the language regarding certified filters, CWD also does not think the phrase “galvanized 
requiring replacement service line” will be understandable to the average customer. In 
your desire to be more thorough, you will actually be more confusing to consumers.  
 
Some of the language proposed is challenging for utilities to communicate with customers 
due to discrepancies in how the health effects are communicated as blood lead level, but 
that type of data isn’t available to water systems. This can lead customers to be worried 
that all exposure to lead comes from the water even though they may or may not have a 
LSL and all scientific sources of data for decades have pointed out that dust from lead 
paint is the primary source of lead exposure. Locally, there is a significant amount of older 
housing that contains lead based paint and this remains a challenge for local health 

departments. The educational material we distribute should not undermine or contradict 
their efforts to educate people about the dangers of lead based paint. The language is also 
confusing because while advising customers to choose bottled water as an alternative 
source, it neglects to state that plastic, which costs 1,000‐times more, may have higher 
actual lead levels (allowable is 5 ppb) than the public tap water when the public water 
system has effective corrosion control. Using verbiage that states any amount of lead in 
the water is unsafe—when systems can only get to the analysis level of non‐detection and 
that amount is not zero, therefore cannot be listed in the consumer confidence report as a 
zero – creates confusion about the safety of all water. This distinction between the non‐
detect level testing limitations and use of language regarding no safe level in blood vs 
acceptable/testable in water samples is confusing. 
 
CWD fully supports efforts to protect public health by reducing exposure to lead via 
drinking water. However, to actually improve consumer’s health and achieve a reduction 
in the blood lead levels will require remediating the lead paint issues. Remediating lead 
paint  would  come  with  a  significant  health  benefit  to  our  community,  unlike  the 
replacement of lead service lines.  Communities must retain flexibility to prioritize funding 
programs based on health benefit, so that they can address the primary pathways of lead 
exposure and protect public health. 
 
In  2019,  the  national  nonprofit  Enterprise  Community  Partners  convened  Lead  Safe 
Cleveland Coalition (LSCC), a community organization with more than 500 institutional 
and 140 individual members dedicated to addressing lead poisoning in Cleveland. The 
Cleveland  Clinic  is  LSCC’s  largest  donor,  having  contributed  $52.5  million,  and  its 
physicians serve on many of the coalition’s seven working committees. The centerpiece of 
the LSCC’s work is the Lead Safe Certification program. In May 2019, the coalition made 
33 policy recommendations pertaining to lead safety, screening, testing, intervention, and 
treatment to the Cleveland City Council. The council took these recommendations under 
advisement and passed an ordinance that requires owners of rental units built before 
1978 to obtain Lead Safe Certification from the city’s Department of Building and Housing 
every 2 years. To obtain the certification, the property owner must submit a report or 
audit from a lead clearance technician indicating that the unit either has no existing lead 
hazard or had an existing hazard but was made safe. The owner may either remediate the 
hazard — usually lead paint — with interim controls or permanently remove it. . The 
certification does not require that the home’s water be tested or service line be non‐lead 
because it is known that the water is not the source of the elevated blood lead levels. (See 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Office of Policy Development and 
Research report).  https://www.huduser.gov/portal/casestudies/study‐042623.html 
 
In summary, Cleveland Water supports USEPA’s goal to remove LSLs. However, we do not 
believe  the  proposed  timeframe  is  achievable  on  a  nation‐wide  basis  and  will  cost 
significantly more than USEPA’s estimate. The requirement to inventory and replace every 
lead service line is the exception, rather than the norm for drinking water regulations in 
that there are no economies of scale. Every single LSL (or thought to be lead) has to be 
potholed and then removed. The older the utility, the more likely they are to have LSLs 
and also the more likely they are to not have complete records of every replacement 
performed in conjunction with other work throughout the years. Furthermore, USEPA 
must address the supply chain and material shortage issues directly, not just assume 
markets  will  adjust  and  needed  supplies  and  skilled  workers  will  become  available. 

Cleveland Water suggests USEPA phase in the implementation of this rule such that 
utilities  with  higher  lead  levels  at  customer  taps  be  prioritized  for  implementing 
mandatory system‐wide service line replacement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely yours, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Margaret L. Rodgers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Manager of Plant Operations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cleveland Water

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0739 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Tammy Walker <tammywalker656@gmail.com>  
Sent: Thursday, November 30, 2023 1:35 PM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Subject:  
 
 
More information please.  
 
I want to help, but get overwhelmed and distracted with all the issues that I procrastinate on. 
 
 
I would love to take a lead in my community to start this. 
 
Thanks 
 
Tammy Walker  
3815 Carney Avenue  
Erie Pennsylvania 16510 
USA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0846 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0719 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Educate. Advocate. Empower.
PRESIDENT
Mayor Mark T Kupsky, Fairview Heights
FIRST VICE
PRESIDENT
Mayor Deborah Frank Feinen champaign
SECOND VICE
PRESIDENT
Mayor Gary W. Manier Washington
EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR
Brad Cole, Former Mayor, Carhondale
VICE
PRESIDENTS
Mayor Richard H. Veenstra, Addison
Mayor David Goins, Alton
Mayor Richard Irvin, Aurora
Village President Katrina Thompson, Broadview
Mayor Carolin Harvey, Carbondole
Mayor Brandon Johnson, Chicago
Mayor Cohen Barnes, DeKaIb
Mayor Teresa Kernc, Diamond
Mayor Reggie Freemon, East Moline
Mayor Art Risavy, Edwardsville
Village President Danny Schmit, Fox Lake
Mayor Jodi Miller, Freeport
Village President Mike McCormick, Godfrey
Village President Rodney S. Craig, Hanover Park
Village President Vernard L Alsberry, Jr., Hazel Crest
Mayor Andy Ezard, Jacksonville
Mayor Christopher W. Curtis, Kankokee
Village President James L Discipio, La Grange Park
Village President Sheila Chalmers-Currin Motteson
Mayor Rick Hall Mattoon
Mayor Chris Brown Morris
Mayor Joe Judge, Mount Carmel
Mayor John C. Lewis Mount Vernon
Town President Chris Koos Normal
Mayor Herb Roach, O’Fallon
Mayor Rita Ali Peoria
Mayor Michae A. Troop, Quincy
Mayor Susan L Harbaugh, Red Bud
Village President Rick Reinhold, Richton Park
Mayor Thomas McNamara, Rockford
Mayor George Van Dusen Skokie
Mayor Misty Buscher Springfie d
Mayor Christopher Nelson West Dundee
Mayor Billy McKinney, Zion
PAST PRESIDENTS
Village President Karen Darch Barrington
Mayor Julie Moore Wolfe, Decatur
Mayor Michael J. lnman, Macomb
Mayor Leon Rockingham, Jr., North Chicago
Mayor Gerald R. Bennett, Pales Hills
Village President Catherine Id. Adduci, River Forest
Mayor Ricky J. Goitmon, Vandalia
December 15, 2023
Michael S Regan
Administrator
US Environmental Protection Agency
Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-080 1
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
Dear Administrator Regan:
As the statewide association representing all 1,294 cities, villages and towns
in Illinois, the Illinois Municipal League (EVIL) herein submits formal
comments regarding the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements
(LCRI) issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA),
which would require nearly all water systems in the United States to replace
lead service lines within 10 years.
In 2021, the State of Illinois enacted the Lead Service Line Replacement and
Notification Act, Public Act 102-0613, which mandates community water
supplies (CWS) to complete a final material inventory of lead service lines
by April 15, 2024. CWS then have between 15 and 50 years to complete lead
service line replacement once their final lead service line replacement plan is
submitted to the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency by April 24, 2027.
Even with the longer timelines established by Illinois law, communities are
already facing challenges complying with the existing lead service line
replacement mandate. A copy of our fact sheet on this state Act is enclosed
herein.
Illinois also requires owners or operators of CWS to develop and maintain a
complete inventory of lead service lines and to implement a comprehensive
plan for the replacement of those lines, according to prescribed timelines
based on the number of lead service lines reported in the material inventory.
A CWS with fewer than 1,200 lead service lines must complete their lead
service line replacement by 2042; a CWS that has between 1,201 and 4,999
lead service lines must complete their lead service line replacement by 2044;
a CWS that has between 5,000 and 9,999 lead service lines must complete
their lead service line replacement by 2047; a CWS that has between 10,000
and 99,999 lead service lines must complete their lead service line
replacement by 2061; and, a CWS with 100,000 or more lead service lines
must complete their lead service line replacement by 2077.
~U N OI~~
500 East Capitol Avenue
RO. Box 5180
Springfield, IL 62705-5180
Phone- 217 525.1220
Fox: 217.525.1438 www.imI.org

Page 2
Administrator Regan
December 15, 2023
Under the proposed LCRI, the vast majority of lead service lines would be required to be replaced by
2034, nearly a full decade before some of Illinois’ smallest communities are required to complete
replacement under state law. The 1 0-year timeline for replacement proposed in LCRJ is unrealistic and
not feasible, not to mention likely impossible given the lack of skilled labor to complete the necessary
work within such a short time frame.
Funding is one of the largest challenges CWS in Illinois presently face in regard to lead service line
replacement, but even with unlimited financial resources, which is not the reality for most communities,
CWS would not be able to complete replacement under the timeline in the proposed LCRI due to
workforce shortages.
Present funding sources, both from the federal government and the State of Illinois, are wholly inadequate
to cover the full costs of replacing all lead service lines in the state. The 10-year timeline in the proposed
LCRJ will only exacerbate funding shortfall issues CWS in Illinois face as they begin the process of lead
service line replacement. Current funding sources for CWS rely largely on loans that will have to be
repaid in some form. In order to ensure CWS are able to afford the cost of replacing lead service lines,
direct grants must be provided as the primary funding source. Inadequate funding coupled with the
accelerated timeline in the proposed LCRI will force CWS to pass the costs of lead service line
replacement to local residents. As a result, the proposed LCRI would have a severely negative impact on
every community in Illinois and every taxpayer.
Illinois is one of a few states that currently have laws mandating lead service line replacement and is
already taking steps to address the replacement of lead service lines. IML requests USEPA provide a full
exemption from future LCRI rulemaking to states that already have lead service line replacement
requirements and are making progress toward that end, and specifically an exemption for the State of
Illinois. This would ensure those communities that are in the process of replacing lead service lines are
able to do so without additional roadblocks to completion.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide public comment about this important issue. Please feel welcome
to contact me if you have any questions or concerns. I may be reached by phone at (217) 525-1220 or by
email at bcole~iml.org. Thanks.
Yours very truly,
/
I
BRAD COLE
Executive Director
c:
IML Board of Directors
Governor 18 Pritzker
Enclosure

July 7, 2023
Lead Service Line Replacement
Public Act 102-0613 creates the Lead Service Line Replacement and Notification Act. The Act requires owners or operators
of community water supplies, such as municipalities, to develop and maintain a complete material inventory of lead service
lines, and to implement a comprehensive plan for the replacement of those lines according to prescribed timelines based on
the number of lead service lines reported in the material inventory.
This fact sheet provides a general overview of the Act and the duties and responsibilities of municipal officials and owners or
operators of a community water supply.
TABLE 1
ENTORY AND REPLACEMENT PLAN TIMELINE
April 15, 2022
— lniti~l Material Inventory Completed
April 15, 2023
— Updated Material Inventory Submitted to Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA)
April 15, 2024
— Final Material Inventory and Initial Replacement Plan Submitted to IEPA*
April 15, 2025 — April 15, 2027
— Updated Replacement Plan Submitted to IEPA by April 15 Annually
April 15, 2027 — Final Replacement Plan Submitted to IEPA
*Community water suppliers may apply for an extension for submission of the final material inventory to
IEPA, but must do so no later than January 15, 2024, to be considered.
MATERIAL INVENTORY
The Act requires community water suppliers to complete an initial material inventory by April 15, 2022, and provide an
updated material inventory to IEPA by April 15, 2023. A final material inventory must be submitted to IEPA no later than
April 15, 2024. The inventory must report the composition of all lead service lines in the water distribution system, whether
they are suspected, known or unknown. An extension to submit the final inventory may be granted by IEPA, but the
community water supplier must apply for an extension no later than January 15, 2024, to be considered. (See Table 1.)
During the creation of the material inventory, the community water supplier is required to maintain a record of persons
refusing to grant access to the interior of a building for purposes of identifying the material of the water service lines
within. The community water supplier must also notify building owners and occupants of the existence of lead service lines
connected to the building within 15 days of that discovery.
Illinois Municipal League 1500 East Capitol Avenue I P.O. Box 51801 Springfield, 11627055180
Phone: 217.525.1220 I Fax: 217.525.7438 I iml.org

REPLACEMENT PLAN
Separate from the material inventory report, each community water supplier that has known or suspected lead service lines
must submit an initial written replacement plan to IEPA no later than April 15, 2024. This must be updated and resubmitted
annually by April 15 until a final plan is submitted for approval no later than April 15, 2027. The community water supplier
must post the most recently submitted plan on their website or request that it be posted on IEPA’s website.
REQUIRED COMPONENTS OF A REPLACEMENT PLAN
A plan must address:
• The name and identification number of the community water supply;
• The total number of service lines connected;
The total number of suspected lead service lines connected;
• The total number of known lead service lines connected;
• Whether the line is or was connected downstream to lead piping;
• How each lead service line will be replaced;
• The total number of lead service lines that have been replaced each year since 2020; and,
• An analysis of costs and financing options for replacing the lines connected to the distribution system
A plan should also include a proposed lead service line replacement schedule that includes one-year, five-
year, 10-year, 15-year, 20-year, 25-year and 30-year goals, if applicable; a plan for prioritizing high-risk
facilities; a map of the areas where lead service lines are expected to be found; and, the sequence with
which those areas will be inventoried and lead service lines replaced.
Additionally, a plan should contain measures for how the community water supplier will inform the public
of the plan and provide opportunity for public comment, as well as measures to encourage diversity in
workforce hiring required to implement the plan
The Act allows community water suppliers to request an extension for submitting a final replacement
plan to IEPA no less than three months prior to the April 15, 2027, due date. IEPA shall develop criteria for
granting replacement plan extensions.
REPLACEMENT OF LINES
The replacement schedule is dependent upon the number of inventoried lead service lines in the community water supply
distribution system. IEPA may grant an extension* of additional time of up to 20% of the original replacement timeline and, in
TIMELINE TO
COMPLETE REPLACEMENT PLAN*
(following plan submission deadline of April 15, 2027)
within 15 years (2042) at a rate of no less than 7% per year
within 17 years (2044) at a rate of no less than 6% per year
within 20 years (2047) at a rate of no less than 5% per year
within 34 years (2061)4at a rate of no less than 3% per year
within 50 years (2077) at a rate of no less than 2% per year
situations of extreme hardship,
IEPA may consider a second
extension* of up to 10% of the
original replacement timeline.
The replacement schedule is
detailed in Table 2 and begins
upon the submission of a final
replacement plan, which is due
no later than April 15, 2027.
Partial lead service line
replacements are expressly
prohibited, unless an
emergency repair affects a
TABLE 2
NUMBER OF LEAD
SERVICE LINES
in the community
water supply
distribution system
less than 1,200
1,201~4,999
5,000-9,999
10,000-99,999
100,000 or more
Illinois Municipal League
I Lead Service line Replacement
I page 2

lead line or the owner or occupant of the building does not cooperate in order to replace the entire line at that time. In that
situation, the owner or operator of a community water supply must then notify the residents of the repair, provide water
filters and, additionally, replace the remaining portion of the service line within 30 days of the repair or within 120 days in the
event of weather or other circumstances beyond reasonable control that prohibit replacement.
Unless the adjoining lines are being replaced with state grant funding, a municipality may require a private property
owner to pay to replace the service lines on that private property. In the event the
community water supplier receives grant funding from the state, the Act requires
.
-
The Act provides broad liability
them to bear the entire expense of full lead service line replacement for all lead
p otect o
to t e o
e s a d
service lines within the scope of the grant. The Act also requires that community
operators of a community
water suppliers make a good faith effort to utilize contractors and vendors pursuant
supp y o a da age
to the Business Enterprise for Minorities, Women and Persons with Disabilities Act
to property when replacing or
(commonly known as BEP), for no less than 20% of the total contracts.
installing a service line.
All lead service line replacements are considered public works projects and subject
to the Prevailing Wage Act.
PROVIDING NOTICE
The community water supplier must attempt to contact the owner of a potentially affected
building by mail, 45 days in advance of conducting a planned lead service line replacement.
If the owner of the affected building does not respond to the request within 15 days after the
request is sent, the community water supplier shall attempt to post the request on the entrance of
the affected building.
A community water supplier shall request the owner of an affected building who
does not allow access to replace private lines to sign a waiver developed by IEPA. The
Act provides required information on lead service line replacement to be included in
written notices. Required notifications must contain general notice information in English,
Spanish, Polish, Chinese, Tagalog, Arabic, Korean, German, Urdu and Gujarati.
FUNDING MECHANISMS
Absent directistate or federal funding community water suppliers will be responsible for paying for the costs associated with
the replacerner~t of lead service lines within their~water distribution systems If a community,~iater supplier is~replacing lead
s~rvice lines’~utilizing its own funds the Actallows the community water supplier to~require the owner of the private portion
of thee lead service line to pay to replace that portion of the line
ThetActcontains,broadpermissive authorityfor both hom~ rule and non-home rule municipalities to fund lead service line
replaceme~t’by’órdinance or resolution, under the following statutory provisions
Special Service Area Tax 35 IL!CS 200 27-5 etse.)
Corporate Fund Property Tax 65 ILCS 5 8-3-1
Home Rule Municipal Retailers Occupation Tax 65 ILCS 5 8-11-1
Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax 65 IhCS 5 8-11 5)
Home Rule Municipal Use Tax 65 ILCS 5 8-11-6)
Local Improvements ~- Special Assessments 65 ILCS 5 9-1-1 etsee
Procedures for Specified Local lm~rovements - Special Assessments 65 ILCS 5 9-3-1 etse. )
~lmprovements Affecting I~roperty Not Within Municipality - Special Assessments 65 ILCS 5 9~4t1 etse.~
City and Water Fund Tax 65 ILC’S 5 11-131~1) and
Waterworks and Sewerage Connection Charge 65 ILCS 5 11-150-1
~1unicipal officials are encouraged to thoroughly discuss these funding options with their treasurers finähce officers and
legal counsel
Illinois Municipal League
Lead Service Line Replacement
I page 3

LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT ADVISORY BOARD
The Act creates the Lead Service Line Replacement Advisory Board to provide technical assistance to IEPA in implementing
the Act. The 28-member board, which must meet at least every six months, includes 10 members who are mayors of the
largest municipalities in the state, or their designee, two members who are mayors representing municipalities located in any
county south of the southernmost county represented by one of the ten largest municipalities or their respective designees
(south of Sangamon County) and an Illinois Municipal League (IML) representative.
The board was required to provide a report to Governor JB Pritzker and the General Assembly within 18 months of the Act’s
effective date, concerning opportunities for dedicated, long-term revenue options for funding lead service line replacement.
This report avai able via this link was approved on June 29, 2023.
The board is required to provide a report concerning the status of all lead service line replacement within 10 years of the Act’s
effective date.
~Q
Lead Service Line
S R~pIacement and Notification Act
~ Howis lead service line replacement funded’
•The Act establishes the Lead Service Line Replacement Fund in the state treasury to be used by
• IEPA to finance and administer programs associated,with lead seryice~line replacement However the
Act does not specifically allocate or guarantee any available funding in the State Fiscal Year 2022
Budget The federal government has publicized a desire to allocate up to $45 billion for lead~service
line replacement nationwide but that has not yet been funded or established by the U S ~ongress
federal funding, community water suppliers ar4 respon~ibl~for pa~ying for
costs associated with the replacement of lead service lines within their distribution systems The
Act provides broad permissive authority for both home rule and non-home rule municipalities to
fund lead servIce line’replacernênt, b~’ ordinance dr resolution, ur~derspe~ified taxing stati~ites~
Q • Are partial lead service line replacements allowed~
.
• No. The Act expressly prohibits partial lead service line replacements. When replacing a lead
•service line, the community water supplier shall replace the service line in its entirety, including,
but not limited to, any portion of the service line running on private property and within the
building’s plumbing at the first shut-off valve. The Act provides exceptions to this requirement,
including when a private property owner refuses to grant access to replace the entire service line,
or in instances of an emergency repair.
• Who pays for the replacement of lead service lines located on private property’
• If a community water supplier is replacing lead service lines utilizing its own funds the Act allows
•the community water supplier to require the property owner of the private portion of the lead
service line to pay to replace that portion of the line
In the event the community water supplier receives grant funding from the state the Act requires
them to bear the entire expense of full lead service line replacement for all lead ~ervice lines~within
the s~cope of the grant
Illinois Municipal League
Lead Service Line Replacement
I page 4

A
rviceLine
ment and Notification Act
Q ~ Is there a waiver process for property owners who do not grant access for private line replacement?
•Yes. In the event a property owner denies access, the community water supplier shall request the
iproperty owner to sign a waiver (to be developed and provided by IEPA). In this instance, the
property owner shall be responsible for providing filters for all fixtures until the remaining portion
of the lead service line is replaced.
~:What happensdU~ing an emergency rápair?
‘.~ In the event of~an erñérgency ~epairi the community water supplier may perfo~rna partial
• replacement if the owner of the property refuses to grant access In this instance the community
water supplier shall notify the building s owner and residents that a repair has been conripleted
with specified information A~dditionaIly the community water supplier must provide filters for at
least one fixture within the property supplying potable water for consumption
If the community water supplier is unable to replace the entire service line during the course of
an emergency repair the Act requires the replacement of the remaining portion of the service
line within 30 days of the repair or within 120 days if weather or other circumstances prohibit
•
•~
cohstruction.,
-
S
•
•
Q DAre liability protections in place for municipalities when performing lead service line replacement?
•Yes.The Act provides that, to the extent allowed by law, the community water supplier shall be
! held harmless for all damage to property when it replaces or installs a lead service line in a public
right-of-way, and when the municipality enters into an agreement with a private contractor for the
replacement of a lead service line.
imi.org
•
—.
Illinois Municipal League I Lead Service Line Replacement
I page 5

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2024 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 2, 2024 
The Honorable Michael Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC  20460 
 
FOR ELECTRONIC DELIVERY 
RE: 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper:  Improvements (Docket 
Id#:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
The American Water Works Association (AWWA) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI or Proposed Rule).1  AWWA is a proponent of 
strong protections for water consumers today while we work for a future when lead is no longer in 
contact with drinking water.  
The Proposed Rule contains a number of positive developments that AWWA strongly supports, 
especially the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) decision to continue the use of a treatment 
technique-based primary standard for lead and copper.  AWWA also supports the decision to make 
service line replacement a separate requirement from triggered actions following a lead action level 
exceedance. We remain a strong proponent of the complete removal of all lead service lines – in their 
entirety – through a reasonable approach over time. 
However, AWWA has significant concerns that the requirements, as proposed, are not feasible to 
implement.  By EPA’s own estimate, the cost ($3.0 – 4.9 billion annualized) associated with the LCRI is 
higher than virtually all prior Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) rulemakings.  We are concerned that 
most, if not all regulated systems will not have the resources needed to meet EPA’s ambitious timeline 
for lead service line removals.  We are also concerned with the potential impacts on households that 
cannot afford higher water bills, as increased compliance costs are directly passed on to customers in 
many cases.   
In finalizing the LCRI, EPA has the opportunity to revise the current proposal so that it enhances the 
protection of public health, builds public confidence in the regulation of water systems, and allows for 
efficient oversight and enforcement.  The public is best served by a lead and copper regulation that is 
practical to implement and legally sound.  A final rule that is feasible for public water systems and states 
 
1 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,878 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
Government Affairs Office 
1300 Eye Street NW 
Suite 701W 
Washington, DC 20005-3314 
T 202.628.8303 
F 202.628.2846 

Docket Id#:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 2, 2024 
Page 2 
to implement is essential to achieving our shared goal of reducing the risk of lead from drinking water.  
Community water systems and the public are ill-served by shifting and uncertain legal requirements, 
which can cause systems to spend limited resources inefficiently or distract from other urgent public 
health concerns.   
The Safe Drinking Water Act requires that the LCRI be “feasible,” and in finalizing the LCRI requirements, 
EPA must also consider the nature of the entities that it is regulating: many public water systems (PWSs) 
are small, rural, public, or quasi-public entities with limited resources, complex budgeting and 
contracting procedures, and aging infrastructure. They are being asked to simultaneously implement a 
number of new EPA regulatory proposals that are capital and resource intensive.  These entities will face 
significant logistical, financial, and practical challenges to securing the qualified personnel they need to 
complete this work, as well as to obtain and deploy any grant money that may be available to assist 
them. We are concerned that many of the regulated PWSs will simply be unable to comply.  
AWWA supports EPA’s proposal to largely transition directly from the 1991 Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) 
to the LCRI, which will prevent regulated systems and states with primacy from inefficiently spending 
resources on regulatory requirements that will soon be superseded by a fundamentally different set of 
requirements. As EPA has correctly recognized, preparing for and implementing the Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR) will not help water systems or states be further prepared for the LCRI but will 
instead detract and distract from their ability to do so.  However, we further urge EPA to immediately 
postpone the compliance dates for the LCRR not otherwise continuing under the LCRI.  Given the 
substantial changes proposed in the LCRI and the fact that the compliance date for the LCRR is October 
16, 2024, local resources may be inefficiently spent on complying with the LCRR rather than toward 
compliance with the LCRI. 
The following detailed comments contain suggestions that (1) clarify, (2) simplify, and (3) revise the 
Proposed Rule with the specific goals of increasing the efficiency of public health risk reduction and 
reducing the burden of rule implementation on states, water systems and customers.   
AWWA is concerned that there are elements of the proposed LCRI that violate the SDWA and 
Administrative Procedure Act (APA) and will not withstand legal scrutiny in the courts.  If these and 
other considerations are not addressed in the final rule, water systems will be faced with more 
uncertainty going forward. The attached detailed comments point out a number of issues that EPA must 
address in finalizing the LCRI, but the most critical are   
1.
The proposed LCRI inaccurately equates community water systems having “access” to
private property with a system having “control” over the service line on private property
as described in the SDWA.
2.
The proposed LCRI asserts without demonstration in the record that the rule is feasible as
proposed. Particularly, EPA has not demonstrated the feasibility of:
a.
Replacing all lead and galvanized requiring replacement service lines within 10
years without substantial and currently unavailable federal subsidies and
b.
Lowering the lead action level to 10 µg/L, while also substantially altering the
dataset on which the lead action level exceedance is determined

Docket Id#:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 2, 2024 
Page 3 
AWWA agrees that water systems, communities, states, and the federal government should be striving 
to fully remove all lead service lines in their entirety and that water systems should be actively managing 
the corrosivity of the water they distribute.  The regulatory requirements aimed at reaching those goals 
must be reliably achievable. Timeframes for required actions must be possible within the resources 
reasonably available to water systems, and complying with this regulation should not negatively impact 
the time and resources required to address other high priority risks and system improvements.  
Over the last several decades, the drinking water community has made tremendous strides in reducing 
lead levels in drinking water.  More can and should be done.  The next steps in drinking water policy to 
further lead risk reduction must be credible, legally sound, truly feasible, and appropriate to the 
challenge at hand. AWWA hopes that these comments will assist EPA as it formulates a final LCRI that 
achieves additional risk reduction while recognizing the additional resource-intensive challenges facing 
water systems, including per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), cybersecurity, climate change and 
aging infrastructure. 
If you have any questions regarding this correspondence, please contact me at your convenience. 
Best regards, 
SUBMITTED ON BEHALF OF AWWA 
G. Tracy Mehan, III
Executive Director for Government Affairs
cc: 
Bruno Pigott, EPA/OW 
Jeffrey Prieto, EPA/OGC 
Jennifer McLain, EPA/OGWDW 
Eric Burneson, EPA/OGWDW 
Hannah Holsinger, EPA/OGWDW/SRMD 
Jeffrey Kempic, EPA/OGWDW/SRMD 
Michael Goldberg, EPA/OGWDW/SRMD 
Attachments (1 with appendices) 
Who is AWWA 
The American Water Works Association (AWWA) is an international, nonprofit, scientific and educational 
society dedicated to providing total water solutions assuring the effective management of water. Founded 
in 1881, the Association is the largest organization of water supply professionals in the world. Our 
membership includes more than 4,000 utilities that supply roughly 80 percent of the nation's drinking 
water and treat almost half of the nation’s wastewater. Our 50,000-plus total membership represents the 
full spectrum of the water community: public water and wastewater systems, environmental advocates, 
scientists, academicians, and others who hold a genuine interest in water, our most important resource. 
AWWA unites the diverse water community to advance public health, safety, the economy, and the 
environment.  


Attachment 1 
FORMAL COMMENTS ON THE 
NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATIONS FOR LEAD AND COPPER: 
IMPROVEMENTS PROPOSED RULE 
88 Federal Register 84878, December 6, 2023 
Docket Id#:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Prepared by: 
American Water Works Association 
1300 Eye Street, NW, Suite 701W 
Washington, DC  20005 
February 2, 2024 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... i  
1 
Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 1 
2 
General Comments .............................................................................................................................. 2 
2.1 Positive Aspects of LCRI Proposal .................................................................................................... 2 
2.2 Critical Revisions Essential to Rulemaking ....................................................................................... 3 
2.3 Essential Policy Support Needed ..................................................................................................... 5 
2.4 Affordability ..................................................................................................................................... 6 
2.5 Opportunities for Greater Clarity................................................................................................... 11 
2.6 Guidance to Support Rulemaking .................................................................................................. 13 
2.7 Public Education – Required Communication ............................................................................... 13 
2.8 Corrections to Avoid Misinterpretation ......................................................................................... 15 
2.9 Opportunity for Future Improvement ........................................................................................... 16 
3 
Requested Comments ........................................................................................................................ 17 
3.1 General Matters ............................................................................................................................. 17 
3.2 Reduce Burden ............................................................................................................................... 19 
3.3 Prompt, Fair, and Equitable Enforcement ..................................................................................... 23 
3.4 Service Line Replacement .............................................................................................................. 26 
3.5 Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper ................................................................................................ 49 
3.6 Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan ........................................................... 56 
3.7 Lead Action and Trigger Levels ...................................................................................................... 61 
3.8 Corrosion Control ........................................................................................................................... 65 
3.9 Compliance Alternatives for Lead Action Level Exceedance by a Small CWS or NTNCWS ............ 69 
3.10 Public Education ............................................................................................................................. 70 
3.11 Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances .................. 78 
3.12 Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities ........................................................................ 83 
3.13 Reporting and Recordkeeping ....................................................................................................... 86 
3.14 Compliance Dates .......................................................................................................................... 90 
3.15 Consumer Confidence Report ........................................................................................................ 93 
3.16 Definitions ...................................................................................................................................... 94 
3.17 Questions from within Preamble ................................................................................................... 95 
4 
Legal Review ....................................................................................................................................... 97 
4.1 Introduction to Legal Section ......................................................................................................... 97 

4.2 Legal Standard ............................................................................................................................... 99 
4.3 EPA Reasonably Determined Not to Set an MCL for Lead Because it Remains Infeasible to 
Do So..........................................................................................................................................  100 
4.4 A Treatment Technique-Based Rule Remains the Most Sound Approach for Regulating Lead in 
Drinking Water and EPA is Within its Discretion to Continue to Use This Approach. .......................... 104 
4.5 A more stringent regulatory regime or implementing LCRR until LCRI goes into effect would not 
be feasible. ............................................................................................................................................ 105 
4.6 EPA Reasonably Interpreted the SDWA’s Anti-Backsliding Provision in Light of the Treatment 
Technique Approach ............................................................................................................................. 111 
4.7 The SDWA does not allow regulation of private property outside of public water systems and 
“control” cannot be equated with “access.” ........................................................................................ 113 
4.8 The Proposed Rule creates federalism concerns and risks creating unnecessary conflicts with 
state and local laws. .............................................................................................................................. 121 
5 
Economic Analysis ............................................................................................................................ 122 
5.1 Estimate of Lead Risk Reduction is Not Substantiated ................................................................ 122 
5.2 Health Burdens (Costs) Not Addressed in Analysis ...................................................................... 125 
5.3 Distributing Cost over Time ......................................................................................................... 128 
5.4 Cost of Service Line Replacement ................................................................................................ 129 
5.5 Likelihood of Additional WQP Sampling Site ............................................................................... 133 
5.6 Assuming No Reduction in Lead Exposure ................................................................................... 134 
5.7 Understanding Post-Partial Lead Concentrations ........................................................................ 135 
5.8 Costing Expectations for CCT Decision-making ........................................................................... 135 
5.9 Analysis Misjudges the Impact of Orthophosphate Addition on Cost ......................................... 135 
5.10 Alternative Definition of Lead Content Service Lines to be Replaced ......................................... 137 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A 
Implications of the Draft EPA Lead and Copper Rule Improvements: Human Health Risk 
and Benefits 
Appendix B 
Full Lead Service Line Replacement Guidance (WRF 4713) (copyrighted) 
Appendix C 
AWWA Comments on Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-
1012) 
Appendix D 
Corrosion Control Treatment Training (copyrighted) 
Appendix E 
When and How to Evaluate Corrosion Control Treatment When Conditions Change (WRF 
5032) (copyrighted) 

Appendix F 
Guidance for Using Pipe Rigs to Inform Lead and Copper Corrosion Control Treatment 
Decisions (WRF #5081) (copyrighted) 
Appendix G Strategies for assessing optimized corrosion control treatment of lead and copper 
(copyrighted) 
Appendix H 
Analysis of Impacts of Corrosion Control Treatment on Lead and Copper Levels over Time 
Appendix I 
Comparing the Cost of Bottled Water vs In-Home Filter Provision for a Lead Action Level 
Exceedance and Review of Filter Cost Estimates for LCRI 
Appendix J 
ANSI/AWWA C810 - Replacement and Flushing of Lead Service Lines (copyrighted) 
Appendix K 
CDM Smith Final Report. Considerations when Costing Lead Service Line Identification and 
Replacement.  

 
 
GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS 
ABC 
 
Associated Builders and Contractors 
ALICE  
Asset Limited, Income Constrained, Employed 
APA 
 
Administrative Procedures Act 
ASDWA  
Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
AWWA  
American Water Works Association 
BIL 
 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law 
BIOPOC  
Black, Indigenous, and People of Color 
BLL 
 
Blood Lead Level 
BOY 
 
Beginning of Month 
CCR 
 
Consumer Confidence Report 
CCT 
 
Corrosion Control Treatment 
CDC 
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
CERCLA  
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
CIFA 
 
Council of Infrastructure Financing Authorities 
CPI 
 
Consumer Price Index 
CVP 
 
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary   
CWA 
 
Clean Water Act 
CWS 
 
Community Water System 
DWINSA 
Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment 
DWSRF   
Drinking Water State Revolving Loan Fund  
EOY 
 
End of Year 
EPA 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EUM 
 
Effective Utility Management 
FOIA  
 
Freedom of Information Act  
GDP 
 
Gross Domestic Product 
GIS 
 
Geographic Information System 
GRRSL  
Galvanized Requiring Replacement Service Line 
IQ 
 
Intelligence quotient 
IRS 
 
Internal Revenue Service 
ISA 
 
Integrated Science Assessment for Lead 
IESWTR  
Interim Enhanced Surface Water Treatment Rule 
LCR 
 
Lead and Copper Rule 
LCRI 
 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
LCRR 
 
Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
LSL 
 
Lead Service Line 
LSUSL  
Lead Status Unknown Service Line 
LT2ESWTR 
Long-Term 2 Enhanced Surface Water Treatment Rule  
MCL 
 
Maximum Contaminant Level 

 
 
MCLG  
Maximum Contaminant Level Goal 
M/DBP  
Microbial / Disinfection Byproduct Rulemakings 
NHANES  
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
NPDWR  
National Primary Drinking Water Regulation 
NTNCWS  
Non-transient Noncommunity Water System 
OCCT 
 
Optimized Corrosion Control Treatment  
PFAS 
 
Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
PFOA 
 
Perfluorooctanoic acid 
PFOS 
 
Perfluorooctane sulfonate  
POTW  
Publicly Operated Treatment Works 
PQL 
 
Practical Quantitation Level 
PUC 
 
Public Utility Commission 
PWS 
 
Public Water System 
SBREFA  
Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act 
SDWA  
Safe Drinking Water Act 
Stage 2 DBPR 
Stage 2 Disinfection and Disinfection Byproduct Rule  
TWA 
 
Time-weighted Average 
UMRA  
Unfunded Mandates Reform Act 
VSL 
 
Value of a Statistical Life 
WQP 
 
Water Quality Parameter 
WRF 
 
Water Research Foundation (aka AWWARF, AwwaRF, WaterRF) 
 
 

 
i 
 
FORMAL COMMENTS BY THE 
AMERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION 
ON THE 
NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATIONS FOR LEAD AND COPPER: 
IMPROVEMENTS PROPOSED RULE 
88 Federal Register 84878, December 6, 2023 
Docket Id#:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The American Water Works Association (AWWA) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI).2  AWWA is a proponent of strong protections for 
water consumers today while we work for a future when lead no longer is in contact with drinking 
water.  
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has proposed a rule framework that addresses a 
number of stakeholder concerns.  The proposal is an important step toward developing a clear 
regulatory framework that the drinking water community can implement for the benefit of the public 
we serve. 
Lead is a serious and well-recognized public health concern. Our nation’s history of reducing 
environmental lead exposure is a tremendous success story, including the reduction of lead in drinking 
water accomplished under the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA).  In revising the Lead and Copper Rule 
(LCR), the next major opportunity for reducing lead release is taking steps to ensure there is less lead in 
contact with drinking water.  Further reductions in lead in water must recognize the practical realities 
facing regulated systems and state primacy agencies be accomplished within the technical, managerial, 
and fiscal means of local communities.  Proactive, incremental risk reduction measures like lead service 
line (LSL) replacement and improved corrosion control treatment (CCT) should not come at the cost of 
delaying essential infrastructure investments in any community water system (CWS).   
A SIGNIFICANT STEP MISSING IN LCRI RULEMAKING 
As EPA has correctly recognized, preparing for and implementing the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
(LCRR) will not cause water systems or states to be further prepared for the LCRI but will instead detract 
and distract from their ability to do so.   Given the substantial changes proposed in the LCRI, EPA must 
immediately postpone the compliance dates for the LCRR through a separate, targeted rulemaking.  The 
compliance deadlines for the LCRR are set to go into effect on October 16, 2024.  Despite the fact that 
EPA has proposed removing many of these compliance requirements through the finalized LCRI prior to 
the October 2024 compliance deadline, until EPA changes the federal regulation with which water 
systems must comply, local resources must continue be spent on complying with the LCRR rather than 
toward compliance with the LCRI. 
As EPA weighed whether to pursue the LCRI rulemaking, the agency delayed the effective date and 
compliance dates of the LCRR, but then let the rule become effective.  Today, water systems must 
assume that the LCRR is a binding regulation and must spend resources to focus on complying with that 
 
2 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,878. 

 
ii 
 
rule’s October 2024 and January 2025 milestones, regardless of EPA’s new proposal to remove those 
requirements prior to the LCRR compliance deadline.  Had EPA not so substantially altered the structure 
of the LCR in its proposal, this step might not have been needed, but the LCRI proposal makes clear that 
postponing LCRR compliance dates except for those described in Proposed § 141.80(a)(4)(d)(i) is a 
necessary and urgently needed action.  
ELIMINATING BARRIERS TO SUCCESS 
The proposed LCRI has two fundamental objectives (1) removing lead service lines (LSLs) and galvanized 
requiring replacement service lines (GRRSLs) that may contribute lead to consumer’s taps and (2) 
bringing additional focus to CCT where it is not reliably limiting soluble lead to very low concentrations.  
These are both sound goals.  It is important that the final LCRI be crafted with these goals and practical 
implementation in mind.  Steps that EPA can easily take in finalizing the rule include: 
1. Focus service line replacement requirements on replacing service lines where there is the 
potential for real risk reduction (i.e., service lines that are in active use providing water to 
drinking water taps in structures) and revise the definition of service line to prevent 
misinterpretation of customer-owned pipe networks as “service lines” subject to the LCRI 
requirements. 
2. More clearly recognize that systems with a very low probability of LSLs or GRRSLs should 
have a clear, simple path to compliance, focused on having field and communication 
protocols for the unlikely situation where a LSL or GRRSL is encountered. 
3. Eliminate the Proposed Rule’s annual replacement rate as a regulatory metric. 
4. Simplify and eliminate public water system (PWS) reporting and state record retention 
requirements that are of limited value for rule implementation or oversight. 
5. Simplify customer notification requirements, allowing PWSs to target communication 
effectively, work within practical timeframes, and use electronic notification strategies 
that are auditable. 
6. Clearly establish in regulatory text that good-faith outreach efforts are adequate to meet 
treatment technique requirements for service line characterization and replacement. 
7. Affirm that community water systems (CWSs) can include lead observations from Tier 3, 4, 
or 5 sample sites when good-faith system outreach to remaining Tier 1 and 2 sample sites 
in the approved monitoring plan do not produce sufficient Tier 1 and 2 sample site 
observations. 
8. Require tracking of lead connectors within the LCR’s materials evaluation requirement 
rather than within the service line inventory requirements. 
9. Assure that efforts that occurred prior to the LCRR and LCRI effective dates are properly 
credited. Specifically, appropriately accomplished proactive efforts—including corrosion 
control pipe rig studies and school and child-care facility monitoring—should “count” 
toward compliance with the final rule even if they take place now.  
10. The rule should not include any ban on partial replacement of LSLs or GRRSLs when risk 
reduction measures are implemented, including replacement practice in keeping with the 

 
iii 
 
notification provisions of the LCRI and practices described in ANSI/AWWA C810 - 
Replacement and Flushing of Lead Service Lines.3 
AWWA’s comments include additional opportunities to streamline the Proposed Rule so that it more 
efficiently delivers the desired increased public health protection and is more readily implemented by 
states and PWSs. 
COMPLY WITH RELEVANT STATUTES AND LEGAL LIMITS 
EPA, states, and PWSs must achieve policy objectives within the boundaries of all applicable and 
relevant laws and regulations.  The SDWA requires that that the Proposed Rule be “feasible.”  EPA must 
craft a rule that takes into account the resource constraints and other challenges simultaneously facing 
PWSs.  As drafted, EPA’s proposed requirements ignore the shortages on available personnel to perform 
the require work and constraints on systems’ budgets and ability to pass on compliance costs, while 
overestimating the ability of systems to timely receive grant money that can make up for the significant 
financial impacts of the Proposed Rule.  Drafting a rule that many, if not almost of the targeted PWSs, 
cannot accomplish not only violates the SDWA but creates a greater public health risk by distracting 
from other more pressing concerns.  While AWWA recommends that EPA scale back the more 
burdensome requirements and extend the timeline for service line removal, at the very least the final 
regulation must have off-ramps in instances when the underpinning assumptions for EPA’s projection of 
the rule’s feasible prove to be unsound.   
EPA is also proposing a definition of “control” that goes beyond the bounds of the SDWA.  Specifically, 
the Proposed Rule takes the unsupportable position that a PWS having “access” to private property is 
equivalent to having “control” as defined by the SDWA. Water systems as described in SDWA do not 
include piping not owned by the water system, even when actual owners use their “control” to grant 
“access” to water systems. This aspect of the Proposed Rule is not legally sound. 
The federal government, states, and local government all have a role in ensuring that the portions of 
service lines on private property warranting replacement are adequately addressed.  EPA should finalize 
the LCRI within the bounds of current applicable laws and regulations.  And importantly, EPA, states and 
the water sector should work collaboratively to identify and remove barriers to full-service line 
replacement beyond EPA’s immediate jurisdiction under SDWA. 
REFLECT FEDERAL FUNDING BARRIERS IN RULEMAKING 
One of the significant barriers to achieving the goals of the LCRI is available discretionary funding.  In 
proposing the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI), EPA estimated that nationally, PWSs will 
need to expend $3–4.9 billion annually to comply with the proposal.  While AWWA’s analysis indicates 
EPA has underestimated the cost of Proposed Rule requirements, the financial challenge is very large, by 
the agency’s own analysis.  This cost will be borne by thousands of water systems, but will primarily be 
supported by the water rates charged to households in about 4,400 CWSs.  Moreover, most of the 
increased capital and operating expenses from the proposal that CWSs and individual households will 
incur occurs in the first 13 years of rule implementation, rather than the 35-year span over which EPA 
annualized the cost of the Proposed Rule. 
 
3 ANSI / AWWA. C810 - Replacement and Flushing of Lead Service Lines. (2017) (copy enclosed in Appendix J) 

 
iv 
 
EPA should work with the water sector to develop a more robust estimate of the cost of service line 
replacement and CCT changes likely to result from the rule—in particular the cost of service line 
replacement on private property.  Such an estimate would inform the administration’s budget request 
and legislative agenda for federal funding support and help define an achievable milestone for replacing 
all LSLs and GRRSLs. 
EPA should also prompt the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to provide clarity to EPA, states, 
communities, and individual taxpayers regarding the tax consequences of a publicly funded service line 
replacement.  Individual taxpayers can ill afford additional tax consequences from receiving publicly 
funded replacements. This is an especially troubling issue for taxpayers for whom a taxable benefit 
would impact their access to the nation’s social safety net programs. 
RECOGNIZING PROPOSED IMPROVEMENTS 
EPA made several important and sound policy decisions in this most recent review of the LCR.  Those 
decisions warrant attention and support.  For example, the agency: 
1. Properly chose to continue to regulate these contaminants through a treatment technique 
after carefully reviewing options to regulate lead and copper using a Maximum 
Contaminant Level (MCL) or treatment technique. 
2. Delayed implementation of ancillary aspects of the LCRR, such as changes in requirements 
for monitoring, public education, sampling in schools, and associated reporting, so that 
work can proceed in an organized and efficient manner. 
3. Established a separate requirement for LSL and GRRSL replacement with the objective of 
full replacement to the extent feasible so that PWSs can pursue service line replacement 
in an appropriately planned approach. 
4. Recognized that CCT changes resulting from the rule should, where possible, be delayed 
until LSLs and GRRSLs are removed. 
5. Recognized that the lead action level is not a health-based concentration of lead in water 
that should guide individual household actions. 
FINALIZING THE LCRI 
Public health is best protected when regulations are based on a sound premise and regulated entities 
are focused on meaningful opportunities for risk reduction that are actually feasible for PWSs and the 
state primacy agencies to implement. In finalizing the LCRI, EPA should revise the Proposed Rule 
requirements and supporting documentation to that end.  AWWA hopes that its comments will assist 
EPA in doing so.

 
 
 
FORMAL COMMENTS BY THE 
AMERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION 
ON THE 
NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATIONS FOR LEAD AND COPPER: 
IMPROVEMENTS PROPOSED RULE 
88 Federal Register 84878, December 6, 2023 
Docket Id#:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
The Lead and Copper Rule Improvements proposal (LCRI or Proposed Rule) represent an important step 
for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).  In making revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule 
(LCR) as modified in 2021 by the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) EPA acknowledged that the 
long-term goal of removing sources of lead in contact with drinking water, particularly lead service lines 
(LSLs), is an important opportunity to reduce the potential for lead release to drinking water.  EPA also 
correctly recognized that that public water systems (PWSs) should not alter corrosion control practice 
that is already performing well until large sources of lead that influence corrosion control practice 
selection are removed.  In these respects, EPA’s current proposal is aligned with AWWA’s policy 
statements on Drinking Water Quality, Lead Service Line Management, and Distribution System Water 
Quality.  EPA and the drinking water community are united in the goal to replace all LSLs completely and 
to effectively manage water’s corrosivity to the materials used to deliver that water to customers. 
While AWWA supports the overall goal of EPA’s Proposed Rule, the proposal asks more of community 
water systems (CWS) than will be achievable by many systems and is therefore not feasible.  If finalized 
as drafted: 
1. In the absence of substantial additional federal and state funding CWSs will be forced to 
defer important water infrastructure investments. 
2. There are not sufficient federal or state infrastructure funding assistance to enable CWSs 
to achieve the service line material characterization and replacements required by the 
Proposed Rule.  The associated increases in household water rates (i.e., costs to 
consumers) in some communities will be substantial. 
3. The public education requirements will result in high violation rates because the 
expectations for performance are not achievable within the LCRI’s proposed structure 
even when a water system makes best efforts to comply. 
4. CWSs with many lead status unknown service lines (LSUSLs) and few LSLs could be out of 
compliance with the minimum 10% replacement rate and expend limited resources trying 
to “prove” LSUSLs are not lead. 
Importantly, the Proposed Rule will create an environment where EPA, state primacy agencies, and 
CWSs are in repeated and ongoing conflict with the communities they serve.  Delivering information and 
making demands of private citizens and rate payers that will erode public trust in both CWSs and the 
government agencies overseeing the rule’s implementation.   
 

 
2 
 
In finalizing the LCRI, EPA has the opportunity to revise the current proposal so that it instead builds 
public confidence in the regulatory oversight of water systems, enhances existing strong public health 
protections, and allows for efficient oversight and enforcement.  AWWA also notes that the public is 
best served by a regulation of lead and copper that is practical to implement and legally defensible as 
such a rule will allow PWSs to be able to address the issue of lead in drinking water.  CWSs and the 
public are ill-served by shifting and uncertain legal requirements, which force systems to mis-allocated 
limited resources in response to changing regulatory regimes.  AWWA is particularly concerned that 
because the Proposed Rule violates the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) and Administrative Procedure 
Act (APA), it will not withstand legal scrutiny in the courts, creating even more uncertainty going 
forward. AWWA offers the following recommendations with these concerns in mind. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
If EPA’s goal is to protect public health, it must craft regulations that take into account the nature of 
entities it is regulating, as well as the primacy agencies responsible for implementing those regulations.  
EPA must also take into account the rate-based structures of these systems, which means that 
compliance costs will be directly passed on to local customers, many of which are individual households.  
It is useful to keep the following in mind when considering the burdens associated with the Proposed 
Rule and when considering how to improve the agency’s Proposal: 
1. There are almost 70,000 CWSs and non-transient noncommunity (NTNCW) systems 
subject to the LCR and supervising compliance of all of these systems falls on primacy 
agencies. 
2. The vast majority PWSs that must comply with the LCR serve less than 10,000 persons 
(67% of PWSs and 91% of CWSs subject to the rule).  More than 40,000 of the CWSs 
managed under the LCR serve less than 3,300 persons. 
As EPA has structured the proposed LCRI, the vast majority of the costs and implementation challenges 
fall on just 4,390 CWSs and the greatest system-level burden falls on an even smaller group of 1,016 
CWSs serving more than 50,000 persons.  Said differently, the $3 – 4.8 billion in annualized burden on 
PWSs EPA estimates for implementing the proposed LCRI fall primarily on roughly 4,400 CWS that each 
must comply within the means of their local community’s ability to pay for expenses associated with this 
rulemaking while also making investments in infrastructure, personnel, and operations to assure safe 
and reliable water service in all other respects.  The cost of implementing the rule is not equally 
distributed across the United States but rather highly localized.   
2.1 
Positive Aspects of LCRI Proposal 
The proposed LCRI would make several important improvements over the current codified requirements 
of 40 CFR 141.  AWWA supports the inclusion of these aspects of the Proposal in the final LCRI.  
Improvements of note include: 
1. Retaining the treatment technique regulatory framework for the control of lead and 
copper in drinking water 
2. Moving lead service line replacement from a triggered requirement to a sustained 
program, separate from reliably maintaining observed lead levels below the action level 

 
3 
 
3. Recognizing that the lead action level is not a health-based concentration of lead in water 
that should guide individual household actions. 
4. Recognizing the importance of delaying changes to optimized corrosion control until lead 
service line materials are replaced as directed by the LCRI are achieved 
5. Continuing recognition that CWSs face legal constraints over and above the SDWA that 
limit their ability to accomplish full-lead service line replacement  
6. Recognizing the importance of customer education with respect to achieving effective 
lead risk reduction 
7. Delaying implementation of ancillary aspects of the LCRR such as changes in requirements 
for monitoring, public education, sampling in schools, and associated reporting so that 
work can proceed in an organized and efficient manner 
8. Recognizes the importance of simplifying the rule in order to facilitate correct and 
effective implementation 
The proposed LCRI also takes steps toward making regulatory requirements of the LCRR more 
implementable.  Adherence to the rule requirements is documented through annual certifications rather 
than extensive documentation submissions for: 
1. The number of service lines not replaced due to a lack of consent4 
2. Offer to inspect any incorrectly categorized service lines5 
2.2 
Critical Revisions Essential to Rulemaking 
There are provisions in the proposed LCRI that must be changed prior to the rule being finalized.  
Without these changes water systems will be subject to regulatory requirements that are not legally 
sound because they are beyond the scope of the SDWA, in tension with many state and local laws, 
arbitrarily require the significant misuse of community resources, or are impossible to successfully 
achieve: 
1. Given that the compliance dates for the LCRR go into effect on October 16, 2024, and the 
substantial changes proposed in the LCRI, EPA must act immediately (prior to the intended 
promulgation of the final LCRI) to extend the compliance dates for the provisions of the 
LCRR that EPA does not intend to continue under the LCRI.  Currently, systems are 
expending resources to prepare to comply with the LCRR as it is the codified regulation, 
while EPA is proposing to dramatically change both the substance and deadlines for all but 
three of the LCRR requirements.  Water systems have a duty to comply with applicable 
regulations and have no assurance EPA will meet its promulgation timeline nor that 
enforcement discretion will occur should EPA not publish the final rule prior to the LCRR 
compliance dates. 
2. EPA must return to the definition of “control” it adopted in the LCR revisions in 2000, that 
“control” is based on ownership.  The definition of what is “under the control” of water 
 
4 Proposed Rule § 141.90(e)(7)(i). 
5 Proposed Rule § 141.90(e)(14). 

 
4 
 
systems as described in SDWA does not include piping not owned by the water system, 
even when the actual owner uses their “control” to grant “access” to a water system.   
3. EPA must prepare an economic analysis that is in keeping with the Office of Management 
and Budget and the agency’s own guidelines for credibility and being fit-for-purpose: 
a. The calculations of risks and benefits underlying the LCRI analysis use profile data 
centered around the fifth liter data as the basis for assigning water lead levels. 
Fifth liter samples are on average approximately a factor of five higher than time-
weighted average values presumed in health effects models. If this factor of five is 
accounted for, both intelligence quotient (IQ) and cardiovascular benefits 
calculated on the basis of a compliance sample would be reduced by a factor of 
five and the net benefit to cost ratio considerably reduced. 
b. The economic analysis annualizes costs that will be accrued over the space of less 
than 13 years to a period of 35 years misrepresenting the acute economic burden 
the rule presents for impacted communities because PWSs pass compliance cost 
on directly to their local customer-base. 
c. Throughout the economic analysis EPA underestimates the cost of 
implementation.  EPA underestimates the cost of specific required activities, does 
not include aspects of compliance not specifically enumerated in the regulatory 
requirement, and underestimates the number of systems impacted or instances 
when a cost will be incurred.  
Without a credible federal estimate of benefits and costs for the final LCRI, neither policy 
makers at any level of government or the general public will truly understand the magnitude of 
the tasks that are envisioned in this rulemaking or the likely benefit.  This undermines the 
public’s ability to meaningfully comment on the Proposed Rule.  Moreover, without that 
credible backdrop for future funding and policy conversations, neither decision-makers or the 
public will support water system and state regulatory agencies as they attempt to fulfill the rule 
requirements. 
4. EPA must recognize in the rule structure that there are two categories of CWSs following 
the LCRR inventory process.  Category 1 operates a distribution system where a 
recognizable fraction of service lines are LSLs or GRRSLs and Category 2 which operates a 
distribution system where there is a very low probability that any appreciable number of 
LSLs or GRRSLs exist.   
a. The LCRI should not require the latter category to expend resources needlessly.  
Rather than requiring such Category 2 systems to proceed through the LCRI 
service line replacement requirements as though they actually have many LSLs 
and GRRSLs, this group of systems should have a second path to compliance that 
focuses primarily on (1) having a protocol for the rare instance when a LSL or 
GRRSL is discovered and (2) the validation study to assure the initial 
characterization of the system’s inventory is correct.   
b. Important from the agency’s perspective, this approach incentivizes CWSs to take 
steps prior to the beginning of the final LCRI compliance window to transition to 

 
5 
 
Category 2 if they are currently a Category 1 system (e.g., accelerate service line 
characterization and validation studies).  This revision will be very important to 
smaller CWSs. 
2.3 
Essential Policy Support Needed 
Since early 2021 EPA has focused its lead service line replacement policy work on three facets to the 
challenge: allotment of state revolving loan fund monies made available by congress, adding technical 
assistance capacity, and establishing a regulatory requirement for full lead service line replacement.  
Achieving the goal of full replacement of all LSLs and GRRSLs nationwide will require the Biden 
Administration to take additional policy actions, beyond those it is currently pursuing: 
1. Obtaining congressional appropriations will be necessary to support the regulatory 
requirements of the LCRI, and at best such funding is uncertain.  Achieving the service line 
replacement objective of the proposed LCRI, removing all LSLs and GRRSLs within a 
decade will easily cost $12,000 - $15,000 per replaced service line, with much of that cost 
resulting from the replacement of privately-owned service lines if that requirement 
remains in the final rule.   
Removing all lead service lines fully is a goal the water sector shares with the 
administration but if that goal is to be achieved it will require substantial additional 
federal funding than is available at present.  Moreover, if more federal funds are made 
available those funds cannot be directed only to disadvantaged communities.  Municipally 
and investor operated water systems of all sizes and financial condition will need 
assistance to implement the Final LCRI.  Proactive, incremental risk reduction measures 
like LSL replacement should not come at the cost of delaying essential infrastructure 
investments in any CWS.  
EPA’s current estimate in the proposed LCRI Economic Analysis is inadequate to support 
the federal funding required.  The sector, including AWWA, would be glad to join in a 
cooperative effort to develop a sound estimate of the national cost of the required service 
line replacement, so that the administration and Congress can determine what service line 
replacement schedule the federal government is prepared to support. 
2. Obtain relief for taxpayers who receive federal, state or locally funded LSL or GRRSL 
replacements.  The use of public dollars to benefit an individual property owner (i.e., the 
replacement of a LSL or GRRSL) could be treated by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) as 
taxable income.  Taxable income has implications both for individual households annual 
revenue tax bills, as well as their ability to access income-based elements of our nation’s 
social safety net.  This issue has been brought forward to EPA repeatedly without 
resolution.  EPA’s successful intervention with its sister agency, the IRS, is necessary to 
obtain 
a. A determination that these property owners do not face a tax liability.  That IRS 
exemption is needed immediately to facilitate property owner participation in 
service line replacement programs. 
b. A separate, but related, decision by the IRS that the provision of a LSL or GRRSL 
replacement using public resources does not require preparation of an IRS 1099, a 

 
6 
 
document that to be completed requires the recipient’s social security number or 
business tax identification number. 
2.4 
Affordability 
EPA must take cost into account with setting primary standards including the development of treatment 
techniques, including the environmental justice implications of these burdens, and has failed to do so in 
violation of the SDWA, APA, and executive orders.   
CWS Ratepayers will Bear Cost of Final LCRI -- The cost impacts of the proposed LCRI are substantial and 
at present will fall directly on CWS households either in the form of direct charges or through increases 
in water rates.  The cost of drinking water infrastructure is borne almost entirely by the rates and 
charges paid by the CWS’s customers.  Even if available, outside funding will not resolve this issue as 
most federal and state infrastructure funding comes in the form of loans.  Also, with few exceptions 
(e.g., preparation of service line inventories) federal funding is not available to subsidize operational 
expenses.  Consequently, federal infrastructure funding to the degree it is available may reduce the 
additional burden placed on households but that effect is marginal and limited to a few systems.  
Costs of Water Service are Already Rising -- The cost of water services (i.e., drinking water, wastewater, 
stormwater, and reuse) are rising both to meet new challenges and to repair and replace aging 
infrastructure.  This challenge is familiar to EPA.  Awareness rose to the level of EPA’s water finance 
center (now known as the “Water Infrastructure and Resiliency Finance Center”) highlighting the need 
for customer assistance programs in 2016. 6 More detailed analysis of affordability as a constraint in 
water infrastructure planning, including regulatory compliance, has been the topic of substantial 
discussion. Raucher et al.7 highlighted relevant trends including the cumulative increase in household 
cost for water service relative to the consumer price index (CPI) (see following graph). 
 
 
 
Source: Raucher et al. (2019) citing Bureau of Labor Statistics 
 
6 EPA, Drinking Water and Wastewater Customer Assistance Programs (2016).  
7 Raucher, Robert, J. Clements, E. Rothstein, J. Mastracchio, and Z. Green, Developing a New Framework for 
Household Affordability and Financial Capability Assessment in the Water Sector (2019). 
Annual cumulative increase in household costs for 
water, sewer, and trash compared to increase in CPI 
for all items 

 
7 
 
Raucher et al (2019) also describes how water service is increasing as water at the same time as other 
critical household expenses (see following graph).   
 
Source: Raucher et al. (2019) citing Bureau of Labor Statistics 
The above analyses do not reflect the social disruption associated with the COVID pandemic, the 
economic turmoil associated with recovery from the pandemic, current inflationary pressures, or 
international events.  The affordability challenge has been developing over more than a decade and will 
continue even in a stable, post-pandemic economy.   
While the CPI is a long-standing indicator of price trends.  It does not fully capture the affordability 
challenge of disadvantaged households.  An alternative metric Asset Limited, Income Constrained, 
Employed (ALICE) worker household essentials index.  Over the last 15 years the ALICE Essentials Index 
has increased at a higher rate than the CPI, including the most recent estimates for the 2021 – 2023 
period (see following graph).8 
 
 
           Source:  Alice Essentials Index. https://www.unitedforalice.org/essentials-index.  
 
8 United for Alice. Alice Essentials Index. Measuring Inflation for Basic Needs. 2023 National Report (2023). 
Annual cumulative increase 
in household costs for water, 
sewer, and trash compared 
to increase in CPI 

 
8 
 
 
United for ALICE estimates that financial hardship is a real concern for not just the 13% of U.S. 
households below the federal poverty level but another 29% of households that earn less than is 
required to cover the ALICE household survival budget.9 
Like the ALICE Index Bluefield Research’s December 2023 report illustrates that specifically water rates 
are rising (see the following excerpted figure) continuing trends illustrated in previous reports.10  This 
figure reflects the combined burden of water and wastewater service for 50 cities found that “combined 
water and sewer bill for a typical U.S. household has increased by 54.8% since 2012, or on average 4.1% 
annually.”  
Source: https://www.bluefieldresearch.com/ns/water-challenges-
drive-u-s-water-utility-rates/   
Affordability is Already a Challenge for Many Communities – Analyses like those shared with EPA in in 
201911 in support of EPA decision-making and more recently with Congress regarding development of a 
low-income water customer assistance program are reenforced by recent work from outside the water 
sector.12 
 
9 United for ALICE. ALICE in the Crosscurrents, COVID and Financial Hardship in the United States. (2023).  
10 Bluefield Research. U.S. Municipal Water & Sewer: Annual Utility Rate Index, (Nov. 8, 2023).  
11 Raucher, Robert, J. Clements, E. Rothstein, J. Mastracchio, and Z. Green, Developing a New Framework for 
Household Affordability and Financial Capability Assessment in the Water Sector (2019). 
12 Berahzer, Stacey Isaac, J. Clements, Z. Green, J. Mastracchio, R. Raucher, E. Rothstein, and M. Teodoro, Low-
Income Water Customer Assistance Program Assessment (2023).  

 
9 
 
The following figure illustrates the unaffordability of water services in the United States as analyzed in 
2023 by authors at the Nicholas Institute.13 The authors note, “The analysis shows that 28.3 million 
people in those communities live in households that spend more than one day each month working to 
pay for water services and sanitation services.” 
 
 
Source:  https://today.duke.edu/2023/05/17-percent-us-households-face-
growing-water-affordability-challenge  
Proposed LCRI Costs in Larger Context -- Reports like the above referenced prior analyses and EPA’s 7th 
Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment (7th DWINSA) draw attention to the need 
for investment in distribution system renewal and water infrastructure.  The 7th DWINSA estimates the 
traditional 20-year national drinking water infrastructure need to be $625 billion.14  These analyses fall 
short of reflecting the full range of infrastructure needs associated with constructing additional water 
supply storage, developing alternative supply, futureproofing water infrastructure in the face of climate 
change, right-sizing existing facilities to improve water quality, improving long-term sustainability, 
improving cybersecurity protections, reducing carbon footprint by integrating alternative sources of 
power, and reducing water loss by systems and customers.  The above infrastructure investments are 
widely recognized and advocated for by EPA in its Drinking Water and Wastewater Resilience 
programming15 and Effective Utility Management (EUM) Initiative.16 
 
13 Lauren A. Patterson, Sophia A. Bryson, Martin W. Doyle, "Affordability of Household Water Services Across the 
United States," PLOS Water (May 10, 2023). DOI: 10.1371/journal.pwat.0000123. 
14 EPA, Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment, 7th Report to Congress (2023).  
15 EPA. Undated (website accessed 1/11/2024). Drinking Water and Wastewater Resilience.  
https://www.epa.gov/waterresilience. 
16 EPA. Undated. (website accessed 1/11/2024). Effective Utility Management Practices. 
https://www.epa.gov/sustainable-water-infrastructure/effective-water-utility-management-
practices#euminitiative. 

 
10 
 
Proposed LCRI is One of Several Concurrent Regulatory Burdens -- There are multiple environmental 
regulations that will require infrastructure investments and increase operating costs. First, at $3.0 – 4.8 
billion EPA underestimates the annualized cost of the proposed LCRI borne by water systems.  Second, 
even if those figures were accurate, standing alone they would be infeasibly high.  Third, these costs 
would come at a time when water systems are also facing similar regulatory costs as a result of other 
EPA rulemakings, which in the aggregate make these costs particularly infeasible.  For instance, EPA is 
currently: 
1. Finalizing a national drinking water standard for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances – 
EPA’s proposed primary drinking water standard for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFAS) is anticipated to entail more than $3 billion in annual expenses just for installation 
and operation of required drinking water treatment facilities.17 
2. Finalizing a rulemaking that will place water systems at risk of liability for PFAS in wastes 
they have previously released to the environment – the cost implications of designating 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) as Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) Hazardous 
Substances. EPA did not estimate the cost of CERCLA liability for water systems.  An 
analysis by Hazen and Sawyer estimates the potential impact from shifting waste 
management practices for drinking water treatment residuals could exceed $3 billion 
annually.18 
3. Preparing to propose a regulation that will require PWSs relying on surface water to 
achieve greater levels of total organic carbon removal—he soon to be proposed Stage 3 
Microbial and Disinfection Byproducts rulemakings—which will also be significant.19 
EPA has a duty to ensure that the entirety of its regulatory program is sustainable for regulated entities 
like CWSs.  While under some statutes, a regulation that leads to the insolvency of a regulated entity 
may be tolerable, EPA cannot impose a cumulative regulatory burden on communities that is not 
economically sustainable or leads to inadequate resources for other key public health protections. 
EPA’s Analysis Under E.O. 12898 -- EPA is required to by E.O. 1289820 to evaluate environmental justice 
implications of its regulatory actions.  EPA’s current environmental justice analysis21 does not consider 
the implications of the Proposed Rule on the affordability of water services or associated disparate 
water rate impacts on Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIOPOC) households.  EPA must consider 
not just potential differential effects of specific rule provisions within the proposed LCRI, but also the (1) 
consequences of increases in household water rates on disadvantaged households, (2) opportunity costs 
impacting BIOPOC households, and (3) negative secondary effects that those requirements will have on 
households, especially disadvantaged households. 
 
17 88 Fed. Reg. at 18,638. 
18 AWWA, Comment submitted by American Water Works Association on Addressing PFAS in the Environment 
(July 5, 2023), EPA-HQ-OLEM-2022-0922-0079. 
19 National Drinking Water Advisory Council, Letter to the Administrator on Potential Revisions to Microbial and 
Disinfection Byproducts Rules (Dec. 14, 2023).  
20 59 Fed. Reg. at 7,629. 
21 EPA, Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (2023), EPA 815-R-
23-004. 

 
11 
 
2.5 
Opportunities for Greater Clarity 
The proposed LCRI is the second major revision of 40 CFR §141 Subpart I and related portions of 
subparts A, C, O, and Q in less than five years. Over the course of that timeframe the policy discourse 
around managing lead in water has focused on multiple facets of the LCR, and there has been significant 
confusion both in the regulated community and amongst the primacy states as to what the new 
regulations require.  As a consequence, the proposed LCRI has multiple opportunities for EPA to provide 
greater clarity in finalizing the LCRI.  The need for clarity is particularly acute given the confusion to-date 
in this rulemaking and the anticipated implementation timelines and tasks. Such confusion harms public 
health by detracting limited resources away from the most meaningful compliance efforts as systems 
instead spend time debating the meaning of vague provisions or taking unnecessary actions in an 
abundance of caution.  Aspects of the Proposed Rule for EPA to state more clearly in the final rule text 
and preamble include: 
 
1. Completing the outreach efforts described in §141.84(d)(3)(i) for LSLs or GRRSLs: if the 
final rule retains requirements related to replacing service lines on private property 
(which it should not), then the final rule should clearly state that four attempts at contact 
via at least two communication methods is adequate when evaluating service line 
replacement program success.22  The compliance metric should recognize that a CWS has 
taken required action while acknowledging that continued efforts will be needed over 
time to fully replace the service line (e.g., at the end of replacement period a system may 
report outstanding refusals and still meet the treatment technique requirements). 
2. The rule should clearly state that water systems that have made good faith efforts to 
understand optimized CCT options available to them under the LCRR and now the 
proposed LCRI, including appropriately constructed pipe rig studies may use those studies 
to inform LCRI compliance, including if those studies were conducted prior to the LCRI’s 
effective date. Such studies should not have to be repeated after the LCRI effective date. 
3. The rule should clarify that the requirement related to the delivery of information about 
and / or filters that remove lead from drinking water is specifically an instruction to supply 
information about and / or filters that are certified to meet NSF/ANSI Standard 53 for total 
lead removal and NSF/ANSI Standard 42 for fine particulates (Class I).  The type and 
number of replacement cartridges provided will be based on average household use, the 
performance characteristics of a particular vendor’s replacement cartridge, and the 
duration specified in the Proposed Rule.  After providing information about filter use and 
in some instances filters, CWSs do not have further obligations related to filter use. 
4. Proposed § 141.80(c)(3)(ii) addresses how to calculate whether a system has exceeded the 
lead action level.  This provision reads,  
“For water systems with lead service lines with sites identified as Tier 1 or 2 under 
§141.86(a) with enough Tier 1 or 2 sites to meet the minimum number of sites listed in 
§141.86(c) or (d) as applicable: … Lead or copper sample results from Tier 3, 4, or 5 
sites cannot be included in this calculation.”   
 
22 See Proposed § 141.84(d)(3)(i). 

 
12 
 
EPA must clarify that it does not intend to preclude water systems from including Tier 3, 4, 
or 5 sample sites in compliance datasets when systems have otherwise exhausted 
necessary efforts to otherwise achieve sampling at Tier 1 and 2 sample sites shown in the 
monitoring plans submitted to the state prior to compliance monitoring per § 141.90(a)(i).  
Where systems have attempted but were unable to successfully engage Tier 1 and 2 
customers to participate in compliance monitoring, Tier 3 – 5 sample sites should be 
acceptable in the compliance dataset, even if the service line inventory continues to 
reflect unsampled homes with LSLs.  This clarification will be increasingly important over 
time as CWSs successfully reduce the number of LSLs in their service area, and the 
remaining occupants with LSLs are either difficult to reach or uncooperative and where 
the remaining LSLs are associated with vacant properties.  The report required in 
§141.90(a)(i)(B) provides an opportunity to report the system’s best efforts to comply. 
5. The proposed LCRI describes “supplemental monitoring” for purposes of amending the 
compliance tap sample dataset as monitoring offered to customers in the wake of a lead 
action level exceedance.  The Proposed Rule text is consistent with the proposed LCRI 
preamble23 but can be easily misunderstood given the broader emphasis on monitoring in 
the Proposed Rule.  EPA should emphasize in the preamble of the final LCRI and 
subsequent guidance that supplemental monitoring is limited to customer-requested 
monitoring in response to required public education efforts following a lead action level 
exceedance. 
6. The requirement for CWSs to engage schools and child care facilities regarding lead 
includes provisions to (1) notify elementary schools, high schools, and child care facilities 
regarding the opportunity for sampling requires a good faith effort to notify per Proposed 
Rule § 141.92(c)(2)), (2) document refusal or nonresponse by these facilities to participate 
as demonstration of a good faith effort by the CWS to involve the facility,24 provide 
sampling results and information to facilities.25 These individual tasks are described in 
terms of interaction with individual facilities because there are independently operated 
schools and child care facilities.  EPA should acknowledge clearly in the final rule preamble 
and subsequent guidance, that CWSs are not being required to overstep the 
administrative chain of command in school systems and child care facilities under a single 
management.  Under these provisions engaging the central offices of school systems and 
child care facilities under a single management is sufficient to comply with these 
requirements.  
7. EPA proposes to include lead connectors in the inventory required by the proposed LCRI.  
While AWWA recommends EPA not take this step, EPA wisely distinguished lead 
connectors from service line materials with respect to many facets of the Proposed Rule, 
notably the LSL / GRRSL replacement rate, mandate to replace all LSL and GRRSL within 10 
years, mandate to characterize all LSUSL materials, and the service line validation study.  
This distinction is apparent in the Proposed Rule text. EPA should retain this distinction in 
 
23 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,950. 
24 Proposed Rule § 141.92(d)(1)(i)), 141.92(d)(3). 
25 Proposed Rule § 141.92(g)(1).   

 
13 
 
the final LCRI regulatory text and communicate this distinction clearly in the final rule 
preamble, associated rule guidance, and technical support to states and systems. 
There are also facets of the Proposed Rule that require substantial restructuring simply to assure reliable 
and consistent interpretation, and thus compliance.  In particular see Sections 2.7, 2.8, 3.2 and 3.3 of 
these comments.   
2.6 
Guidance to Support Rulemaking 
In recent SDWA rulemakings, EPA has waited until after the LCRI is final to craft guidance.  The lack of 
guidance for how EPA envisions implementing the provisions of the proposed LCRI makes understanding 
the import of the Proposed Rule requirements very difficult.  In a Proposed Rule as complex as the LCRI, 
it is impossible to fully quantify either the cost or the benefits of the Proposal without a clear 
interpretation of the regulatory text.  Neither the Proposed Rule preamble nor the associated docket 
fully describe what CWSs will be required to do to comply with the LCRI if finalized as proposed. Clear 
explanation in the final rule and preamble itself is essential to ensure that PWSs properly implement the 
rule and do not waste years of time and resources based on misunderstandings of the requirements.  
As EPA prioritizes SDWA program activities following this proposal, it is essential for EPA to turn rapidly 
to developing associated guidance and to engage stakeholders, particularly, the community of 
associations that support CWSs in that development process.   
While guidance is important, as EPA is aware the agency cannot engage in regulation through guidance.  
There are already instances where the preamble to the proposed LCRI diverge from the Proposed 
regulatory text.  A number of those instances are described in the balance of these comments.  Similarly, 
EPA’s enforcement program cannot re-interpret regulatory text to fit a future change in policy 
perspective or the exigencies of a specific situations.  As EPA prepares guidance and training materials 
those materials must conform to the regulatory text because is it contrary to law for EPA to establish 
regulatory expectations through guidance federally.  There are also states that adopt federal guidance 
as though it is in fact binding regulation when it is not.   
2.7 
Public Education – Required Communication 
While AWWA requests more rapid guidance and collaborative development of guidance, the more likely 
scenario is that EPA will require months, if not years to prepare final guidance following promulgation of 
the LCRI.  As a matter of sound regulatory practice and for the above reasons, EPA should take this 
opportunity in finalizing the LCRI to craft clear LCRI public education requirements. 
Inconsistent and Multiple Names for Targeted Recipients – The proposed LCRI is the latest in a series of 
rulemakings that have introduced new words and phrases into the LCR that reflect concepts particular 
to the moment in time when the rule was promulgated.  Now the LCRR and proposed LCRI have 
introduced completely new requirements and the proposed regulatory text that do not clearly identify 
who CWSs are tasked with contacting, what CWSs are charged with conveying, and how the CWS is 
expected to communicate.  For example, in the course of conveying communication responsibilities in 
the proposed LCRI, the regulatory text employs at least the 16 words and phrases in the following table.  
Words and phrases are used in combinations that are inconsistent but in plain English are not clearly 
distinguishable. 

 
14 
 
Word / Phrase 
Appears in 
Regulatory Text 
Uses with respect to 
Communication Tasks 
Customer 
62 
28 
“receiving a bill” 
1 
1 
Consumer 
42 
34 
Resident 
24 
3 
“Residential unit” 
4 
4 
“Residential customer” 
1 
1 
“Non-residential customer” 
1 
1 
“Non-residential occupant” or “occupants” 
10 
3 
“Non-residential unit” 
5 
5 
“Residence” 
4 
1 
Person served 
4 
2 
“persons served by the water system at the 
tap that was sampled” 
1 
1 
“Persons served by the water system at the 
sites that were sampled” 
8 
6 
“Persons served by the water system at the 
specific sites that were sampled” 
2 
2 
Service connection 
11 
6 
“other service connections” 
1 
1 
“Persons served by the water system at the 
service connection” 
5 
5 
Owner of the affected service line 
2 
2 
Owner’s authorized agent 
2 
2 
Non-owner occupant(s) 
1 
1 
Household(s) 
8 
2 
 
EPA should simplify the regulatory text using a select set of phrases that convey consistent intent 
appropriate to the Proposed Rule requirement.  The following table illustrates such a simplification of 
the current regulatory text. 
Context 
Target audience 
Task / Information Delivered 
Lead service line 
inventory 
“service line owners”  
• Annual service line material 
notification 
• Notification of planned 
construction 
• Notification that construction has 
occurred 
Construction activity 
health protective 
measures 
“building unit(s)” 
• LSL, GRRSL, LSUSL, and lead 
connector replacement 
notifications 
• Notifications of disturbances 
• Provision of filter instructions, 
pitcher filters and replacement 
cartridges (as appropriate) 

 
15 
 
Context 
Target audience 
Task / Information Delivered 
Lead action level 
exceedance 
“bill paying customers” 
• Mailed post-exceedance public 
education materials 
Observed lead and / 
or copper 
concentrations from 
sampling 
“persons served by 
sampled tap” 
• Results from compliance samples 
• Results from requested samples 
 
EPA’s Environmental Justice Analysis of the proposed LCRI26 points out the role of public education in 
preventing disparities in outcomes under the proposed LCRI.  Including clear regulatory text in the final 
LCRI is important to achieve this outcome as well as prevent assertions in the future that compliant 
CWSs had in some way not taken environmental justice considerations into account in their public 
education efforts. 
2.8 
Corrections to Avoid Misinterpretation  
There are instances where there are currently misinterpretations among drinking water regulators, 
technical assistance providers, consultants, and advocacy organizations regarding the substance of 
current and anticipated LCRI requirements. 
1. Because the proposed LCRI is being crafted as a replacement for the LCRR, it is important 
that EPA correct current ongoing misreading of guidance regarding the scope of CWSs’ 
responsibilities under the LCRR and LCRI.  Current misunderstandings and guidance 
incorrectly lead CWSs to believe they are obligated to include pipes in their inventory that 
are not in fact a service lines connected to the CWS’s distribution system.  This error will 
have subsequent implications for compliance with lead service line replacement 
requirements and other facets of the current rulemaking.   
Currently EPA guidance emphasizes the broad nature of 40 CFR 141.84(a), which reads “All 
water systems must develop an inventory to identify the materials of service lines connected to 
the public water distribution system.”  Because the inventory is inclusive of “service lines” that 
are on both public and private property, some states and technical assistance providers are mis-
interpreting this wording to mean that water systems have a duty to: 
a. Incorporate water mains internal to private property as a “service line” (e.g., 
mains within a campus of buildings) 
b. Incorporate service connections to mains operated by another entity 
SDWA defines a public water system.27  Just as CWSs are not responsible for characterizing and 
replacing the service lines associated with a consecutive CWS, CWSs are not responsible for 
characterizing campuses and subdivisions that are served by a single metered connection to a 
CWS. Correction of this misinterpretation in as timely a manner as possible would facilitate both 
preparation of initial inventories and implementation of the final LCRI.  If additional clarity can 
 
26 EPA, Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 3-4 (2023). EPA-HQ-
OW-2022-0801-0641. 
27 42 U.S.C. § 300f(4), 42 U.S.C. § 300g. 

 
16 
 
be most efficiently resolved through revising regulatory text, a straight-forward modification of 
the definition of service line is proposed in Section 3.16 of these comments in response to the 
agency’s request for comments regarding definitions. 
2. The clear intent of the definition of GRRSLs is service lines where the prior segment of the 
service line before the galvanized portion of the service line is or may have been a lead 
service line at one time.28, 29  That is the history and described basis as well as the plain-
English reading of the proposed LCRI definition.  Unfortunately, the frequent framing of 
“galvanized downstream of lead” has resulted in some regulatory agency staff, including 
EPA staff, to instead frame GRRSLs in terms of any and all potential lead construction 
materials in mains.  When the GRRSL definition includes potential historical lead, this 
misinterpretation can lead to significant expansion of the scope of service lines classified 
as GRRSLs.  The final LCRI text should retain the current clear definition of GRRSLs and the 
final rule preamble and subsequent guidance should re-affirm that definition. 
2.9 
Opportunity for Future Improvement 
There are important opportunities to learn from this rulemaking going forward. In particular, the failure 
to provide sufficient time for meaningful public comment and engagement undermines the rulemaking 
process and does not comply with the letter or spirit of the APA.  
1. The Proposed Rule does not provide sufficient time for data collection and technical 
analysis. Specifically, the Proposed Rule solicits data and technical analysis including 
modelling while affording the public less than 9 weeks (44 working days) over a series of 
nationally recognized religious and secular holidays to prepare and file a response to the 
agency’s notice.  By contrast, EPA had 485 workdays to prepare the notice requesting this 
data.  In instances where EPA has an interest in technical input, the agency should engage 
the expert community (e.g., AWWA, Water Research Foundation, etc.) with information 
needs early in a rulemaking process.  Adequate time is necessary to provide cogent 
analyses and there are limited aspects of this rulemaking about which EPA has been 
transparent regarding its intent.  The requests for comment in the proposed LCRI 
preamble pertain to facets of the Proposed Rule EPA has not highlighted publicly prior to 
releasing the Proposed Rule.  EPA is held to a high standard by Executive Orders with 
respect to the data and analysis it includes to support a rulemaking.  Preparation of 
analyses that meet that standard require adequate time to prepare, provide quality 
assurance, and conduct adequate review, prior to their submittal to the agency.  
The proposed LCRI docket (1) does not describe a technical premise for the Proposed Rule 
requirements and (2) presents an analysis of costs and benefits in a fashion that is not 
sufficiently transparent for stakeholders to replicate and test the agency’s approach in the 
time available to them. 
2. EPA’s expectations for what PWSs must do in order to comply with specific rule provisions 
cannot be discerned from the regulatory text, preamble, and economic analysis.  In 
particular the activities costed in the economic analysis are often very confined aspects of 
 
28 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(a)(4)(ii). 
29 Proposed LCRI § 141.2 - Galvanized Requiring Replacement Service Lines. 

 
17 
 
wide-reaching regulatory text, and the regulatory text and preamble may or may not be 
well-aligned.  As a consequence, water systems cannot review the docket and discern 
either what constitutes a violation or what is expected to avoid a violation.  EPA could 
resolve this challenge through incorporating draft guidance documents in the docket for 
proposed rules.  EPA did this in the Stage 1 Microbial / Disinfection Byproduct 
rulemakings.  One of those guidance documents should be the state implementation 
guidance.  The state implementation guidance has historically provided a concise 
enumeration of what constitutes a violation and the associated violation codes. 
When EPA takes a year and one-half or more to craft a proposed rule and provides the 
public a docket with hundreds of documents many of which are hundreds of pages in 
length with 60 days or less to prepare comments, EPA owes the public a clear technical 
explanation of expectations under the rule. Its failure to do so has prevented the public 
from meaningfully commenting on the Proposed Rule in violation of the APA.  
3 
REQUESTED COMMENTS 
The LCRI Proposal included a number of requests by the agency for comment to which AWWA responds 
here. 
3.1 
General Matters  
Request for Comment 1: “Whether the proposed revisions to the LCRR treatment technique are effective 
to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible in accordance with the 
SDWA.” 
As EPA is aware, the SDWA requires that all national primary drinking water regulations (NPDWRs) be 
feasible “taking cost into consideration.”30  Here, EPA has not demonstrated that the proposed 
treatment technique as a whole is feasible, either on its own or when viewed in light of all of the 
additional regulatory burdens EPA is proposing to simultaneously place on PWSs, and as a result it does 
not comply with SDWA. The proposed LCRI, while providing a more orderly organization of actions than 
the LCRR it will replace, creates a financial and resource burden on many water systems that endangers 
sound CWS operations.   
Proving Technical Feasibility -- EPA has not described with any rigor in the Proposed Rule or provided 
analysis in the associated docket that demonstrates that the proposed treatment technique’s optimized 
CCT element is technically feasible.  As a result, the proposed requirements if finalized in their current 
form would violate both the SDWA and the APA. 
The treatment technique as proposed in the LCRI includes: a lower lead action level, a new sampling 
protocol for homes with lead service lines, a revised sample pool that includes homes with galvanized 
piping in the home, and retains high-dose orthophosphate addition as the anticipated optimal corrosion 
treatment.   
1. Prior experience under the LCR, including data collected under the State of Michigan 2018 
LCR,31 does not provide EPA with data to demonstrate that the systems with water 
 
30 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(4)(D). 
31 Michigan Administrative Code. Supplying Water to the Public. Section R 325.10710a 

 
18 
 
characteristics targeted by the Proposed Rule (e.g., those that were reliably compliant 
under a lead action level of 15 µg/L but not reliably below a lead action level of 10 µg/L 
based on the compliance dataset required in the Proposed Rule) can indeed make that 
transition within the constraints described in the Proposal.   
2. The LCR with its action level and sampling construct primarily required controlling soluble 
lead which is the emphasis of CCT methods outlined in the LCR and now proposed LCRI.  
Lowering the action level while incorporating lead observations from a fifth liter sample in 
compliance tap samples makes control of particulate lead control more critical. EPA has 
not provided analysis demonstrating that known CCT methods including orthophosphate 
can control particulate lead sufficiently for CWSs to reliably achieve required lead 
concentrations.  
3. Prior to this rulemaking EPA focused the LCR on controlling the solubility of lead and 
copper. The LCRI rulemaking, for the first time, adds control of iron release to the 
regulatory corrosion control paradigm, as the stability of iron scales will underpin 
compliance for those systems sampling from Tier 3 structures. (See additional request for 
comment responses in Section 3.8 of these comments for additional explanation.) 
The proposal also requires many water systems to apply limited local funds, borrowing capacity, field 
personnel time, and community good will to fulfill the construction and administrative burdens of the 
proposed LCRI which will not have corresponding benefits to public health, and are therefore arbitrary.  
Actions that will require re-allocation of resources from other needed investments in infrastructure 
renewal, assuring an adequate water supply, and improvements to reliably comply with other state and 
federal regulatory requirements. The Administrator has a duty to take cost into account with 
establishing a treatment technique, and the Proposed Rule does not adequately consider the cost of the 
proposed treatment technique requirements.  For example, the Proposed Rule requires CWSs to: 
1. Replace LSLs and GRRSLs at a rate substantially higher than the nominal 10% per year. 
(See additional request for comment responses in Section 3.4 in these comments for 
additional explanation.)  
2. Accomplish required service line characterization and replacement in 10-years in the 
midst of price escalation and logistical difficulties that will result from the nationwide 
mandate to replace all LSLs and GRRSLs with a 10-year timeframe, such that all water 
systems across the United States will be competing for the same construction resources 
(e.g., personnel, equipment, materials, etc.). EPA has not created a record to demonstrate 
such resources are available and affordable to water systems. 
3. Bear the increased cost of main repair and replacement that the rapid pace of service line 
replacement will require as service line replacement disturbs very old cast iron mains. EPA 
must account for these increased costs in assessing the feasibility of the Proposed Rule. 
Exemplars Do Not Represent Typical Systems -- EPA provided several examples of systems that 
undertook lead service line replacements on timelines that it asserts demonstrate the feasibility of the 
proposed timeline in the LCRI. However, these examples do not demonstrate the feasibility of its 
proposal for several reasons.  First, the examples of systems achieving expedited LSL replacement did 
so, only with the advantage of significant external financial subsidies that will not be available to all 

 
19 
 
CWSs, likely few CWSs.  This is because the examples used by EPA were instances where the system or 
city exceeded the lead action level or were in the midst of much larger crises.  As such, these systems 
had access to state and federal resources that will not be available to CWSs seeking to comply with the 
proposed LCRI. 
With few exceptions EPA also cited examples of CWSs that had taken steps prior to the 10-year 
construction window for replacing all LSLs that facilitated faster replacement programs.  At least one 
cited example likely exceeded its authority to enter private property under state law, but was not 
challenged legally.  Also, the cited programs did not have to comply with the administrative burden and 
associated rigidity of the proposed LCRI framework, where the proposal would establish extensive 
administrative requirements that are subject to state oversight and enforcement. As a result, EPA has 
not met its burden to create a record to demonstrate that the Proposed Rule is feasible. 
EPA Did Not Consider Opportunity Costs --   To adequately assess whether a rule effectively reduces 
public health risk, the agency must also consider the opportunity costs associated with regulatory 
requirements.  EPA did not engage in such an analysis and the scope and scale of the proposed LCRI do 
have the unintended effect of imposing significant opportunity costs in the form of reduced opportunity 
to address other pressing health risk reduction needs at individual CWSs and the households those 
CWSs serve.  See subsequent more detailed comments on EPA’s Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis in 
Section 5.2 of these comments. 
Anticipated Benefit is Overstated -- See Appendix A regarding the Proposed Rule “prevent known or 
anticipated adverse health effects” for a more detailed response to this question.  In short, the benefits 
analysis falls short of demonstrating the degree to which the Proposed Rule requirements will prevent 
either recognized or potential adverse health effects.   EPA’s analysis of benefits associated with avoided 
IQ decrement is flawed, in that it does not focus on the benefit accrued in the portions of the IQ spectra 
where the anticipated effect is meaningful (e.g., <3% of children in the U.S.).   
Further Expansion of the Treatment Technique is Unsupported – As described above and in subsequent 
Sections within these comments, the proposed LCRI tests and for many systems will exceed the bounds 
of what is technically and economically feasible.  EPA has heard public comment encouraging additional 
measures above and beyond what the agency has already proposed (e.g., lowering the lead action level 
below 10 µg/L, requiring distribution of pitcher filters under additional rule provisions, expanding 
monitoring of lead at schools, etc.).  These comments include information on the state of the supporting 
science, cost, logistical constraints, and legal considerations that are relevant to such proposals as well 
as responding to the agencies requests for comment.  
3.2 
Reduce Burden 
Request for Comment 2: “Whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the 
regulatory approach used to address lead in drinking water consistent with the statutory standard for a 
treatment technique rule in section 1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. Specifically, EPA requests comment on ways 
that the proposed LCRI could be simplified and ways that burden, including paperwork burden, could be 
reduced without affecting the ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects.” 
There are a number of steps EPA could take that would significantly reduce the burden of the final LCRI 
by reducing paperwork.  These changes would (1) not reduce state capacity to provide appropriate 
oversight, (2) would not affect the ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse health 

 
20 
 
effects, and (3) do not impact the substance of the requirements.  If EPA truly wants to achieve full LSL 
and GRRSL removal on the most expedited timeline that is feasible, it cannot layer on additional burdens 
that will force water systems and states alike to redirect resources towards undertaking paperwork and 
administrative oriented tasks that serve little, if any, public health purpose.  As noted elsewhere in these 
comments, paperwork burdens add towards making sustained compliance with the Proposed Rule 
infeasible for many, if not all, CWSs.    
1. Initial inventory and subsequent annual updates are extensive, requiring submission 
requirements well beyond what is needed for regulatory oversight and representing both 
a data transfer and data storage challenge for states.32  The final rule should require 
annual submission of summary information, as otherwise required annual updating of 
public-facing inventories, reporting on-line links to inventories to the state when such 
posting is required, and the maintenance of records to document inventory development 
for auditing by the state. 
2. Recurring submission of documentation following each monitoring period when public 
education materials are distributed are not necessary and should be removed.  As 
currently drafted the regulatory text requires documentation of all requirements of 
Proposed § 141.85 which include public education following a lead action exceedance but 
also notification following service line and lead connector disturbances as well as 
notification of lead and copper monitoring sample results.33  Reporting to the state of 
individual activities required by the final LCRI should not be required.  Rather an annual 
summary report and certification of adherence to required protocols with the retention of 
records to document required processes for auditing by the state, should be sufficient. 
3. The public education requirements contained in Proposed § 141.85 could include 
preparation and submittal of a single public education plan rather than EPA’s current 
public education reporting requirements.  That single plan would be subject to state 
review and approval prior to the first compliance date with the proposed provisions of 
Proposed § 141.85.  The operator in responsible charge would certify annually that that 
system had complied with the plan as approved.  In the event of a change in circumstance 
(e.g., a system completes replacing all LSLs and GRRSLs) the plan would be updated with 
the relevant revisions approved by the state. 
This approach assures a cohesive set of communication tools, activities, and internal 
documentation measures by the CWS that can be reviewed by the state during sanitary surveys 
and in the event a system is being evaluated for a compliance failure.  It dramatically reduces 
the volume of paperwork exchanged with the state at the end of each monitoring period and 
with that reduction the opportunity for inadvertent monitoring and reporting violations. 
4. The annual submittal of the inventory to the state as described in Proposed § 141.90(e)(8) 
should be reduced to only those requirements in Proposed § 141.90(e)(8)(i)(A – D).  The 
balance of the Proposed § 141.90(e)(8) paragraphs should be reduced to those needed to 
calculate the annual service line replacement rate if that requirement is retained in the 
 
32 Proposed LCRI § 141.90(e)(8)(i) and § 142.14(d)(9). 
33 Proposed LCRI § 141.90(f). 

 
21 
 
final rule.  The additional data proposed to be submitted, particularly the provision of data 
about service line material on an address-specific basis should be maintained by the CWS.  
Other requirements in the Proposed Rule assure that the inventory data will be available 
to the state as public access to address-specific information is required.  Moreover, as 
CWSs are providing this data to the public via the internet and often in geographic 
information system (GIS) formats, the data available to the state via this alternative 
approach will be more useful to the state at a significantly lower cost in state information 
management expenses.   
5. As currently drafted, Proposed Rule § 141.84(g)(3) requires notification in the form of 
“written notice” which must be provided to “the owner of the affected service line, or the 
owner’s authorized agent … as soon as possible but no longer than 24 hours following 
completion of the replacement” following a full LSL or GRRSL replacement.  This 
requirement does not include a standard of care for delivery to the owner and delivery to 
the owner is necessary even when the required information is adequately conveyed to the 
actual occupants of the affected structure.  As EPA is aware, LSLs and GRRSLs can be 
associated with rental properties with absentee landlords who are difficult to reach.  
Unlike other Proposed Rule requirements, this provision does not address acceptable 
strategies under such circumstances.  Absentee landlords can be difficult to reach and 
may even be overseas, making written notification in this time period both infeasible and 
not useful to reaching the actual occupant with concerns.  As the proposed LCRI 
framework does not rely on non-resident owners to notify their tenants, EPA could reduce 
the burden associated with this provision without reducing the anticipated public health 
benefit, by eliminating the requirement for this expedited risk communication notification 
to reach owners and owner’s authorized agents following a replacement.  
In addition to the paperwork-specific changes noted above there are changes to the Proposed Rule that 
are necessary to assure the final LCRI can be implemented and when necessary, enforced in a just and 
fair way that incentivizes achieving the objectives of the rulemaking.  These changes impact the 
paperwork burden associated with the Proposed Rule but they also change the substance of the 
proposed requirements.  These substantive changes would not affect the ability of the final rule to 
prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects: 
1. The tracking of lead connectors should be an element of the system’s materials evaluation 
(i.e., Proposed § 141.42(d) as referenced in Proposed § 141.86(a)(i)) rather than an 
element of the inventory as described in the Proposed Rule at § 141.84. 
2. Inventory and service line replacement requirements should be revised to: 
a. Eliminate the need to include fire service and other service lines used for non-
potable applications from the inventory and replacement requirements where 
there are plumbing codes, terms of service, or other permitting mechanisms to 
assure that such lines are not re-purposed for potable uses without proper 
characterization, and if necessary, replacement.  Revising this requirement 
reduces burden without affecting the risk reduction associated with the Proposed 
Rule.  Even if this change in the Final LCRI did not impact the initial inventory 
submitted in October 2024, the implementation of other aspects of the Proposed 

 
22 
 
Rule would be simplified.  This change would be beneficial in combination with 
other proposed changes to proposed requirements included in AWWA’s 
comments (e.g., inventory updates, calculation of replacement pool, calculation of 
replacement percentile, occupant notification, etc.). 
b. Eliminate the need to include service lines for abandoned properties or as yet 
undeveloped properties, where there is an adequate administrative barrier to use 
of the service without material characterization and, if necessary, replacement.  
As with the prior recommendation, this recommendation does not diminish the 
benefits associated with the rulemaking but facilitates efficient final LCRI 
implementation and prioritizes risk reduction opportunities.  Such prioritization is 
consistent with EPA’s emphasis on timely risk reduction to challenged households, 
achieving such goals requires finding opportunities for efficiency in the Proposed 
Rule framework.   
3. A requirement to communicate all required monitoring sample results to occupants of 
buildings where samples were taken by mail that is postmarked within three calendar 
days after learning of results is not feasible for CWSs (Section 3.10 of these comments).  
Timely delivery could be assured, and paperwork burden reduced through: 
a. Lengthening the period post-receipt to 5 business days 
b. Limiting the duty to deliver sample results via this expedited schedule to 
observations above the lead action level (10 µg/L) 
c. Allowing delivery via electronic means (i.e., email, text, data portal access) where 
the timing of communication with the customer can be logged for subsequent 
audit 
4. If water service lines for nonpotable uses are retained in the service line inventory, then 
eliminate the requirement to provide pitcher filters / point-of-use devices and public 
education materials per Proposed § 141.84(h)(1)(i-iv), (2), and (3) when replacing these 
lines and eliminate similar provisions in Proposed § 141.85(g) for when these lines are 
disturbed. 
5. Revise Proposed § 141.86(d)(2)(ii), which sets conditions for small and medium systems to 
transition to triennial monitoring, to include large systems with optimized corrosion 
control treatment (OCCT).  At present the current regulatory text does not provide a clear 
path for large systems with OCCT and reliably below the action levels to obtain monitoring 
relief unless they maintain 90th percentile lead levels below 5 µg/L.34  
6. Revise the Proposed Rule regulatory text such that it is clear that all water systems that 
make a good faith effort to comply with monitoring site Tiers are eligible for reduced 
monitoring under Proposed § 141.86(d).    
7. Revise Proposed § 141.92(h)(5) to remove requirement that alternative state approved 
monitoring in schools and child care facilities must occur after January 1, 2021.  Some 
states and systems have moved forward more expeditiously than EPA to conduct 
 
34 Proposed § 141.86(d)(2)(iii). 

 
23 
 
awareness building lead monitoring at these facilities before and subsequent to the 
proposal of the LCRR.35 EPA should recognize these more proactive programmatic efforts 
subject to the other aspects of conformity with the required monitoring program under 
Proposed Rule § 141.92. 
8. Significantly reduce the record retention expectations for states under Proposed 
§142.14(d)(9) as they are well beyond what is necessary for oversight and represents a 
significant information management burden for states.  Moreover, this requirement 
eliminates the potential to include incentives for CWSs of all sizes by placing required 
materials on-line.  Lastly, EPA is pursuing an annual submittal to EPA of all compliance 
records submitted to states.36  EPA is incapable of receiving all of the information 
generated through this proposed LCRI requirement and managing it in a reliable, quality 
assured information system that affords meaningful use of the collected data.  EPA will 
not have the capacity to respond to Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests for LCRI-
related data in a responsible manner within the timescale of primary milestones in the 
proposed LCRI implementation schedule. 
9. There are significant administrative burdens associated with Proposed § 141.81(a)(2)(i), 
EPA’s proposal to require regulatory reporting of water quality parameters for all water 
systems utilizing corrosion control serving between 10,000 and 50,000 persons regardless 
of (1) having exceeded the lead or copper action level or (2) instituted OCCT per the LCR 
(i.e., systems that do not comport with paragraph “2” of Proposed Rule § 141.2 “System 
without corrosion control treatment.”  The number of systems in this subset of systems is 
large and agency efforts to-date have not prepared either states or these systems for this 
development.  As currently drafted the requirement creates a regulatory data stream 
without a useful context.  Two alternatives include: 
a. Delaying the extension of WQP monitoring and reporting (e.g., six years after 
initial compliance deadlines in the proposed LCRI). During the intervening period 
post-initial compliance, medium systems could be tasked with maintaining an 
internal log of WQP (conceptually a parallel construct to the disinfection profiling 
and benchmarking in § 141.172 in the Interim Enhanced Surface Water Treatment 
Rule (IESWTR) and LT2SWTR), documenting training hours specific to CCT and 
OCCT, and developing a report for submittal to the state outlining current CCT 
practice and proposing WQP monitoring locations.  
b. Structure a similar delay in implementation of this provision that integrates a 
delay of “x” years (e.g., six years) following a rolling transition to the proposed 
LCRI sample pool / sample protocol based on system size categories. 
3.3 
Prompt, Fair, and Equitable Enforcement 
Regulatory clarity, in the actual regulatory text rather than later guidance, is the best way to promote 
compliance without the need for an enforcement action.  Because of this, AWWA encourages EPA to 
 
35 See Proposed § 141.92(d).  
36 88 Fed. Reg. at 20,092, Consumer Confidence Report Rule Revisions, Proposed § 142.15(b)(3). 

 
24 
 
implement the recommendations it has provided throughout these comments to clarity the LCRI.  
Simply put, a water system cannot comply if it does not understand the requirement.  
The other significant way to reduce non-compliance is to ensure that the final LCRI is actually feasible 
and possible for CWSs to implement. Even though EPA has traditionally focused on large municipal and 
regional water systems when assessing feasibility, the agency should recognize that when the 
requirements are not feasible within the meaning of the SDWA for smaller or rural systems, then EPA is 
essentially ensuring noncompliance by those systems. Such non-compliance will detract state and 
federal enforcement resources from more critical public health concerns.  Approximately 91% of the 
systems that would be regulated under the Proposed Rule are small systems. Successful implementation 
and compliance with the final LCRI, therefore necessitates crafting the requirements with this in mind 
rather than setting the bar in a place only a handful of systems can likely reach.  
Request for Comment 3: “Whether the proposed requirements of the rule are enforceable and promote 
compliance without the need for State or Federal enforcement action. EPA also solicits comment on ways 
the rule could be modified to better promote compliance.”  
There are also opportunities for EPA to facilitate prompt, fair, and equitable enforcement.  These 
recommendations also assist EPA by avoiding a rule for which enforcement would be deemed arbitrary 
and capricious.  These opportunities include: 
1. With the inclusion of the non-lead validation study, clearly communicate to state and EPA 
oversight and enforcement staff (through the final rule provisions and preamble) that a 
records-based service line material determination can reflect relevant documented 
practice associated with service line construction in a community, and not simply records 
specific to an individual service line.  This is consistent with Chapter 4 of EPA’s “Guidance 
for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory,” which is cited in the proposed 
LCRI docket.37  Currently, there is substantial state-to-state variability in implementation 
of this requirement primarily due to concern that EPA will continue over time to modify its 
view of what is an adequate demonstration of the materials of construction. 
2. The proposed LCRI does not provide a regulatory framework for the instance when 
random sample sites(s) in a non-lead validation study conducted per Proposed 
§ 141.84(b)(5) contain a LSL or GRRSL.  When the CWS submits its study per Proposed 
§ 141.84(b)(5)(v) the system 
“…must submit a list of the locations of any non-lead service lines identified to be a lead or 
galvanized requiring replacement service line as well as the method(s) used to categorize the 
service lines, if available …” 38 
There is not a clear outcome from this submittal and it is possible that some may read the 
proposed special primacy provisions (Proposed § 142.16) to require a renewed service line 
characterization and replacement program effort.  A more appropriate response would be 
to clarify per Proposed § 141.84(b)(5)(v)(ii) “Table 1 To Paragraph (b)(5)(ii)” to include a 
third column.  That third column would reflect the number of additional random samples 
 
37 EPA, Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory (2022),EPA 816-B-22-001. 
38 Proposed § 141.90(e)(9). 

 
25 
 
to be drawn in order to reassess the 95% confidence interval for every LSL or GRRSL 
discovered in the initial validation sample set.  This structure is in keeping with the 
validation study concept, initiates additional evaluation in keeping with the scope of the 
prior effort’s potential mischaracterization, and allows the CWS to continue focusing on 
removal of known LSLs and GRRSLs rather than divert resources to a new discovery effort. 
3. Specify clear criteria a state must use under Proposed § 141.84 (d)(5)(iv) to assign a 
shorter deadline (and if provision is retained, an associated replacement rate).  While a 
state may set a different schedule for replacement under state law, if the requirement is 
to be based in federal law it must be specified in a manner that can be consistently 
applied. 
4. The proposed LCRI CCT requirements39 encourage states to require large systems (> 
50,000 person served), both with CCT and those without, and detectable (i.e., > practical 
quantitation limit) lead levels that are below the lead action level (10 µg/L) to re-evaluate 
optimized corrosion control.  Given the revised lead action level and the mandatory 
replacement of LSLs and GRRSLs this provision no longer serves a clear purpose in the 
proposed LCRI.  The provision should be deleted, unless EPA can articulate specific criteria 
under which the federal regulation should lead to water systems being instructed to 
outperform the treatment technique that EPA has deemed feasible.  States will retain the 
authority to seek additional action by water systems under state law regardless of EPA’s 
inclusion of the provision in the final LCRI. 
5. With the proposed changes to the LCRI there are systems that meet the definition of 
optimized corrosion control40 that are not employing corrosion control strategies 
recognized in Proposed § 141.82(c).  Many of these systems will not exceed the lead 
action level so will not be triggered by the federal rule to revisit their OCCT using the new 
list of CCT strategies.41  As these systems are reliably achieving desired OCCT performance 
and subject to the balance of the Proposed Rule’s risk reduction measures, these systems 
should not be required to revisit their CCT strategy.  Revising OCCT carries with it the risks 
of missteps and lead release, moreover, corrosion control is best achieved through 
maintaining consistent conditions – an arbitrary instruction to change OCCT misdirects 
limited resources and creates the opportunity for increased risk. EPA did not attempt to 
quantify how many systems would be impacted by this facet of the LCRR/LCRI nor the 
associated cost implications.42,43 EPA can address this issue in rule text, preamble text, and 
guidance as it finalizes the LCRI. 
6. As described in more detail elsewhere (see Section 3.4 of these comments) the Proposed 
Rule is not clear as to what constitutes fulfilling the requirement to replace all LSLs and 
GRRSL within 10 years.  To be fair and just, the final rule framework must recognize best 
efforts to achieve full replacement when determining compliance. 
 
39 Proposed § 141.81(a)(1)(C)(ii - iii). 
40 Proposed I § 141.2 - Optimal corrosion control treatment. 
41 Proposed § 141.81. 
42 EPA, Final LCRR Economic Analysis Appendices, Exhibit B-5 (2023).  
43 EPA, Appendices to LCRI Economic Analysis, Exhibit B-9 at B-23 (2023). 

 
26 
 
7. As described in more detail elsewhere (see Section 3.4 of these comments) the current 
annual replacement rate metric is not a fair or just enforcement metric.  This performance 
metric must be removed from the final LCRI entirely or replaced with a fair approach. 
3.4 
Service Line Replacement 
Request for Comment 4: “All aspects of the proposed scope of the replacement requirements, including 
the criteria used to define a full service line replacement (e.g., cutting the pipe at abandoned properties, 
replacing the entire service line) and which lead sources are subject to replacement under the mandatory 
program.  
Addressing abandoned properties -- The expectation that a written policy for not using existing buried 
service lines that are not removed should only be relevant to service lines going forward from the 
compliance date in the final LCRI.  The use of buried pipes that are discovered unused and neither 
connected to the source of supply or the customer is not a field practice either water system staff or 
plumbers would engage in, but there may not be an existing written policy. 
The current LCR requirement in Proposed § 141.84(d)(6)(iii)(C) is unnecessarily burdensome as it 
requires water systems to expend limited resources to locate, identify the materials of construction, and 
either replace or disconnect LSLs and GRRSLs to abandoned properties.  The same effect could be 
achieved through administrative measures.  For example, there could be a requirement that service not 
be renewed at the property without replacement of the LSL or GRRSL.  So long as the service has been 
terminated at the location, then systems should not be required to consider the service line for 
purposes of the 10-year service line replacement requirements.  Use of such an administrative 
procedure would both reduce the immediate costs to the water system in the 10-year compliance 
window for replacement and inform setting the replacement rate for those service lines where removal 
in a more timely manner would be beneficial. 
The alternative to physically disconnecting abandoned properties in the Proposed Rule is to replace the 
service line in anticipation that a similar structure with a similar potable water and fire service demand 
would eventually replace the prior abandoned structure.  While local land use practices will determine 
changes in land use over time, with urban renewal there are often significant increases in housing 
density and greater mixed use development.  Such changes in land use can significantly change future 
water demand when a site is eventually re-developed.  Moreover, urban renewal is seldom a steady 
planned process but one reliant on opportunistic investment of public and / or private capital.  
Installation of a replacement service prior to understanding the actual demands of future use(s) of 
abandoned properties will lead to wasted financial resources.  As a result, administrative measures to 
ensure there is no water service until a replacement will more effectively address EPA’s concern and the 
realities of property development. 
The cost of service line replacement must be sound -- For the agency to develop a feasible treatment 
technique it must fairly represent the costs of service line characterization and replacement.  As 
described in Section 3.4 of these comments, the Proposed Rule’s economic analysis does not reflect the: 
1. Typical cost of service line replacement,  
2. Anticipated ancillary costs associated with service line replacement, 

 
27 
 
3. Recent and readily anticipated inflationary pressure on service line replacement program 
costs, or 
4. Uncertainty in its cost estimate in keeping with accepted engineering practice. 
Request for Comment 5: “EPA is seeking comment on whether to prohibit reconnection of any 
disconnected LSL or GRR service line.” 
EPA’s request for comment is broadly framed and must be broken into practical scenarios to evaluate 
soundly.  The first scenario is an instance where a property is vacant (e.g., unimproved, a structure exists 
but has been abandoned, a structure had existed but fell into disrepair and was demolished).  In such an 
instance, when the property is improved for a future use, water service will be required.  At that time 
conditions of service would apply and the service will have to meet standards of construction including 
adequate potable water and fire service for the development that is occurring.  In such a scenario, 
replacement of an existing LSL, GRRSL, or a service line of uncertain condition would be an appropriate 
element of developing the property.  This scenario would not be limited to service lines that have been 
physically disconnected from the main but would be equally applicable to service lines where access to 
water service was managed administratively.   
The second scenario is the disconnection of LSLs and GRRSLs in the course of infrastructure renewal, 
service line replacement programs, and emergency repairs.  The proposed LCRI acknowledges that LSLs 
and GRRSLs may be partially replaced and then returned to service in the cases of planned infrastructure 
work or emergency repairs.44  Such construction will entail “disconnecting” the service line and then 
returning it to service after the LSL or GRRSL has been partially replaced if the property owner of an 
inhabited / usable structure (property may be residential or commercial under proposed LCRI) does not 
cooperate to accomplish a full replacement.  A prohibition on reconnecting disconnected LSLs and 
GRRSLs in this case would lead to discontinuation of service to existing inhabited structures with non-
cooperating property owners.   
Discontinuation of service to inhabited residential and commercial structures is viewed as a public safety 
and public health hazard.  CWS practice, as well as local and state policies are in place to limit the 
number of instances when service is discontinued.  CWSs are concerned that discontinuation of water 
service practice could result in environmental justice concerns.  EPA should be careful to craft the final 
LCRI to work within the framework of current law while avoiding a new environmental justice concern.      
Request for Comment 6: “EPA is requesting comment on whether the Agency should include lead 
connectors or galvanized service lines that are or were downstream of a lead connector as part of 
mandatory replacement.” 
EPA should not include lead connectors or galvanized service lines that are or were downstream of a 
lead connector as part of mandatory replacement.  EPA has not demonstrated that removing GRRSLs as 
currently defined present a meaningful opportunity to reduce lead exposure.  To expand the scope of 
the final LCRI to include all galvanized service lines with a definition akin to GRRSLs that includes lead 
connectors would further expand the scope of the replacement task even more with a less certain 
demonstrable benefit.  As AWWA has repeatedly noted, there are already significant concerns with the 
 
44 Proposed § 141.84(g). 

 
28 
 
feasibility of the LCRI as proposed.  This additional requirement would amplify the costs and burdens 
associated with the rule and would not be achievable for water systems. 
Adding such a requirement also provides very little health benefit as both the LCRR and the proposed 
LCRI require the replacement of lead connectors under the control of the water system when 
encountered.45  Consequently, lead connectors will be replaced in the course of LSL and GRRSL 
replacement as currently required by the Proposed Rule whether that replacement is occurring during 
routine infrastructure work, a dedicated service line replacement program, a customer-initiated 
replacement or an emergency repair or replacement.  The incremental burden associated with 
expanding the definition would be large, in that it would:  
1. Re-open the validity of prior service line characterizations 
2. Require restructuring ongoing service line material verification practice 
3. Change the design of service line material validation studies required by the Proposed 
Rule 
All of these burdens are without a demonstrable additional benefit in lead risk reduction given other 
Proposed Rule requirements. 
Request for Comment 7: “Whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent should be more 
than four times (e.g., five, six, or seven times).” 
The specific regulatory provision in the proposal reads: 
“A ‘‘reasonable effort’’ must include at least four attempts to engage the property owner using 
at least two different methods of communication (e.g., in-person conversation, phone call, text 
message, email, written letter, postcard, or information left at the door such as a door hanger) 
before the applicable deadline of mandatory service line replacement as described in 
paragraph (d)(4) of this section. The State may require systems to conduct additional attempts 
and may require specific outreach methods to be used.”46  
The request for comment must be considered in the context of the entire requirement.  Systems are 
being required to contact hundreds or thousands of property owners to undertake replacement, and to 
do so within the span of no more than 10 years.  Property owners are not under a legal obligation to 
reply to the CWS’s outreach and are indeed unlikely to, based on the experience of our members. The 
proposed regulatory text provides a reasonable list of communication strategies that can be attempted.  
Four attempts already place a significant resource burden on water systems and should be sufficient to 
meet regulatory compliance obligations.  Individual CWSs would then be free to take additional 
measures appropriate to their community and the replacement scenario at hand without fear of failing 
to meet their regulatory obligations. 
EPA should either specify clear criteria a state must use to require additional attempts or require specific 
outreach methods under the federal rule or eliminate this element of the provision.  While a state may 
 
45 Full Lead Service Line Replacement Guidance, Water Research Foundation 4713 at 66-67. (see Appendix B) 
46 Proposed § 141.84(d)(3)(i). 

 
29 
 
set different expectations for CWSs under state law, if the requirement is to be based in federal law it 
must be specified in a manner that can be consistently applied nationwide. 
Request for Comment 8: “Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets “control” for the purposes 
of the mandatory replacement provision (i.e., require systems to conduct full service line replacement in 
situations where the system has access to conduct the full replacement).” 
EPA cannot define “control” as “access.”  Such a definition of control is flawed and problematic from a 
practical perspective, and not in keeping with the intended meaning of “control” in SDWA. See Section 
4.7 of these comments. 
The Proposed Rule states that EPA is “not proposing to delineate the prerequisites or elements of 
“access”” 47, 48 but then goes on to delimit constraints on access to four specific legal barriers in the 
proposed regulatory text and the preamble.49, 50, 51, 52, 53  Those legal barriers are limited to state 
constitutional requirements, state law, local law, and tariff agreements.  The Proposed Rule regulatory 
text has the effect of delineating the prerequisites and elements of access where the preamble states 
that the agency is not.54, 55, 56  
Proposed Rule cannot require systems to endanger staff or contractors --  As public facing entities, water 
systems are routinely in contact with the public.  As such, there are established training and protocols 
for managing interactions with the public who are uncooperative or hostile.  There are also protocols to 
assure personnel safety.  Such protocols reduce the number of instances where hostile confrontations 
endanger CWS personnel and contractors.  Creating a situation where CWS personnel and contractors 
are directed to force their way onto private property and into private homes will result in hostile 
confrontations, and create situations where personnel are on private property without immediate 
access to aid.  Such situations pose a risk to CWS personnel and contractors that is arbitrary and 
unwarranted.  
Proposed Rule does not address limited access in inventory requirements -- EPA recognizes the need to 
physically access private property with respect to service line replacement and the required validation 
study57 but does not address the issue of access with respect to characterizing service line materials in 
the inventory requirements in Proposed § 141.84.  EPA does not take access into account when 
establishing the deadlines for characterization of all LSUSLs, calculation of annual replacement rate or 
the economic analysis for the Proposed Rule.   
 
47 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920. 
48 Proposed § 141.84(d)(2)(i). 
49 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,884. 
50 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,916. 
51 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920. 
52 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920. 
53 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,923. 
54 Proposed § 141.84(c)(1((viii). 
55 Proposed § 141.84(d)(2) and (3); (e)(i). 
56 Proposed § 142.16(d)(8). 
57 Proposed § 141.84(b)(5)(iii). 

 
30 
 
Request for Comment 9: “The proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement deadlines. EPA is 
seeking comment on whether it is feasible for systems across the nation to complete service line 
replacement in a shorter timeframe than ten years, such as in six, seven, or eight years.” 
Based on the experience of AWWA’s members and the record before EPA in this rulemaking, a 10-year 
replacement period is not feasible, and a shorter timeframe would certainly not be feasible, particularly 
in light of the other expansive requirements in the Proposed Rule.  The final LCRI should provide 
mechanisms for water systems to undertake LSL replacement on a longer time frame than 10 years.  The 
current 10-year timeframe will delay needed infrastructure improvements, negatively impact the 
borrowing capacity of CWSs, and in some communities result in significant disruption of neighborhoods.  
EPA has not offered a clear rationale for the proposed 10-year replacement window other than there 
were several specific examples where systems undertook LSL replacement programs similar to what EPA 
is contemplating in the proposed LCRI within 10 years.   
None of the programs cited in the Proposed Rule preamble complied with the LCRI provisions as 
described in the proposal.  None of the programs cited accomplished the replacement program in 10 
years (or anticipated achieving program goals in 10 years) without substantial outside subsidies when 
the system had an appreciable number of service lines requiring replacement.  In other words, the 
anticipated replacement rate and timeframe is not feasible within the fiscal, managerial, and technical 
capacity of even large systems.  This is particularly true where “large” system is defined as systems that 
serve more than 10,000 persons served.  This population cutoff is the system size that EPA uses for its 
analysis of “small” system impacts under SBREFA and is also the breakpoint used in SDWA for small 
systems.58   EPA also has not taken into account the fact that there is likely to be a shortage of skilled 
labor to perform these replacements when all systems are mandated to replace them on the same 
timeline.  A few examples of systems able to complete the work within a 10-year timeframe when they 
did not have to similarly compete for such labor does not provide a record supporting the feasibility of 
this timeframe. 
Request for Comment 10:  “EPA is seeking comment on the rate construct approach, including how to 
calculate compliance with a given service line replacement deadline and average annual rate calculated 
across a rolling three-year period.” 
The proposed LCRI contains a regulatory requirement for all service line materials to be characterized 
and replaced within 10 years.  It also includes provisions for annual reporting of progress toward that 
objective.  Given the regulatory requirement and data accrued by the state for oversight of progress, it is 
not clear why EPA included a 10% per year replacement rate in the proposed LCRI.  Exhibit 1 in the 
proposed LCRI Technical Support document illustrates that referenceable service line replacement 
program rates seldom achieve 10% annual rates when substantial numbers of service lines are being 
replaced.  The analysis does not consider the variability in replacement over time in the systems 
evaluated – such an analysis would be critical to the setting of a regulatory expectation, whether an 
annual rate or a rolling annual average.   
 
58 See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. § 300g–1 (b)(15).   

 
31 
 
Given that many CWSs are public or quasi-public entities, they will need to seek budget approval 
through legislative bodies before undertaking LSL and GRRSL removal work.  Even investor-owned 
entities will have to plan their budgets,  
1. Accounting for other EPA regulations being simultaneously introduced and consider how 
to adjust water rates so that they do not rise at too rapid a pace for their customers 
2. CWSs will also need to seek subsidized infrastructure funding like the Drinking Water State 
Revolving Loan Fund (DWSRF) program.  DWSRF and other more limited subsidized 
funding programs employ administrative processes that are protracted, requiring months 
to complete.  Even sound proposals for DWSRF funding may not be selected in certain 
years given multiple competing proposals or the lack of funding.   
Longstanding challenges of DWSRFs being oversubscribed has become more difficult.  The 
Council of Infrastructure Financing Authorities (CIFA) estimates that over the last two 
years, congressionally directed funding has diverted more than $2.3 billion in annual 
federal funding for the SRFs to pay for specific projects.  Those funds are not available for 
CWSs that are in the DWSRF queue for project funding. 
3. CWSs must also consider the timeline for other critical infrastructure investments.   
There may be shortages of skilled workers at any given time, particularly in light of a nationwide 
mandate to perform all of this work during the same 10-year time period.  These budgeting complexities 
collectively mean that systems may need to undertake a higher percentage of removals during a 
particular year or may attempt to coordinate removals alongside other projects to gain efficiencies, 
while they may have to perform fewer removals in other fiscal years.  
EPA offers a single reason for this provision, 
“EPA is proposing that systems calculate compliance with service line replacement on a 
three-year rolling average. This can provide systems with additional time that may be 
needed to replace service lines at prioritized sites, such as schools and child care facilities 
throughout the service area or areas with higher lead exposure, as opposed to focusing only 
on areas with a high LSL density, where replacement may be more efficient.”59 
EPA is incorrect.  The three-year rolling average does not afford an increased opportunity to prioritize 
service lines that diverge from the goal-based program.  In proposing a rule (1) including an inordinately 
short timeframe for replacement, (2) including an annual 10% replacement metric and (3) requiring 
replacement rates be calculated using a formula that mischaracterizes programmatic success, EPA is 
forcing systems to replace service lines at a rate higher than the nominal 10% annual rate it its 
describing.  CWSs in this situation will consider where there are overlapping concerns between 
environmental justice and service line replacement as required by the LCRR and now the proposed 
LCRI.60  EPA will discourage systems from “one-off” material characterization and line replacement at 
facilities where (1) the service line is unlikely to actually be a lead service (e.g., a large school building) or 
(2) unlikely to contribute meaningfully to lead exposure (e.g., a large school building).  Moreover, 
licensed childcare facilities are responsible for the children in their care.  Such facilities should already 
 
59 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,928.  
60 Proposed § 141.84(c)(1)(v). 

 
32 
 
be taking steps to understand and address lead in drinking water for the children in their care.  Where 
such businesses and nonprofit organizations pursue service line replacement, there are mechanisms in 
current CWS practice, the LCRR, and the proposed LCRI to assure collaboration in service line 
replacement.61  If EPA sought to provide an incentive for preferentially replacing service lines at schools 
and child care facilities, it should: 
1. Pursue application of federal funding to schools and child care facilities through the 
Department of Education and other federal departments to support replacing these lines 
fully 
2. Engage state child care licensing programs to require such facilities both regularly monitor 
for lead in drinking water (and other routes of exposure) and review the materials of 
construction in their facility and service line as a condition of licensure 
Simply put, this requirement unnecessarily complicates the proposed LCRI, does not allow systems 
flexibility to plan their LSL removal programs and budgets, and lacks support or justification in the 
rulemaking record.  
Request for Comment 11:  “EPA also seeks comment on the complexity of the rate construct.” 
As noted above, AWWA strongly recommends that EPA remove the proposed rolling, 3-year average 
replacement rate of 10% from the final rule. The current calculation is fundamentally unfair and must be 
revised to avoid creating a rule that is arbitrary and capricious.  The proposed LCRI description of the 
service lines that warrant evaluation is artificially inflated through the definition of GRRSLs, the inclusion 
of LSUSLs, and the criteria for determining a service line is non-lead.  The replacement rate calculation 
includes in the denominator: known LSLs, known GRRSLs, and all LSLUSLs.  Subsequent calculation of the 
replacement rate is not an accurate reflection of program progress as it only credits the system for full 
replacements of LSLs and GRRSLs.  The calculation should take into account progress in reducing the 
number of LSLs and GRRSLs, progress reducing LSUSLs, and service lines for which the system has 
completed its good faith effort to engage the property owner in replacement.  Lastly, while EPA’s use of 
a three-year rolling average was an attempt to recognize the year-to-year variability in replacement 
rates over the program timeframe, unfortunately, that variability cannot be adequately managed by the 
proposed metric without in some scenarios, the water system having to replace substantially higher 
percentages than the average rate with which EPA characterizes the Proposed Rule. 
Below illustrates reasonably expected implementation scenarios and the resulting impact on system’s 
capacity to reliably comply with a 10% replacement rate.  A simple spreadsheet was developed to 
illustrate achieving an annual 10% replacement per year criteria.  The output does not reflect a three-
year rolling average, but a similar pattern would emerge. Most CWSs would prioritize replacement of 
known LSLs both to save on funds for digging up non-lead lines as well as to maximize the known health 
benefit. The effect of that logical action is straight forward when there are few or no LSUSLs.  EPA did 
not make this assumption, rather EPA assumed that all systems would characterize LSUSLs at a steady 
10% per year beginning year one.62 
 
61 Proposed § 141.84(f). 
62 EPA, Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis at 4-182 (2023). 

 
33 
 
Scenario 1 -- The table below shows a CWS with primarily known LSLs (or GRRSLs) (2,000 LSLs and 200 
LSUSLs.  In this example the CWS will need to characterize LSUSLs at a rate of 6% per year to meet a 10% 
annual replacement rate and address all LSUSLs in the initial inventory. 
Scenario 2 – This table illustrates the dilemma for a CWS that has many LSUSLs that are believed to be 
nonlead. In this example there are 2000 lead lines and 4000 LSUSLs.  The CWS will need to begin by 
replacing all of its 2,000 known lead lines in the first three years to satisfy the 10% replacement rate 
while also identifying 7% of the unknowns per year. In year four the CWS would not meet the 10% 
replacement rate unless by that time it had characterized all LSUSLs.  
In order to reliably achieve the 10% annual replacement rate the CWS would need to characterize 20% 
of the LSUSLs per year in addition to removing the required lead lines.  All lead lines and unknowns 
would need to be removed from the pool by the end of year four. The effect of the replacement rate 
calculation described in the proposed LCRI is to require a much faster replacement period than 10 years. 
To further illustrate the unfair nature of the proposed calculation, if the CWS only identified 10% of the 
original LSUSLs per year so all are identified in 10 years by the beginning of year four there would be no 
known lead lines left to remove but the required calculation would define the replacement pool as still 
having 2,800 LSUSLs plus the original 2,000 lead lines requiring replacement of 480 lead lines when 
there are no known lead lines left.  To meet the requirements of the calculation all the 2,800 unknowns 
would need to be characterized and removed in a single year.  
If the final LCRI were to include an annual replacement rate calculation, then EPA should use a different 
approach that is both fair and easily calculated.  One such option is the following: 
1. An approach based on two parallel metrics, (1) a cumulative percentage of LSLs and 
GRRSLs replaced and (2) a cumulative percentage of LSUSLs that are characterized 
2. The numerator in the cumulative percentage of LSLs and GRRSLs replaced would be the 
total number of lines replaced and the denominator would be the sum of LSLs and GRRSLs 
in the initial inventory plus those discovered in prior years. 
3. The final rule could include cumulative percentages like the following: 
Metric 
Years After Compliance Date 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
% of LSLs and 
GRRSLs replaced 
-- 
-- 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
% of LSUSLs 
characterized 
-- 
-- 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
 

 
34 
 
Scenario 1 - Simple Inventory Simulation for a CWS (Not Deferred, few LSUSLs, 7% of LSUSLs characterized per year) 
Year (i) 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030 
2031 
2032 
2033 
2034 
2035 
2036 
2037 
Initial Inventory 
  
Lead  
2,000 
Lead Status Unknown 
200 
Non-Lead 
  
Total 
2,200 
Updates (BOY) – Characterizing 7% of initial LSUSL pool each year 
Initial Number of LSUSLs 
200 
186 
172 
158 
144 
130 
116 
102 
88 
74 
Number Eliminated 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
Remaining Unknowns 
186 
172 
158 
144 
130 
116 
102 
88 
74 
60 
Required Replacements 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Replacement Pool (BOY) 
2,200 
2,186 
2,172 
2,158 
2,144 
2,130 
2,116 
2,102 
2,088 
2,074   
Percent Replacement 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10%   
Lead Lines Left from Previous Year 
  
1,780 
1,561 
1,344 
1,128 
914 
701 
489 
279 
70 
0 
Pipes to Replace 
220 
219 
217 
216 
214 
213 
212 
210 
209 
207   
Status of Compliance Calculation 
  
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
  
Available Pipes in Replacement 
Pool (End of Year) 
1,980 
1,952 
1,719 
1,488 
1,258 
1,030 
803 
381 
158 
60   
Lead Lines Left (EOY) 
1,780 
1,561 
1,344 
1,128 
914 
701 
489 
279 
70 
0   
 
 
 
 

 
35 
 
Scenario 2 - Simple Inventory Simulation for a CWS (Not Deferred, Many LSUSLs, 7% of LSUSLs characterized per year) 
Year (i) 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030 
2031 
2032 
2033 
2034 
2035 
2036 
2037 
Initial Inventory 
  
Lead  
2,000 
Lead Status Unknown 
4,000 
Non-Lead 
  
Total 
6,000 
Updates (BOY) – Characterizing 7% of initial LSUSL pool each year 
Initial Number of LSUSLs 
4,000 3,720 3,440 
3,160 
2,880 
2,600 
2,320 
2,040 
1,760 
1,480 
Number Eliminated 
280 
280 
280 
280 
280 
280 
280 
280 
280 
280 
Remaining Unknowns 
3,720 3,440 3,160 
2,880 
2,600 
2,320 
2,040 
1,760 
1,480 
1,200 
Required Replacements 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Replacement Pool (BOY) 
6,000 5,720 5,440 
5,160 
4,880 
4,600 
4,320 
4,040 
3,760 
3,480   
Percent Replacement 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10%   
Lead Lines Left from Previous Year 
  
1,400 
828 
284 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Pipes to Replace 
600 
572 
544 
516 
488 
460 
432 
404 
376 
348   
Status of Compliance Calculation 
  
Calc. 
OK 
Calc. 
OK 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
  
Available Pipes in Replacement Pool 
(EOY) 
5,400 4,840 3,988 
3,164 
2,600 
2,320 
2,040 
1,760 
1,480 
1,200   
Lead Lines Left (EOY) 
1,400 
828 
284 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0   
 
 
 

 
36 
 
Scenario 3 - Simple Inventory Simulation for a CWS (Not Deferred, Many LSUSLs, 10% of LSUSLs characterized per year) 
Year (i) 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030 
2031 
2032 
2033 
2034 
2035 
2036 
2037 
Initial Inventory 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lead  
2,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lead Status Unknown  
4,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Lead 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
6,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Updates (BOY) – Characterizing 10% of initial LSUSL pool each year 
Initial Number of LSUSLs 
4,000 3,600 3,200 
2,800 
2,400 
2,000 
1,600 
1,200 
800 
400 
 
Number Eliminated 
400 
400 
400 
400 
400 
400 
400 
400 
400 
400 
 
Remaining Unknowns 
3,600 3,200 2,800 
2,400 
2,000 
1,600 
1,200 
800 
400 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Required Replacements 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Replacement Pool (BOY) 
6,000 5,600 5,200 
4,800 
4,400 
4,000 
3,600 
3,200 
2,800 2,400   
Percent Replacement 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10%   
Lead Lines Left from Previous Year 
  
1,400 
840 
320 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Pipes to Replace 
600 
560 
520 
480 
440 
400 
360 
320 
280 
240   
Status of Compliance Calculation 
  
Calc. 
OK 
Calc. 
OK 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
OK 
  
Available Pipes in Replacement Pool 
(EOY) 
5,400 4,600 3,640 
2,720 
2,000 
1,600 
1,200 
800 
400 
0   
Lead Lines Left (EOY) 
1,400 
840 
320 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0   
 
 
 

 
37 
 
Request for Comment 12: “EPA also seeks comment on whether systems should be required to meet a 
minimum replacement rate in the first three years after the compliance date to give States an 
opportunity to enforce replacement rate progress sooner than three years after the compliance date.” 
Systems should not be required to meet a minimum replacement rate in the first three years after the 
compliance date. Neither of these provisions are necessary as states have the authority under state law 
to establish additional performance criteria for water systems.  If such provisions were to be included in 
the final federal rule, EPA would have to articulate criteria when more rapid initial replacement rates 
were warranted and a basis for enforcing replacement rate progress sooner.  EPA would have to justify 
those criteria in keeping with the provisions of 42 U.S.C. § 300g–1(b)(3), a task that is not supported by 
the current agency arguments for the proposed treatment technique or the record before the agency. 
As a practical matter, the characterization and replacement of LSLs and GRRSLs in the targeted 10-year 
timeframe will require substantial local and state policy actions by elected and administrative bodies as 
well as federal funding appropriations.  This is particularly true given the goal of full service line 
replacement.  EPA does not have a basis at this time to determine either (1) what shorter timelines are 
indeed possible or (2) under what circumstances state action to hold an individual CWS accountable 
such shorter timelines is appropriate. 
And as noted previously in these comments, specific minimum replacement rates within the timeframe 
for full replacement will cause additional and unnecessarily burdens on water systems as they attempt 
to balance budgeting challenges and other regulatory requirements that EPA is simultaneously imposing 
under other forthcoming and recently finalized regulations.  Minimum replacement rates within the 
allowable timeframe for replacement are not feasible.  If EPA truly wants to achieve full LSL removal on 
the most expedited timeline that is feasible, it cannot layer on additional burdens in the process that will 
force water systems and states alike to redirect resources towards meeting interim goals and 
undertaking paperwork and administrative tasks.  
Request for Comment 13: “EPA is taking comment on whether States, as a condition of primacy, or EPA 
when it is directly implementing the program, should be required to set initial shortened deadlines by a 
certain timeframe, such as no later than 60 days after the compliance date.” 
Neither states or EPA should be required to set initial shortened deadlines by a certain timeframe 
because neither states nor EPA have objective criteria that could be reasonably applied to all CWSs that 
must comply with the proposed LCRI such that an alternative timeframe could be set by EPA or the 
State.  The rulemaking docket does not include information about the practical steps CWSs must 
undertake to implement a program such that EPA would have a factual basis for finalizing an approach 
to setting interim milestones for CWS lead service line characterization, validation, and replacement 
activities.  Moreover, as EPA has acknowledged there are numerous variables specific to each CWS that 
will determine how it will pursue program implementation and which elements will be prioritized over 
another in a particular CWS’s program timeline.  Variations include CWSs that: 
1. Face severe financial hardship will need to focus on financing more so than systems that 
have available funds or a smaller number of service lines subject to the Proposed Rule 
provisions 

 
38 
2. Have a significant percentage of their service lines that are LSUSL due to a lack of 
information about customer-owned service line materials 
3. Are attempting to overcome barriers to program implementation that require changes in 
local or state law 
4. Are part of a community which faces competing infrastructure investment demands (e.g., 
Clean Water Act (CWA) consent orders, school construction, bridge replacement, 
economic development, etc.) that are simultaneously vying for available borrowing 
capacity 
If EPA were to direct or allow states to set abbreviated schedules or impose specific milestones, EPA 
would have to: 
1. Require states to respond to CWS submittals of their replacement plans within 60 days of 
receipt with an alternative schedule and a system-specific basis for the alternative 
schedule.   
2. Require states to make provision for the alternative schedule to be subject to appeal to an 
appropriately qualified panel of drinking water professionals with relevant expertise 
within 60 days of an appeal from the CWS.   
3. Include provisions for state primacy packages to include specific criteria that would trigger 
such an alternative schedule and safeguards that the state can meet the timelines above.   
4. Include the above process safeguards in early implementation agreements for the final 
LCRI. 
Request for Comment 14: “The overall approach and basis to offer deferred service line replacement to 
systems with a high proportion of LSLs and GRR service lines in their distribution system relative to their 
total number of households served. EPA is requesting comment on its proposed threshold of 0.039 
average annual number of replacements per household served, which is used to calculate the number of 
years that systems can defer.”  
It is appropriate to include a mechanism for water systems to seek an extended LSL replacement 
program.  For all the reasons described elsewhere in these comments many systems will find replacing 
all LSLs and GRRSLs within 10 years infeasible.   
Underlying Premise is Not a Sustainable or Feasible Rate -- EPA explains that it estimates that water 
systems are capable of replacing 10,000 service lines per year.  To achieve this rate EPA assumes CWSs 
are capable of replacing 100 service lines per day in 100 working days each year. This rate is not 
consistent with sustainable water infrastructure construction practice, drastically overestimates what is 
possible based on AWWA’s members’ experience, and EPA does not provide support in the current 
rulemaking record for its estimate.  The following figure is a graph of the data EPA presents in the 
Economic Analysis for the Proposed Rule to support service line replacement rates as a function of the 
size of the pool of service lines to be replaced and service area population.  Observed removal rates 
rarely approach 10,000 and seldom break 1,000 service lines per year.  The pace of replacement is more 
a reflection of the challenge before the system than the population / service area of the system.  Said 
another way, the LSL replacement is a slow, cumbersome process that requires extensive coordination 
and the collaboration of multiple parties; it simply takes time.   

 
39 
 
Considering the data that EPA curated for the Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis the 90th percentile 
annual average replacement tally in the dataset was 1,316 and there is considerable scatter in the 
number of service lines replaced annually at the upper end of LSL/GRRSL pool size.  EPA’s dataset 
suggests that a sustainable replacement program is much lower than 10,000 or even 8,000 service lines 
per year.  Moreover, EPA should consider that the overwhelming majority of water systems that will be 
characterizing and replacing significant numbers of LSLs and GRRSLs serve fewer than 10,000 persons 
and the next largest group of systems serve less than 100,000 persons. 
Even a Practical Replacement Rate Requires More Than Available Resources --   Systems with practical 
experience note that on average a single field crew can replace three service lines per workday.  
Construction would not occur during early morning or during evening hours in order to minimize 
disruption to neighborhoods.  Given winter moratoriums limiting in-street construction, there are 167 
weekdays (244 calendar days) available for construction without accounting for: 
1. Gaps in successful replacement program preparation (e.g., permits, easements, required 
notifications, subcontractor scheduling, etc.) 
2. Community holidays 
3. Inclement and increasingly unpredictable weather 
4. Logistical challenges (e.g., equipment, personnel, material shortages, coordination with 
other utilities) 
5. No-cut pavement restrictions 
6. Conflicting local public works projects 
7. Major traffic constraints 
8. Diversion of crews to emergency work 
9. Mis-communication with property owners or inability to effectively communicate with 
occupants regarding access 
1
10
100
1000
10000
1
100
10,000
Service Lines Replaced
Total Services in LSL+GRR Pool
Average Replaced per Year
Average Replaced per Year
1
10
100
1000
10000
1
100
10,000
1,000,000
Service Lines Replaced
System Size (population) 
Average Replaced per Year
Average Replaced per Year
Source:  Prepared using data collected by EPA and reported in EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0053 

 
40 
10. Hazards to personnel / impediments to replacement within a structure (e.g., ability to 
physical access service line entry to building (location of water piping and plumbing, 
hording, etc.), illegal activities in the structure, etc.) 
11. Site-specific challenges (e.g., inadvertent breaks in other utilities, etc.)   
If productive workdays total 200 days per year per crew (assuming higher pay for weekend work) then 
one crew can replace 600 service lines per year.  So, a CWS with a total of 10,000 LSLs and GRRSLs to 
replace would require two full-time crews for 10 years, just for replacement.  Accelerating replacement 
by adding more crews also reaches a breaking point as for each crew all of the above daily challenges 
impact logistics even when there is an in-office support team providing engineering, permitting, 
logistical and management support prior to each replacement, compliance documentation and 
reporting, and customer interaction. There would also need to be crews for service line characterization, 
and validation study, which would be occurring in parallel with replacement.  These crews also require 
the above in-house support. 
Others have grappled with the conundrum of how to move forward at a reasonable pace of replacement 
while recognizing that CWSs with large numbers of service lines to replace will need to distribute that 
task over time.  One example is Illinois (see following Table).  Importantly, Illinois calculates a 
replacement rate without including LSUSLs in the denominator. 
Number of Service 
Lines to be 
Replaced 
Annual 
Replacement 
Rate 
Timeline for 
Completion 
Effective Maximum Required 
Number of Replacements Per 
Year (calculated) 
<1,200 
7% 
15 
84 
1,200 - 4,999 
6% 
17 
300 
5,000 - 9,999 
5% 
20 
500 
10,000 - 99,999 
3% 
34 
3,000 
>100,000 
2% 
50 
--  
 
Due to the complexity of the Proposed Rule and the infeasibility of the current replacement timeline for 
many, if not all, systems, EPA should provide a broader framework for deferral to ensure that systems 
that are using best efforts to replace lines are not unfairly penalized when their lack of resources means 
that they will need additional time to comply with the replacement requirements. This is particularly 
true when systems are relying on subsidized federal or state funding that may not be immediately 
available. 
Household Term in Deferred Deadline Calculation – The proposed LCRI preamble describes including the 
number of households served by a water system in the deferred deadline calculation as a proxy for rate-
paying customers.63  While states maintain descriptive data on CWSs  that they supervise, and the 
number of persons served is one of those fields, states take different strategies for assigning service 
populations and there is not nationwide consistency in the frequency with which this data field is 
managed.  Rather than rely on a surrogate measure, the final rule could specify bill-paying connections, 
 
63 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,913 

 
41 
or residential bill-paying connections.  CWSs pursuing a deferred deadline would have ready access to a 
count of their customers. 
Request for Comment 15: “Whether to require the State, as a condition of primacy, to approve the use of 
the deferred deadline provision where the water system qualifies for it and/or whether to require the 
State, as a condition of primacy, to assess whether it would be feasible for a system to meet the 10-year 
deadline or a shorter deadline even if the system meets the regulatory criteria for the deferred deadline.” 
AWWA supports the Proposed Rule recognizing the deferred deadline provision in regulatory language 
as opposed to a special primacy requirements for states.  Any water system that qualifies for the 
deferred provision should qualify by virtue of the LCRI and not require state approval or assessment 
beyond confirmation of the determination.  Allowing systems to qualify directly through the LCRI text 
will reduce burdens on both the systems and the states and avoid any real or perceived arbitrary 
application of state discretion.  AWWA does not support including, as a condition of primacy, a 
requirement to assess whether it would be feasible for a system to meet the 10-year deadline.  This 
places an unjustified burden on the states, and creates a great risk of being misapplied, resulting in 
enforcement risks for regulated systems.  As repeatedly noted in these comments, there are CWSs that 
will not be able to meet the 10-year replacement schedule EPA has proposed.  Moreover, as illustrated 
in these comments (see Section 3.4) the proposed LCRI requires characterization of LSUSLs and 
replacement of LSLs / GRRSLs at a faster rate than the nominal 10-year window suggests – an even more 
infeasible expectation.  
In order to effectively plan for and finance modifications to current replacement programs, CWSs need 
regulatory consistency.  A federal regulatory structure, like the proposed deferred deadline provision 
provides a measure of consistency.  EPA should hold states accountable to adhering to deferred 
deadline provision of the federal rule, as it is holding states accountable to implement other rule 
provisions.  If an individual state wishes to set an expedited replacement schedule, that state can do so 
under state law.  Several states have already done so, such an action would be separate from 
compliance with the federal regulation.   
Request for Comment 16: “Whether there are additional data on service line replacement rates achieved 
by systems in proactive programs (i.e., excluding programs that only replace service lines in coordination 
with main replacement or emergency repair).” 
AWWA supports providing additional flexibility to systems and for creating a rule that credits them for 
the measures they have already taken to address lead in drinking water.  EPA’s technical support 
document and Proposed Rule preamble illustrate the challenge EPA faces in applying data from ongoing 
programs to the likely costs of a future task occurring within the strictures of regulatory oversight.  CWSs 
implementing proactive replacement programs are undertaking programs that fit their local 
circumstances rather than adhering to EPA’s view of what a replacement program should entail.  This 
provides much needed flexibility as these systems can invest in different forms of customer interaction 
that best meet the needs of their system and customers but may not be compliant with the Proposed 
Rule or meet the proposed standards of documentation and reporting.   
Request for Comment 17: “The proposed use of a maximum threshold of 10,000 annual service line 
replacements for systems with atypically high numbers of LSLs and GRR service lines as well as seeking 

 
42 
comment on the alternate threshold of 8,000 annual service line replacements. EPA is also seeking 
feedback on other thresholds and supporting data.”  
See responses to requests for comment 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, and 16 above. 
Request for Comment 18: “EPA is also seeking feedback on if there’s data available that would inform if 
the maximum threshold for annual service line replacement could increase after ten years, such as if 
replacement rates could double.” 
There is not data to support the premise that the maximum threshold for annual service line 
replacement could increase after ten years, such that replacement rates could double. EPA should 
therefore avoid finalizing any such provision, as it will not be supportable based on the agency’s record.  
The premise for the deferred replacement schedule is that the scope of the replacement challenge is 
beyond the means of the system unless it is adhering to longer window of performance.  The extended 
schedule inherently assumes an average replacement rate over the duration of the calculated 
performance period.  EPA or the state de facto assuming that a more aggressive replacement rate is 
feasible for some portion of that period, is inconsistent with the logic used to derive the performance 
period. 
There is good reason to believe that service line replacement will not peak at the end of the 
performance period.  Each replacement program will go through and initial organizational phase, 
followed by a period of efficient replacement, followed by a period where the system is addressing more 
challenging replacements (for example, due to a lack of property owner cooperation, lack of 
collaborative funding options, etc.).   
Neither EPA or states can forecast the availability of funding, speed with which necessary local and state 
policy changes will be made, or the degree of property owner collaboration systems will face initially or 
over the course of the performance period.  These circumstances will all be fact-specific to individual 
water systems.  Without a means of assessing such constraints EPA would be ill advised to set an 
arbitrary replacement rate step function in the treatment technique or suggest / authorize states to do 
so. 
Request for Comment 19: “Whether systems conducting deferred service line replacement should be 
subject to any additional requirements beyond those for systems that are not replacing service lines in 
accordance with a deferred deadline.” 
Systems conducting deferred service line replacement should not be subject to any additional 
requirements beyond those for systems that are not replacing service lines in accordance with a 
deferred deadline.  Systems facing a mandated infrastructure replacement task that is already beyond 
their means (or they would not be on a deferred schedule) are under sufficient fiscal, managerial, and 
operational stress without additional regulatory burdens.  The administrative and education 
requirements of the LCRI proposal are already extensive, and any additional burdens would not be 
feasible for the reasons repeatedly noted throughout this comment letter.  The imposition of additional 
measures beyond those already included in the Proposed Rule could only viewed as punitive rather than 
tasks that would meaningfully contribute to successfully achieving the targeted replacements. 
Request for Comment 20:  “The requirement for systems to install a dielectric coupling when conducting 
a partial replacement of an LSL or GRR to separate the remaining LSL or GRR service line and the 

 
43 
replaced service line unless the replaced service line is made of plastic and other recommended risk 
mitigation activities.” 
While the use of a dielectric coupling as described in the Proposed Rule is good practice and is 
consistent with established field practice, per ANSI/AWWA C810 - Replacement and Flushing of Lead 
Service Lines, EPA should ensure the use of dielectric coupling through reference rather than through 
specific inclusion in the Proposed Rule.   
SDWA regulations do not and should not specify specific design and construction standards because 
identifying specific technologies forecloses improvements in technology.  EPA should be wary of taking 
the step of incorporating specific design and construction standards into federal drinking water 
standards given the rigidity of SDWA’s regulatory framework and the infrequent nature of individual rule 
revision.  EPA is for example unlikely to revise a rule for a minor technical change due to the expense of 
the rulemaking for the agency itself.  EPA could and should instead as per the National Technology 
Transfer and Advancement Act, cite and encourage service line replacement in accordance with the 
ANSI/AWWA C810 standard. 
Request for Comment 21: “The proposed requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line 
replacement unless it is conducted in accordance with emergency or planned infrastructure work 
(excluding planned infrastructure work solely for the purposes of replacing lead and GRR service lines as 
part of a service line replacement program).” 
For purposes of responding to this request for comment, AWWA notes that it reads the Proposed Rule 
to not consider a replacement a “partial replacement” any time the property owner has denied access 
to its portion of a line.  However, AWWA is concerned that there is a lack of clarity in how the Proposed 
Rule is currently drafted, which could lead systems and states to believe that EPA is prohibiting the 
systems from making any replacement when they have been denied access to the private portion of a 
line.  And for the reasons explained elsewhere in this comment letter, even when a system is granted 
access to a private portion of a line, AWWA continues to maintain that EPA lacks the legal authority 
under the SDWA to require a system to remove the private potion of the line or to otherwise count the 
private potion of the line as part of its LSL or GRRSL replacement obligation. 
EPA should not finalize a requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line replacement unless it is 
conducted in accordance with emergency or planned infrastructure work.  As explained further below, 
such a ban would violate the APA because it relies on outdated information about the potential negative 
consequences of partial replacements, and ignores the considerable downsides to imposing such a ban.  
AWWA supports EPA’s goal in each instance is to achieve a complete replacement.  Full replacement 
requires successful collaboration with property owners, which is not always possible.  The LCRI proposal 
provides important latitude to CWSs and allows necessary water main infrastructure renewal and 
rehabilitation to occur even when there are property owners that are unable or unwilling to participate 
in a full LSL replacement.  Inclusion of this flexibility to proceed with partial replacement is essential for 
ongoing water system infrastructure maintenance and should be retained in the final LCRI. 
The decision to ban partial replacements in the instance of LSL/GRRSL replacement programs more 
broadly should be revisited.  Banning partial replacements as a part of replacement programs impedes a 

 
44 
CWS’s ability to make incremental improvement by reducing at least the portion of the service line to 
which it has access.   
Exposure Management Due to Partial Replacement -- There has been considerable advocacy calling for a 
ban on partial LSL replacement.  Unfortunately, EPA has not fostered a technical dialogue around the 
effect of such a ban in practice.  While in the past, partial replacement could introduce new risks, the 
water sector has evolved and introduced new practices.  The data EPA continues to use to underpin the 
proposed ban is outdated and not reflective of the current situation and therefore does not provide a 
sufficient basis for justifying the requirement.  At present the docket and record before the agency does 
not provide a sound basis for the proposed ban as it is relying on out-of-date information. For example, 
partial replacements today will include: 
1. Use of construction techniques to minimize lead release per the ANSI/AWWA C810 
standard 
2. Post-replacement flushing per the ANSI/AWWA C810 standard 
3. The opportunity to install plastic pipe and / or use a dielectric coupling to prevent galvanic 
corrosion of the remaining LSL. 
4. Provision of a filter to the occupants and six-months of replacement filters per the 
proposed LCRI 
5. Provision of public information material that includes instructions for ongoing measures to 
reduce lead release per and the proposed LCRI 
6. Post-replacement lead concentration data to illustrate if and degree to which lead may 
continue to be released under a stagnant water, first and fifth liter sample protocol (e.g., 
worst case sample conditions) 
Negative Consequences from Banning Partial Replacement – Not affording CWSs the opportunity to 
replace the portion of the service line in its control will have the following negative consequences: 
1. Forcing CWSs to disturb a LSL/GRRSL and thus potentially release lead to the occupants 
without any associated benefit 
2. Resulting in CWSs engaging in replacement activity multiple times in the same street 
leading to greater community disruption, loss of efficiency in the construction program, 
and additional cost inflation due to repeated road cuts and associated re-paving 
3. Leaving the length of lead pipe in the CWS’s control in contact with water the occupants 
consume 
4. Increasing the potential for a subsequent disturbance of the service line to occur as 
remaining GRRSLs are often fragile, and the initial construction could lead to the need for 
additional construction to repair the line after it is first disturbed 
Environmental Justice Concern – EPA posits that partial replacements have environmental justice 
consequences.64  Given the above safeguards and practical effects, the ban on partial replacements is as 
likely to have detrimental effects for this population of occupants as it is to offer risk reduction.  
 
64 EPA, Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  3-4 (2023). 

 
45 
Moreover, as previously noted compliance costs associated with rules like the LCRI are passed on to 
customers in the form of higher rates for their drinking water.  These environmental justice households 
are among those in the community that can least afford the cost consequences of unsubstantiated 
regulatory requirements.  
Participation Not Just a Function of Cost -- EPA cannot assume that property owners will engage in full-
service line replacement. Nor can EPA assume that the cost of coordinating in a service line replacement 
is the only social barrier to customer participation in service line replacement.  AWWA shares EPA’s 
appreciation for the value of long-term risk reduction measures like LSLR.  However, service line 
replacement is not every household’s priority concern.  CWS with ongoing programs that offer full 
replacement at the community’s expense still experience high refusal rates even when service line 
replacement does not impose any costs directly on the property owner.   
EPA Representation of Data is Flawed – EPA cites data from published papers to describe flushing as 
inadequate to reduce lead release following a partial replacement.  First, EPA’s summary of the available 
data described post replacement lead levels, including all tested flushing procedures rather than limiting 
its analysis to flushing procedures that are currently recommended like the protocol for whole-house 
high velocity flushing that is now part of the AWWA/ANSI C810 standard.  Second, the studies reported 
post-replacement lead concentration observations using typical sampling protocol rather than an 
exposure-based sampling strategy.  As EPA acknowledges in the Proposed Rule preamble, current 
monitoring sample strategies are not representative of exposure.   
While not addressed in the preamble discussion of partial replacement, EPA’s economic analysis 
includes a characterization of lead levels associated with partial service lines.  Ignoring the limitations in 
the dataset underpinning the agency analysis, the agency’s own analysis illustrates that partial 
replacements do not lead to elevated lead concentrations that initial research suggested might have 
been a more ubiquitous concern.65 
Request for Comment 22: “EPA is seeking comment on whether partial service line replacement should 
be prohibited during “planned infrastructure work” or with certain types of planned infrastructure work.” 
As noted above, while the goal in each instance is to achieve a complete replacement, full replacement 
requires successful collaboration with property owners, which does not always occur.  EPA should not 
reduce the scope of the exceptions on partial service line replacement, but rather it should expand the 
scope of those partial replacements as described in the above response to EPA’s prior request for 
comment.  Where possible, the final rule should allow for as much flexibility and efficiency in project 
planning as possible, given that the burdens of the replacement timeline will already make it infeasible 
for many water systems. 
Request for Comment 23: “The ability of the market to correct for potential shortages in workers and 
materials to conduct service line replacement, as well to provide sufficient quantities of filters to comply 
with the service line replacement and other relevant provisions in the proposal.” 
 
65 EPA, Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis. Exhibit 5-11 LSL and CCT Scenarios and Simulated Geometric Mean Tap 
Water Lead Concentrations and Standard Deviations at the Fifth Liter Drawn after Stagnation for Each Combination 
of LSL and CCT Status 5-18 (2023). 

 
46 
As noted previously in this letter, there are not sufficient workers and materials for EPA’s proposed 
requirements.  AWWA also notes that EPA has the burden of demonstrating through substantial 
evidence in the administrative record that the requirements are feasible.  EPA cannot shift the burden 
the agency faces in determining the feasibility of the Proposed Rule requirements, particularly the 
viability of the service line replacement element of the treatment technique on to the public.  Rather 
than ask the public to comment (during a short time period and over several national holidays) on the 
available labor supply for construction four to fourteen years into the future, EPA should have presented 
an analysis of this limitation in the Proposed Rule Economic Analysis and allow the public to comment 
on the analysis.  EPA has not done so.  EPA is aware that there is: 
1. A persistent labor shortage in the trained staff of CWSs across the U.S. 
2. An aging workforce in the water sector as well as other sectors, including the construction 
sector generally 
3. There is currently a well reported shortfall in available construction workers 
Cost of infrastructure construction are rising and construction workforce is not available to meet current 
infrastructure project needs. The Associated Builders and Contractors (ABC) tracks trends in the general 
construction sector.  Given current shortages in available workforce and other drivers, ABC reported a 
8.5 month backlog on projects as of December 2023.66  ABC’s construction backlog indicator is little 
changed over the last three years.67  CBRE summarized cost and capacity drivers in 2022 as follows, 
“…Finding skilled labor continues to remain a major challenge for all aspects of the industry 
inclusive of shipping and trucking, manufacturing and on-site construction. … 
The CBRE Construction Cost Index showed a decline in annual escalation from 2022 and is 
forecast at 6.5% (±2%) for the year. This is still higher than the 10-year average of 3-6% per 
year.”68 
Water services construction is a specialized area within the broader construction sector.  Consequently, 
trends in the broader construction sector are even more severe and pronounced in the water sector.  In 
December, Clark et al. reports that “water supply and sewer construction spending were up 15.3% and 
27.2%, respectively in October 2023 from a year ago”69 reflecting increased public sector infrastructure 
spending over the last two years (see following figure based on Bureau of Census data).70  The increased 
spending on public infrastructure is straining existing capacity.  
 
66 ABC, ABC’s Construction Backlog Indicator Inches up in November, Contractors Remain Confident (Dec 12,2023).  
67CBRE, U.S. Construction Cost Trends (2022).  
68 CBRE, United States Construction Market Trends (2023). 
69 Clark, Allison, M. Parkhurst, and S. Repucci,  “Federal Funds Ease US Water Utilities’ Capex Burden but Gap 
Remains.” Fitch Wire, FitchRatings (Dec. 12, 2023). 
70 U.S. Census Bureau, Total Public Construction Spending: Total Construction in the United States [TLPBLCONS], 
retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (Jan.13, 2024), 
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TLPBLCONS,. 

 
47 
 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Total Public Construction Spending: Total Construction in the United 
States 
Antidotal reports from CWSs soliciting bid packages for construction projects like those required by the 
proposed LCRI indicate that available, qualified construction firms are not submitting bids on new bid 
packages because they have already successfully scheduled sufficient work into the future that the risk 
of committing to additional projects was too high.  There is little reason to expect a rapid expansion in 
construction capacity.  The construction sector suffers from well recognized workforce challenges, such 
as an aging workforce and limited influx of appropriately trained workers.  
Access to labor pool is limited – In support of its argument that the 10-year period to remove all LSLs and 
GRRSLs is feasible, EPA is citing past and ongoing efforts by water systems to remove LSLs.  As previously 
noted, those systems did not procure contractor support in the midst of a nationwide sprint to remove 
all LSLs and GRRSLs and therefore do not prove or support the idea that sufficient resources exist for all 
regulated systems to remove these service lines on the proposed timeline.  Past and current efforts can 
tap regional and multi-state pools of construction companies.  As more CWSs enter service line 
replacement there is little reason for contractors that have ready access to projects close at hand to 
compete for work that requires and extensive mobilization effort for personnel and equipment.  When 
contractors bid for projects that are distant from their base of operations, they must add the cost of that 
mobilization including the housing of their workforce, leading to greater logistical complexity, higher 
costs, and potentially lower profit margins, and all of which are a disincentive to compete for more 
distant work. In addition, because many PWSs are public or quasi-public, they may have additional and 
more cumbersome contracting processes which can both deter contractors from bidding on the work 
and also make the process of obtaining skilled labor more time consuming and cumbersome.  These 
issues are discussed in further detail below.  
CWS must meet construction goals within federal, state and local government limits on staffing and 
contracting -- Complying with the proposed LCRI will require systems to (1) revise current infrastructure 
maintenance and investment priorities and (2) entail aligning personnel and equipment to meet rule 
timelines within federal, state, and local government requirements.  Balancing compliance with all 
required regulations and policies imposed on water systems constrains makes aligning resources to 
meet EPA’s proposed timelines unlikely at best.  For example, 
1. Federal funds require use of low-bid (or equivalent) contracted services. As a 
consequence, systems must choose between accessing federal funds for service line 

 
48 
replacement and funding existing in-house staffing of distribution systems maintenance 
and construction crews. 
2. State and local restrictions on water system personnel installing / modifying piping and 
appurtenances on private property.  In some parts of the U.S., policies are in place to 
assure local markets for particular tradecrafts, requiring, for example, the use of local 
plumbers.  This further limits the available labor pool for these PWSs. 
3. Procurement policies and practices to assure open competition for government funded 
projects, preferential contract award to businesses that are an established part of the 
local economy, preferential award of contracts to firms that are owned by disadvantaged 
groups (e.g., women-owned, minority-owned, etc.), and other requirements.  Such 
processes are a routine feature of federal, state, and local procurement practice and 
impact (1) slowing the speed of the procurement process, (2) increasing the cost of 
services procured, and (3) decreasing the flexibility systems have in accessing available 
contractors. 
Limitations on rate increases – Water systems can only respond to increases in project costs within the 
limits of their ability to fund those projects (through, for example, pay-go, municipal bonds, private 
equity, revolving loan funds, etc.).  This funding relies on rates and charges for either operating funds or 
repayment of debt, and such rate and charge increases must be undertaken with care.  These increases 
are also subject to oversight.  The most readily illustrated example is the case of investor-owned water 
systems that are subject to state corporation commission oversight.  While these commissions recognize 
the need to comply with regulatory mandates, they can and do constrain tariffs (rates and charges) 
regulated water systems may charge.  In doing so, they constrain the pace of investment to meet rule 
requirements by regulated water systems.  Similar constraints exist within local government budgeting 
processes. 
EPA’s Proposed Rule LCRI economic analysis does not take such limitations into account.  EPA is well 
aware that water systems must limit rate shock in the communities they serve.  The previously cited 
Raucher et al. (2019) report emphasized the necessity of thoughtfully planning rate impacts over time as 
a key strategy in managing local affordability challenges.  EPA incorporated this concept into its “Clean 
Water Act Financial Capability Assessment Guidance” saying 
“Cash flow forecasting is a useful tool that allows communities to determine … the revenue 
necessary to cover costs … and to meet debt covenants over the implementation period.  The 
community should plan and allow for uncertainty when deciding how to adjust water and 
sewer rate to finance its major capital improvements.   … In evaluating potential rate 
increases, communities should also balance revenue requirements against the likelihood that 
users will reduce usage or cease paying utility bills, causing the yield of the revenues from the 
rate increase to be less than expected or desired, potentially causing the community to 
experience “rate shock.”71 [emphasis added]  
Implications for LCRI Rulemaking -- Stakeholders are ill-equipped to predict the state of the future work 
force when authoritative organizations differ on the likely state of the nation’s economy over the next 
twelve months.  Given this uncertainty, EPA cannot finalize a regulation that does not have off-ramps in 
 
71EPA, Clean Water Act Financial Capability Assessment Guidance 16 (Feb. 2023).  

 
49 
instances when the underpinning assumptions for its projection of the rule’s feasible prove to be 
unsound.  Moreover, there has been ample discussion within the sector and infrastructure finance 
community that workforce scarcity / maxed out organizational capacity is already leading to (1) 
significant increases in bids on infrastructure project cost and (2) delays in construction schedules.  
There is little reason to believe that a regulatory requirement that drives all CWSs to (1) characterize 
service line materials and (2) replace service lines, and do so within a very compressed timeframe, that 
also parallels other construction required by federal standards will not have an inflationary effect on the 
cost of what workforce and organizational capacity exists. 
Request for Comment 24: “The extent to which property owner consent, if required by State or local law 
or water tariff agreement, might complicate full service line replacement and whether there are 
additional measures EPA can take to facilitate access through the LCRI.” 
Property Owner Consent -- As described in more detail in these comments regarding legal issues 
inherent to the Proposed Rule (See Section 4.7 of these comments), the Proposed Rule’s framing of 
“access” is contrary to law as it assumes that EPA can legally require systems to replace lines on private 
property so long as access is granted by the property owner.  This is not the case, and such lines are 
beyond the scope of what Congress intended to regulate under the SDWA.  As a result, regardless of 
what state or local laws or water tariff agreements may be in place, EPA cannot mandate that water 
systems remove these privately owned lines. 
Additional Measures to Facilitate -- As noted previously in Section 2.3 of these comments there are 
three significant steps to improve access that EPA can take that are policy actions beyond the specifics 
of the LCRI: 
1. Align expectations for service line replacement with appropriation of adequate federal 
funding from Congress to pay for LSL and GRRSL replacement, particularly LSL and GRRSLs 
on private property 
2. Obtain a finding from the IRS that the value of a lead service line replacement on private 
property is not taxable income 
3. Obtain a finding from the IRS that CWSs are not required to prepare a IRS 1099 for 
customers receiving a service line replacement on private property 
3.5 
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
Request for Comment 25: “Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of the proposed sites 
should be included in Tier 3, if additional sites should be included, or if some should be included in a 
different, lower priority tier, such as Tier 4. Specifically, comment on whether sites served by galvanized 
service lines or containing galvanized premise plumbing that are identified as ever being downstream of 
an LSL or lead connector should be included in the same tier as other sites with a current lead connector 
(e.g., copper service line downstream of a lead connector).” 
Addition of Galvanized Piping to Tiers -- The addition of galvanized piping to the tiering of the LCR 
sample pool is a new and significant change in the LCR construct.  While lead may be released from 
galvanized pipe scales, the associated mechanism of release is fundamentally based in iron corrosion 
scale stability.  The associated factors affecting lead release and consequently corrosion control are 
different from managing soluble lead from lead pipe and lead solder in contact with water, which 

 
50 
constitute EPA’s prior theoretical framework for the LCR and basis for determining that the treatment 
technique is feasible with the inclusion of a lead action level of 10 µg/L. 
EPA has not illustrated in the preamble or included analysis in the LCRI proposal docket demonstrating 
that CWSs that have compliance sample pool datasets composed solely of Tier 1 (lead service line/lead 
plumbing), Tier 2 (multi-family lead service line/lead plumbing), and Tier 3  sites (or just Tier 3) can keep 
their 90th percentile lead levels below the action level of 10 µg/L as required by the proposed LCRI.  
Maintaining lead levels below the lead action level as described in the proposed LCRI requires CWSs to 
do so while: 
1. Monitoring on a routine monitoring schedule (6-month sample period and greater 
number of samples per period than are drawn by many systems are currently on triennial 
monitoring) 
2. Incorporating the higher lead value from first and fifth liter sample volumes when there is 
LSL at the sample site 
3. Including higher values should they occur in customer requested sample data accrued 
from customers with an interest in lead concentrations in the building they occupy 
While data in hand from LCR compliance monitoring is reassuring with mean population-weighted lead 
concentrations in low single parts per billion, the revised sampling protocol, revised sample tiers and 
compliance metric (90th percentile) focuses on the most extreme upper bound concentrations water 
systems observe.  The proposed Tier 3, galvanized plumbing, further exaggerates observed lead by 
targeting a pipe scale that in some circumstances has been seen as prone to particulate release due to 
factors other than active corrosion control management practice described by the LCR (including LCRR 
and LCRI) (e.g., oxidation reduction potential).   
EPA should revisit whether it can demonstrate the feasibility of the new compliance paradigm and 
whether adding a sample tier where iron corrosion is the dominant mechanism of action is consistent 
with the balance of the LCRI construct. 
Ever Downstream of Lead Service Line – EPA has included the criteria of “ever downstream of a LSL” in 
the definition of GRRSLs as a precautionary approach with respect to service line replacement.  There is 
not a strong technical basis for this requirement, nor is there a credible technical basis articulated in 
either the LCRR or LCRI dockets, and the approach therefore violates the APA.  To extend this criterion 
to the tap sample tiers used to inform corrosion control decision-making would have perverse, 
unintended effects.  EPA can credibly assume that the majority of GRRSLs across the United States are 
not in fact known lead service pipe followed by known galvanized pipe.  Rather, the majority will be 
galvanized service lines for which records are inadequate to demonstrate a lead service never existed 
prior to the galvanized service line. Consequently, a sample tier that emphasizes use of GRRSLs would 
focus sampling on perhaps the most troubled and inconsistently characterized group of service lines in 
the inventory.   
Downstream of a Lead Connector -- The addition of lead connectors to the sample pool tiers would add 
even greater variability to certainty of proper material characterization than a focus on GRRSLs as 
previously discussed.   

 
51 
Moreover, given EPA’s focus on fully documenting compliance sample sites, EPA cannot direct systems 
to sample from a particular type of service line that it cannot verify.  In the instance of lead connectors, 
verification would require excavating the lead connector (often involving excavating in a street with 
associated paving repairs and traffic management considerations) and presumably disturbing the 
connector.  Then leaving that lead connector in place without replacing it.  
Request for Comment 26:  “Comment and available data, such as modeling or sampling data, that 
inform lead corrosion rates over time.” 
See responses to individual requests for comment and general comments above. 
Request for Comment 27:  “Comment on the applicability of alternate sampling protocols to assess CCT 
performance, increase customer participation, and other relevant factors.”  
Appropriate to Assess CCT Performance --  AWWA’s previous comments72 to EPA regarding the proposed 
LCRR remain sound and AWWA reattaches and incorporates them into its comments here (see Appendix 
C).  CWSs and states have an extensive history of evaluating corrosion control for lead and copper based 
on first-draw, stagnant water samples.  Data collected using this sampling protocol, from structures 
where lead is much more likely to be observed offers a consistent, conservative trigger for re-evaluating 
corrosion control.   
The LCRR introduced sampling of fifth liter samples as a means of (1) motivating CWSs and NTNCWSs to 
take additional steps to reduce lead concentrations and importantly (2) trigger removal of lead service 
lines as a risk reduction strategy.  Previously under the LCR, LSL replacement was an economic incentive 
for optimized corrosion control efforts.  The LCRI treatment technique creates a programmatic element 
that specifically requires LSL and GRRSL replacement by a fixed deadline and removes the triggered LSL 
replacement included in the LCR and LCRR.  The LCRI proposal returns the role of lead action level 
exceedances to its primary focus – optimizing corrosion control.  With that role in mind, the first-draw, 
stagnant-water sample remains the most reliable and appropriate trigger for revised corrosion control. 
As EPA is proposing a rule that requires all LSLs and GRRSLs to be removed in 10 years, it is not clear why 
EPA has retained the first and fifth liter samples from the LCRR.  In the LCRR, there was the presumption 
that only a small percentage of LSLs would be replaced and those would be replaced over more than 30 
years.  EPA contended that entering a multi-year process to determine a new corrosion control strategy 
and transitioning to that strategy was effective because lead services may be present for an extended 
period of time.  Retaining the first and fifth liter sample protocol for structures with LSLs results in (1) a 
substantial bolus of new monitoring plan approvals by states, (2) additional monitoring burden on CWSs, 
and (3) subsequent requirements for CWSs in the instance of exceedances. As proposed, the LCRI allows 
systems to postpone pursuing a change in corrosion control practice until LSL and GRRSL replacement 
has occurred (albeit at an accelerated rate), so EPA recognizes the conundrum in its regulatory 
framework, but does not describe a basis for not limiting the fifth liter compliance sample to systems 
where LSL and GRRSL replacement is expected to continue well beyond the 10-year replacement 
schedule.  One possible argument to the contrary might be the remaining homes that are unwilling to 
participate in full replacement of the LSL.  If there are property owners that are unwilling to participate 
 
72 AWWA, AWWA Comments on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, Docket No. EPA–HQ–OW-2017-
0300 (2020). 

 
52 
in replacement of the LSL it seems unlikely that the CWS will be very successful recruiting them to 
participate as a sample site for ongoing compliance monitoring. 
The LCRI proposal changes multiple variables relevant to the likelihood of a lead action level 
exceedance, the cumulative effect of which is not well understood.  That combination includes: (1) 
drawing a fifth liter sample from a LSL sample site as well as a first liter sample, (2) using the higher of 
the observed lead values from the first and fifth liter samples, (3) directing compliance monitoring to 
structures where lead is most likely to be high, (4) limiting calculation of the compliance metric to the 
highest observed lead values from both data, and (5) retaining a compliance metric based on the upper-
tail of the occurrence distribution (i.e., 90th percentile).  So, while EPA rightly assumes that 90th 
percentiles based on the higher value from a first and fifth sample from a LSL will shift the distribution of 
observed 90th percentiles upward when such sample sites exist, the agency has not described how the 
proposed metric is better at “assessing corrosion control.”  Assessing corrosion control requires a stable 
response.  In the European Union, corrosion control is assessed through the use of an average lead 
concentration based on random samples (e.g., without stagnation and without a tiered sample pool).  
The United Kingdom employs a similar approach to the EU.  Given the long-standing practice around the 
1st draw, stagnant water sample used in the U.S. and the difficulties encountered in the U.S. obtaining 
sufficient in-home samples, the LCR 1st draw, stagnant water sample provides stable point-of-departure 
for triggering corrosion control review in the U.S.  
EPA acknowledges in the proposed LCRI preamble that actual lead occurrence is significantly impacted 
by other factors, in particular the amount and timing of ongoing water use in a structure.  Neither the 
first or fifth liter lead observations are representative of actual exposure.73  So, use of a first liter only 
protocol that does not introduce the additional site-to-site variability associated with fifth liter samples 
would be preferrable.  It also affords the economy of being a single sample for both lead and copper 
compliance data. 
Customer Participation -- Since the initial LCR’s promulgation, roughly three decades ago, CWSs have 
worked with customers to obtain tap samples for purposes of LCR compliance monitoring.  EPA is aware 
that over the duration of the LCR’s implementation, locating occupants willing to draw samples as 
specified in the LCR has been an ongoing challenge, as has obtaining compliant samples.  This 
implementation challenge will be much more severe under the proposed LCRI: 
1. Many CWSs currently on triennial monitoring will return to routine monitoring 
necessitating twice as many samples being acquired each monitoring cycle and six times 
more sampling cycles.  For a system serving a population of 10,001, the Proposed Rule 
increases the minimum number of compliance samples over three years from 30 to 360.  
2. Most CWSs will be requesting collaboration in sampling from occupants that are in a small 
fraction of the homes in their service area. While Tier 3 sample sites represent an 
expansion of the LCR/LCRR sample site pool, structures with demonstrable LSL / lead 
plumbing or galvanized service lines / plumbing are a limited subset of homes to 
repeatedly target for compliance monitoring.  Moreover, the LCRI emphasizes sampling at 
 
73 Riblet, Cécile, E Deshommes, L Laroche, M Prévost. True exposure to lead at the tap: Insights from proportional 
sampling, regulated sampling and water use monitoring. Water Res. 2019 Jun 1:156:327-336. doi: 
10.1016/j.watres.2019.03.005. 

 
53 
the same home or replacing it with a similar home if the continued collaboration cannot 
be sustained.  Extending the above example of a system serving 10,001 persons, such a 
system would have on the order of 4,000 services.  If 10% of all service lines were LSLs, the 
system would have a target pool of 400 homes, of which every six months it must find 60 
homes to sample. 
3. CWSs and occupants are being encouraged by every other facet of this Proposed Rule to 
remove LSLs and GRRSLs.  This has two effects.  It encourages some customers that are 
concerned about lead to replace the service line, such that it is no longer available for the 
compliance monitoring pool.  And, it encourages other customers to be adverse to 
participating in monitoring as knowledge of observed lead would trigger a real or 
perceived duty to disclose observed lead concentrations (e.g., a future real estate 
transaction, use of a structure as a child care facility, use of a structure as rental housing, 
etc.).  Consequently, the monitoring pool must be expanded and maintained against the 
effect of the balance of the Proposed Rule requirements. 
3. The elevated attention to adequately documenting sample site adherence to the LCR 
sample tiers leads to yet another behavioral barrier to compliance monitoring.  Systems 
must now document more carefully than under prior LCR implementation.  Such 
documentation is intrusive and requires coordination with the household, likely involving 
a site visit by CWS staff prior to any sample events to document the site.  
4. CWS regularly report that participation by customers under the current LCR requires 
financial renumeration of the household taking a single one liter first-draw, stagnant 
sample.  CWSs routinely provide credits toward customer water bills, gift coupons, and 
cash payments to encourage participation in the sampling program.  The amount offered 
varies with urban examples reaching $100 per sample event.  Even when renumeration is 
offered, follow-through by households that agree to take samples and receive sample kits 
is typically no more than 80%. EPA has not sufficiently considered these costs and the 
associated burdens of running such monitoring programs when assessing the feasibility of 
the Proposed Rule.  
5. EPA proposes to expand the Tier 1 and 2 sample pools by including actual lead plumbing 
and creating Tier 3, which includes galvanized plumbing as well as galvanized services.  
Including lead plumbing and galvanized plumbing in the tiering structure will substantively 
expand the pool of documentable homes for LCRI compliance monitoring.  Lead and 
galvanized piping within structures has been replaced over time both due to failure, 
inadequate flow, and other changes associated with renovating older buildings.  Finished 
home interiors conceal pipe materials behind walls and in ceilings, such that a paper 
record review is not adequate to meet EPA’s current expectations for demonstration of 
adherence to sample pool Tiers.  The portions of plumbing that are most accessible (e.g., 
piping under kitchen faucet or in bathrooms) are also components of household plumbing 
most likely to have been subject to renovation and changes in plumbing materials.   
Other Relevant Factors --  Experience to-date at multiple CWSs indicate that obtaining reliably first and 
fifth liter data will be challenging. 

 
54 
1. Systems have limited latitude under the LCR, at present, or under the proposed LCRI to 
invalidate samples due to sampler error, but experience with obtaining first liter samples 
illustrates that further complication of a first and fifth liter sample will be problematic. 
a. Current CWS quality control of LCR compliance samples received from customer 
collected samples include incomplete sample collection / sample loss due to 
inadequate sample sealing in transit, collection of samples from taps that are not 
kitchen faucets (or designated alternative sample taps), samples being drawn 
after prolonged stagnation especially when a monetary reward is provided for 
sampling, and inadvertent use of water during stagnation period.   
b. Experience of systems that currently collect first and fifth liter samples find that 
they must take additional steps beyond the protocol described in Proposed 
§ 141.86(b)(1)(ii) to facilitate successful customer sampling.  Steps include using 
sample bottles that are clearly different in size, shape and / or color from the first 
and fifth liter samples for collecting the second through fourth samples.  
2. The current Tier 2 sample sites are favored most when Tier 1 sample sites are not 
available.  The sampling protocol requires a sample from a building where (1) the sample 
represents a period of six hours or more of stagnation and (2) a fifth liter that is intended 
to be representative of the service line to the building.  Obtaining samples that meet 
either the required condition and /or meet the intent of the fifth liter sample in an 
occupied multi-family structure is challenging.  And, from a CWS’s compliance perspective, 
it is very difficult to demonstrate this to the satisfaction of the state. 
Request for Comment 28: “Comment on the proposed updated definition of wide-mouth bottles that is 
“bottles that are one liter in volume with a mouth, whose outer diameter measures at least 55 mm 
wide,” and specifically on the availability of qualifying bottles.” 
The proposed definition of a “wide-mouth bottle” is an improvement over the LCRR text.74  The change 
is responsive to the numerous complaints received following promulgation of the LCRR which specified a 
bottle that did not exist as the text implied an interior diameter of the mouth of the bottle to be greater 
than 55 mm.   
The reworded criteria remain difficult to source from available laboratory supply vendors, and thus not 
resolving the infeasibility of the requirement.  Given the purpose of the requirement is to prevent the 
use of “small mouthed” bottles that is so narrow as to force the sampler to throttle the flow of water 
from the faucet during sample collection, a less exact definition would: 
1. Reduce the potential for shortages of supply 
2. Improve access to bottles made of appropriate plastics that have been manufactured to 
support low-level metals chemical analysis 
3. Allow the purchase of bottles that are both 1 liter in capacity and meet the definition of 
“wide-mouthed” 
 
74 40 C.F.R. 141.2 -- Wide-mouth bottles. 

 
55 
4. Allow the purchase of bottles that are visually different (e.g., color, material, etc.) so that 
samplers distinguish first and fifth liter samples from interim collected sample 
AWWA therefore recommends the definition be revised as shown below: 
“Wide-mouth bottles, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means bottles one liter in 
volume that have a mouth with an inside outer diameter that measures at least 4055 mm 
wide.” 
There are bottle options available with mouths that meet this criterion.  For comparison, “small-
mouthed” bottles have inside diameters less than 30 mm and can be much narrower.  Inside diameter is 
suggested because it can be more reliably measured.  Also, laboratory supply catalogs may reflect the 
exterior width inclusive of the closure threads in order to allow the ordering of bottle caps / closures.  
This may not be readily apparent during ordering from some laboratory supply houses.  It also 
misrepresents the actual diameter of the bottle’s mouth orifice by several millimeters.  
Request for Comment 29: “Comment and any relevant data on the number and tiering of samples used 
to calculate the 90th percentile lead and/or copper levels for systems with LSLs for purposes of assessing 
CCT efficacy. Specifically, whether samples from non-LSL sites that have higher lead concentrations than 
samples from LSL sites should be included and whether these higher values should replace lower values 
from LSL sites in the 90th percentile calculation.” 
Supplemental monitoring from customer-requested samples following an exceedance serves a much 
different purpose than the compliance dataset, namely (1) engaging the interested public and (2) 
providing timely information to occupants.  The proposed LCRI describes supplemental monitoring in 
Proposed § 141.85 as tap samples from any customer and any person served by a LSLs, GRRSLs, or 
LSUSLs who requests a sample.  The Proposed Rule then goes on to describe eligibility in Proposed 
§ 141.85(c) as all customers and it specifics that those customers served by LSLs, GRRSLs, or LSUSLs 
should have receive “samples that capture both water in contact with premise plumbing and water in 
contact with the service line (e.g., first- and fifth-liter samples)”.  In the Proposed Rule § 141.86(e) is 
revised to explicitly require inclusion of relevant data collected under § 141.85(c) data in the compliance 
dataset for calculating action exceedances.   
In Proposed § 141.82(j)(2) EPA recognized that including samples collected from site assessments would 
inappropriately bias the dataset being used to evaluate the need to evaluate or re-evaluate corrosion 
control.  This same argument applies with respect to including supplemental monitoring data.  In the 
proposed LCRI EPA appears to be promoting more supplemental monitoring.  CWSs want to use the best 
available data to guide such substantial decisions as changes in corrosion control and increasingly, EPA’s 
emphasis on documentation of compliance monitoring suggests a similar emphasis.  
Consequently, sample sites 
1. Will be less well described 
2. May, like site assessment sampling, reflect multiple samples from the same structure 
3. May compound existing geographic narrowing created by the sample pool tiers 
EPA was also deliberate in recognizing that post-exceedance supplemental monitoring may, for a variety 
of reasons, not utilize the monitoring protocols specified in the LCRI for compliance monitoring data. 

 
56 
In finalizing the LCRI EPA will need to provide additional clarity beyond what seems to be implied by the 
current requirement, including: 
1. Data collected under § 141.85(c) that does not have sufficient data to assure reliable Tier 
1 or 2 placement will be excluded from the compliance calculation algorithm 
2. Data from sampling protocols other than the specific protocols described § 141.86 will be 
excluded from the compliance calculation algorithm 
In finalizing the LCRI, EPA should not expand this provision to include either samples associated with 
service line replacement, lead connector replacement, service line disturbances, or general customer 
requested samples with the defined compliance data set.  Proposed Rule provisions beyond § 141.85(c) 
specify offering sampling with specific instructions, but for a different purpose than OCCT, including 
after a partial LSL or GRRSL replacement.75  Other instances in Proposed § 141.84 include distribution of 
education materials that promote sampling. 
Request for Comment 30: “Comment on whether State authority to specify sampling locations when a 
system is conducting reduced monitoring should apply regardless of the number of taps meeting sample 
site criteria.” 
CWSs and NTCWSs are submitting monitoring plans to the state for review prior to the initiating of 
monitoring.  Implicit in that review is an opportunity for the state to identify LCRI siting criteria that the 
system has not complied with and directing the system to correct those deficiencies prior to sampling.   
States should not be tasked with “specifying sampling locations” either when a system is conducting 
monitoring on a reduced frequency or under routine monitoring.  States have significantly less 
familiarity than individual CWSs with the distribution systems of the water systems they manage (even 
in comparison to other water system facilities states oversee, like water treatment plants), states lack an 
ongoing familiarity with the progress of each system’s lead service line replacement program (most 
systems are on routine monitoring schedules with two sample sets per year), the feasibility of placing 
new water quality parameter monitoring locations as required by § 141.85(i)(1), and other practical 
considerations the water system must consider in developing the monitoring plan.  
3.6 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
Request for Comment 31: “EPA is proposing a threshold of systems serving greater than 50,000 persons 
to host the inventory and plan online, which is the required threshold under the LCRR. EPA is seeking 
comment on the size threshold at which systems must host their publicly accessible inventory, inventory 
summary data, replacement summary data, and service line replacement plan online, and whether it 
should be lowered relative to the LCRR requirements.” 
EPA should not re-visit the system size threshold for placing these required documents on-line from the 
perspective of what minimum system size to set a requirement.  Rather, the final LCRI should incentivize 
on-line posting of these items by eliminating detailed data submittals to the state for all systems, 
regardless of size, that (1) post this information on-line, (2) update the postings with new information as 
required by the rule, and (3) provide the website link to these documents to the state.  
 
75 Proposed § 141.84(h)(1)(iv) and (3)(iv) 

 
57 
Request for Comment 32: “EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of non-
lead service lines in their inventory that were categorized using methods other than records review or 
visual inspection of at least two points along the line.”  
EPA correctly describes records review and visual inspection of at least two points along the service line 
as a sound and adequate basis for service line characterization for purposes of the LCRR and LCRI.  
Because EPA cannot delay CWS efforts and state oversight of ongoing inventory programs further, 
neither CWSs or states can wait for additional guidance on two-point visual inspection.  EPA should  
1. Immediately amend the existing LCRR guidance76 to clearly describe two-point visual 
inspection as captured in the proposal and  
2. Draft the LCRI final rule preamble and/or regulatory text to clearly describe two-point 
visual inspection.   
The Proposed Rule preamble and regulatory text provide a good description in that the current proposal 
is: 
1. Inclusive of customer assisted visual inspection of interior exposure of the service line 
2. Inclusion of combinations of customer provided inspections and CWS inspections of a 
service line 
3. Characterizes two-point visual inspection of a service line for purposes of validation as an 
external inspection 
4. Visual inspection of both the CWS and customer-owned service line where there is shared 
ownership 
5. Visual inspection can be accomplished through a single excavation where there is an 
opportunity to view the service line materials for both the CWS and customer-owned 
service line 
The sector continues to search for and test alternative techniques to characterize service line materials.  
The inclusion of a validation study should provide states with a greater openness to CWSs attempting to 
speed and improve characterization through new techniques.  It is not necessary, given the task at hand, 
to require more than two-point visual inspection as described in the proposal for validation.  Nor is it 
necessary to include service lines characterized based on records as approved by the state primacy 
agency.  The goal of the treatment technique is to take deliberate steps that reduce lead exposure and 
that is best achieved by focusing on addressing known lead sources in a timely fashion. 
The current regulatory text describing the pool of service lines subject to the validation study should be 
reworded to be clearer.  AWWA encourages EPA to adopt the following proposed edit to Proposed 
§ 141.84(b)(5)(i) to align the regulatory text with the description of the agency’s intent in the LCRI 
preamble:77 
“(i) The water system must identify a validation pool, consisting of all service lines categorized 
as ‘‘non-lead’’ excluding non-lead service lines identified by records described in paragraphs 
 
76 EPA, Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory (2022) EPA 816-B-22-001. 
77 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,935. 

 
58 
(b)(2)(i) through (iii) of this section, visual inspection of the pipe exterior at a minimum of two 
points (e.g., excavation, visual inspection in the meter pit or stop box, or visual inspection 
inside the home), or previously replaced lead or galvanized requiring replacement service lines 
from the validation pool. If a water system has no existing record on which to base service line 
characterization or documentation of a two-point visual inspection that indicates how an 
individual non-lead service line was categorized, that service line must be included in the 
validation pool.”78  
Request for Comment 33: “EPA is requesting comment on the number of validations required, the 
proposed 95 percent confidence level approach used to develop the number of validations required, the 
criteria for which methods used to categorize non-lead service lines should be included in the validation 
pool (including whether non-lead lines categorized based on records should be subject to validation), and 
the seven-year timeline for systems on a 10-year replacement deadline to complete the validation 
requirements.” 
95 Percent Confidence Level --  The table included in Proposed § 141.84(b)(5)(v)(ii) (Table 1 To Paragraph 
(b)(5)(ii)) correctly represents the sample size required to test the validity of a system’s assignment of 
service lines to “nonlead” with 95% confidence that the assignment is correct.  The use of a 95% 
confidence interval is ubiquitously used in scientific research as a demarcation of adequate confidence 
that a finding is worthy (e.g., there is an actual effect, correlation, etc.).   
A 95% confidence interval is adequate to the task of validating successful assignment of nonlead 
characterization to service lines as: 
1. EPA and state requirements and guidance have set a high bar for identifying service lines 
as non-lead  
2. In the limited number of instances when a service line is mischaracterized, there are 
multiple back-stops to reduce lead exposure (e.g., optimized corrosion control where 
needed, public education, triggered action in the case of subsequent LSL or GRRSL 
discovery) 
3. Either a service line verification performance standard or validation performance standard 
that relies on physical inspection of all or virtually all service lines lacking clear records 
misallocates limited resources that could be better focused on replacing actual LSLs or 
GRRSLs or meeting other local infrastructure needs. 
4. Physical inspection of service lines like service line replacement and main renewal involves 
disrupting neighborhoods, introducing heavy equipment into neighborhoods, altering 
traffic and pedestrian movement, excavating near other utilities (e.g., cable, gas, electric, 
etc.).  While the water sector has an outstanding safety record, such construction activity 
is not without risk of accident.  Unnecessary construction activity simply creates additional 
potential for unintended consequences without the prospect of providing meaningful 
improvement in available data. 
A practical validation study mechanism is important to CWSs facing two significant data gaps (1) access 
to service lines on private property and (2) distribution systems that have no known use of lead service 
 
78 Proposed § 141.84(b)(5)(i) with proposed edit. 

 
59 
lines but inadequate historical records for demonstration per the LCRR / LCRI.  In the first case, the 
default is to assume like material where there is knowledge of lead under the control of the CWS, so 
inferred material characterization on the customer side is inherently biased toward LSL / GRRSL 
characterization rather than non-lead.  In the latter case, validation affords the opportunity to avoid the 
wasted use of scarce community resources to prove a negative to meet an administrative requirement. 
Inclusion of Records Based Characterizations in Validation Pool --  The standard of care for records-based 
validations is sufficiently high and followed by field verification methods as outlined in EPA’s “Guidance 
for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory,” that the service lines in LCRR / LCRI 
inventories characterized based on qualified records will be sound.79   
The validation requirement will apply to post-LCRR inventories that have been supplemented with an 
additional three years of pre-LCRI compliance service line material verification and replacement 
program activity.  There are communities where the apparent number of LSLs has been reported to 
increase over initial estimates.  These instances do not justify a different validation approach than 
proposed, as such reports are a reflection of communities: 
1. Responding to the evolving definition of service lines of interest, including the addition of 
characterization of customer-side material characterization 
2. Expanding inventories to include GRRSLs as defined in the LCRR and LCRI 
3. Improvements in records-based characterizations following due diligence described in the 
LCRR and EPA’s “Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory”80 
The LCRR and now the proposed LCRI are intended to advance LSL and GRRSL replacement.  The Final 
LCRI should not expand the scope of the validation study to re-examining materials characterizations 
based on existing records.  Continued emphasis on re-examining service lines that are unlikely to 
represent a potential source of lead misdirects resources away from the objective of replacing known 
LSLs and GRRSLs. 
Seven-year Timeframe for Validation – EPA is correct in setting a schedule for validation studies prior to 
the targeted deadline for replacement of all LSLs and GRRSLs.  Seven years allows a three-year period for 
the CWS to adjust its replacement program if the validation study discovers a significant error in the 
CWS’s service line characterization practice.  The final LCRI including state primacy provisions in § 142 
and early implementation agreements with states should provide for state: 
1. Acceptance of validation studies prior to the required submittal in seven years and  
2. Review and response to CWSs as to satisfactory demonstration of service line material 
characterization within 120 days of receipt of a validation study 
Implementation of the LCRR, including the development of initial inventories, was significantly delayed 
because CWSs in many states lacked a regulatory partner at EPA or with individual states willing to make 
policy decisions in a timely manner.  For the LCRI to be successfully implemented, measures like the two 
proposed above will be needed to (1) incentivize systems that should be able to move through the 
compliance process smoothly to do so off-schedule, so that the volume of deadline driven submittals for 
 
79 EPA, Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory. EPA 816-B-22-001 (2022). 
80 Id. 

 
60 
state review is reduced, (2) systems that are relying more heavily on inferences from available 
information to characterize service line materials are incentive to assess their approach earlier in the 
available compliance timeframe, and (3) systems that do discover a need to improve their initial 
characterizations have more time to make adjustments in both their inventory verification program and 
their service line replacement program. 
Request for Comment 34:  “Comment on establishing a deadline for systems to identify all unknown 
service lines prior to their service line replacement deadlines.” 
EPA should not establish another compliance requirement within the treatment technique.  As AWWA 
has repeatedly noted throughout these comments, the Proposed Rule already contains provisions that 
are infeasible for many, if not all, CWSs.  Adding additional requirements, particularly when they are 
administrative or counting exercises, as well as new deadlines, will only distract systems from focusing 
their resources on replacing LSLs and GRRSLs are rapidly as is feasible.  
Furthermore, a one-size-fits-all solution is not appropriate here.  While each system will have to address 
service lines with inadequately characterized materials, the solution will be system-specific.  For some 
systems characterizing LSUSLs will be the most important aspect of meeting the LCRI requirements (e.g., 
systems that do not have LSLs or GRRSLs but cannot meet LCRR documentation requirements). Other 
systems have sufficient available records that a program to replace LSLs and GRRSLs that captures the 
remaining service lines of uncertain materials of construction as an incidental aspect of the replacement 
program.  Consequently, there is not a particular point in this proposed requirement where complete 
elimination of all LSUSLs is needed. 
EPA does not need to add a requirement that further constrains CWS’s approach to inventory and 
replacement program design.  To the degree that states are uncertain whether CWSs are making 
adequate progress addressing service line characterization, there are already multiple touch points in 
the Proposed Rule, including (1) initial inventory per LCRI and subsequent inventory per LCRR, (2) LCRI 
service line replacement plan, (3) nonlead characterization validation study, (4) annual updates on 
progress of the service line replacement program, and (5) annual updates of the service line inventories.  
As the LCRR/LCRI rulemaking proceeds implementation will occur during a period when there will be at 
least five sanitary survey cycles for CWSs subject to the LCR.81 
If EPA were to set a performance criterion for completing characterization of service line materials the 
agency will need to explicitly recognize how service lines where the property owner is not collaborating 
to allow full characterization of the service line will be addressed in the compliance metric.  The 
accounting of characterized unknowns should recognize effort by the CWS to engage the property 
owner as adequate. 
Request for Comment 35: “Comment on a requirement for systems to update their service line 
replacement plans if there are any changes, such as changes to laws and policies applicable to full service 
line replacement.” 
The proposed LCRI lays out a 10-year implementation window, which is preceded by a three-year period 
for preparation.  State and federal statutory and regulatory changes that occur during the initial 
preparatory window will be reflected in the initial plan submission. Similarly, federal and state 
 
81 40 CFR 142.16(o)(2)(i) 

 
61 
infrastructure funding program changes during that preparatory window would be considered in the 
initial submittal.  Subsequent revision of the plan should be limited to policy changes that would in the 
judgement of the CWS operator in responsible charge markedly accelerate or curtail service line 
material identification and replacement.  Submittal and posting on-line an addendum to or revision of 
the initial replacement plan should not be due any sooner than the next annual inventory update or in 
12 months, whichever is longer. 
3.7 
Lead Action and Trigger Levels 
Request for Comment 36: “EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of 0.010 mg/L, as 
well as comment and supporting data on alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, with regards to 
generally effective corrosion control treatment and identifying systems most at risk of elevated levels of 
lead in drinking water.” 
Revising the action level downward is a blunt technique to drive more systems to review corrosion 
control.  It is neither selective for those that are most at risk due to the high degree of variability in the 
lead occurrence data and the choice of the 90th percentile decision metric, nor is it selective for those 
systems that can actually modify their water chemistry effectively to further lower lead levels. As 
detailed further below, EPA’s emphasis on an action level is therefore misplaced and impractical and 
infeasible for systems. 
Proposed Lead Action Level -- As described previously in these comments, EPA has not illustrated in the 
preamble or included analysis in the LCRI proposal docket demonstrating that CWSs that have 
compliance sample pool datasets composed solely of Tier 1 (lead service line/lead plumbing), Tier 2 
(multi-family lead service line/lead plumbing), and Tier 3 sites (or just Tier 3) can keep their 90th 
percentile lead levels below the action level of 10 µg/L as required by the proposed LCRI.  Maintaining 
lead levels below the lead action level as described in the proposed LCRI requires CWSs to do so while: 
1. Monitoring on a routine monitoring schedule (6-month sample period and greater 
number of samples per period than are drawn by many systems are currently on triennial 
monitoring) 
2. Incorporating the higher lead value from first and fifth liter sample volumes when there is 
LSL at the sample site 
3. Including higher values should they occur in customer requested sample data accrued 
from customers with an interest in lead concentrations in the building they occupy 
Collectively, these requirements are not feasible for water systems to meet. While data in hand from 
LCR compliance monitoring is reassuring with mean population-weighted lead concentrations in low 
single parts per billion, the revised sampling protocol, revised sample tiers and compliance metric (90th 
percentile) focuses on the most extreme upper bound concentrations water systems observe.  The 
proposed Tier 3, galvanized plumbing, further exaggerates observed lead by targeting a pipe scale that 
in some circumstances has been seen as prone to particulate release as a result of factors other than 
active corrosion control management practice described by the LCR (as well as LCRR and LCRI) (e.g., 
oxidation reduction potential).   
The LCR with its action level and sampling construct primarily required controlling soluble lead which is 
the emphasis of CCT methods outlined in the LCR and now LCRI.  Lowering the action level while 

 
62 
incorporating lead observations from a fifth liter sample in compliance tap samples makes control of 
particulate lead control more critical. EPA has not provided analysis demonstrating that known CCT 
methods including orthophosphate can control particulate lead sufficiently for CWSs to reliably comply 
with the lead concentrations required by the proposed LCRI. EPA should revisit whether the agency can 
demonstrate the feasibility of the new compliance paradigm and whether adding a sample tier where 
iron corrosion is the dominant mechanism of action is consistent with the balance of the proposed LCRI 
construct.  As currently proposed and based on the current record, these requirements are not feasible.  
Alternative Action Level – 5 µg/L or Other Alternative -- EPA’s analysis of compliance data to support the 
lead action level of 10 µg/L does not support the proposed action level for the reasons described above, 
nor would that or similar analyses justify a lower level.  Recommendations that draw on a lower 
concentration citing examples from Europe would similarly be unconvincing as that compliance data is 
based on random, day-time samples rather than a highly biased sample as used in the LCR (and LCRR 
and LCRI).  The treatment technique that EPA establishes in the final LCRI must be achievable, not just in 
some systems, but reliably across the range of likely water qualities that exist in the United States.  EPA 
has not demonstrated that this is possible for an action level of 10 µg/L and therefore there is not a 
convincing weight-of-evidence that a lower action level of 5 µg/L would be reliably achievable while 
simultaneously assuring compliance with the Stage 1 Disinfection Byproducts Rule (e.g., disinfection 
byproduct formation), Surface Water Treatment Rule (e.g., maintenance of a secondary disinfectant 
residual), or Revised Total Coliform Rule (e.g., incidence of coliform bacteria with loss of secondary 
residual), or, simultaneously managing water system infrastructure longevity against corrosion. Or, 
management of secondary drinking water standards in the water reaching customer’s taps (e.g., iron, 
etc.).  These concerns regarding managing multiple facets of water quality are important not only under 
final equilibrium conditions once a system revises corrosion control, but also during the transition from 
one corrosion control equilibrium to another.  EPA is aware from instances like in Flint, Michigan where 
once water quality becomes unbalanced, correcting the situation can be technically challenging and 
difficult for the community that the CWS serves. 
Alternative Action Level Statistic -- The lead action level is made up of a concentration and a percentile 
occurrence (the 90th percentile).  Burlingame and Sandvig demonstrated that a central tendency 
estimate would provide a better metric for improving existing corrosion control practice.82  After more 
than 30 years of LCR implementation, the action level should be viewed most often in the context of 
improving on current CCT.   
EPA incorporated the 90th percentile into the treatment technique as a more conservative metric and 
retained that metric in the proposed LCRI while also expanding other elements of the treatment 
technique.  EPA provided both a technical and policy basis for its use of the 90th percentile in crafting the 
LCR reflecting the agency’s own analysis and the advice of the EPA Science Advisory Board.83, 84  Now, 
the proposed treatment technique would include additional risk reduction measures, including LSL 
replacement requirements applicable to all CWSs and NTNCWSs.  The proposed treatment technique 
 
82 Burlingame, G., A. Sandvig. How to Mine Your Lead and Copper Data. Opflow. Vol. 30. Issue 6. (2004). 
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1551-8701.2004.tb01760.x. 
83 EPA. Memorandum, Jeff Cohen, Chief Lead Task Force, Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water to Record, 
Subject: Sampling Requirements. May 3, 1991. 
84 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,479. 

 
63 
would also include public education both in the instance of individual observed lead values and broader 
community wide lead education (e.g., lead inventories, CCR, public education after an exceedance, 
customer notifications of service line disturbances, etc.).  Utilization of a more conservative percentile 
metric (e.g., 95th, 99th, or maximum) would further exacerbate the existing conservatism in the 
compliance metric, which would be even less related to effective CCT and lack a clear public health 
benefit. 
Identifying Systems Most at Risk of Elevated Lead Levels -- The lead action level is one component of a 
treatment technique.  Its purpose is not to identify the systems most at risk of elevated levels of lead.  
Rather, it’s role in the treatment technique is to (1) discern when corrosion control where absent can be 
introduced and thus moderate lead levels and (2) identify when existing corrosion control should be re-
evaluated.  The action level is based on a level of control that is “feasible” to reliably achieve in practice.  
Importantly, the action level value is part of a provision with many other facets including a monitoring 
framework (i.e., a defined sample pool from high-risk homes, number of samples per an approved 
sampling plan, defined sampling protocol) and a compliance calculation (e.g., 90th percentile metric, use 
of higher of two values from first and fifth liter at homes with LSLs, use of highest observed values 
including data from supplemental monitoring).  The sensitivity of this entire provision determines which 
systems are most likely to be identified for additional corrosion control.  In structuring the LCR, LCRR, 
and LCRI, EPA has increasingly focused on a relatively small subset of homes with actual lead pipe and 
now in the LCRI a subset of homes with galvanized pipe. This specificity is driving corrosion control for 
control of lead release well beyond what is warranted for the majority of the structures served by most 
CWSs.  To-date, EPA has not stepped back and evaluated whether this emphasis “identifies the systems 
most at risk of elevated lead levels.”  Recent history in communities like Flint, Pittsburg, Newark, and 
others illustrate that greater attention to ongoing system operations by system and state staff would 
have been much more sensitive to identifying systems at great risk than revision of the lead action level 
from 15 µg/L to 10 µg/L or 5 µg/L.    
Request for Comment 37: “EPA is also seeking comment on the use of the action level to determine when 
additional public education is required, and the use of the same action level for public education as for 
the CCT provisions.” 
Logical consistency within rulemaking -- In stating its intentions for revising the LCR in this rulemaking, 
EPA indicated that it intended to simplify rule implementation.85  One of the facets of the LCRR that EPA 
states that it is simplifying in response to public comment is eliminating the LCRR trigger level due to the 
confusion it created.86  Now in lowering the lead action level, a lead exceedance under the LCRI at 10 
µg/L will both trigger (1) Tier 1 public notice and (2) public education.  The LCRR set a lower threshold 
for technical evaluation of corrosion control to draw attention to corrosion control before determined 
efforts to communicate with the public about personal risk reduction measures was required.  If the 
public and state regulators found the LCRR construct difficult to understand, then there is little reason to 
believe that setting a higher or lower threshold for public education distinct from the corrosion control 
criterion will be understandable.   
 
85 88 Fed. Reg. at 84878. 
86 88 Fed. Reg. at 84899. 

 
64 
Non-exceedance public education greatly expanded -- With the LCRR, and now the proposed LCRI, EPA 
has significantly expanded the public education components of the LCR.  Many of the public education 
components are not triggered by the corrosion control criterion.  Examples include information to be 
conveyed to occupants of structures when a sample is analyzed for lead, materials to be delivered prior 
to returning service lines to service following partial or full replacement, and monitoring for lead in 
elementary schools and childcare facilities.  In effect the majority of the public education requirements 
of the Proposed Rule are now divorced from the lead action level.  Given the sustained public education 
elements anticipated for the foreseeable future, there is not an articulatable need to use an alternative 
action level trigger for public education. And as AWWA has repeatedly noted throughout these 
comments, adding additional burdens on system will only detract resources away from their ability to 
remove LSLs as efficiently as is feasible. 
More flexibility is needed for crafting public education materials -- Under the LCRR and now proposed 
LCRI, the requirements87 for the public education brochures and pamphlets does not facilitate effective 
communication. The proposed required specifies that certain information must be presented in a 
specific, exact order and exactly as presented in the regulatory text. The “order” a brochure or pamphlet 
that likely entails a multi-column format and hopefully includes graphics requires organizing so that the 
reader is drawn to read the information provided. 
Moreover, the current regulatory text does not reflect the flexibility that is needed for effective 
communication via electronic communications media, should EPA elect, facilitate use of a broader array 
of communication tools. 
Request for Comment 38: “EPA is seeking public comment, data, and information on the anticipated 
benefits and tradeoffs, including for public health and administrative burden on systems and States, if 
more small and medium systems are required to conduct a detailed OCCT demonstration and take other 
actions if they exceed the proposed action level of 0.010 mg/L or other lower values, while water systems 
are simultaneously required to mandatory conduct full service line replacement.” 
SDWA Requires Analysis -- EPA is required by SDWA (42 U.S. Code § 300g–1(b)(4)(E)(2)) to develop a 
“List of technologies for small systems … that achieves compliance with the maximum contaminant level 
or treatment technique” as a part of each rulemaking for a primary drinking water standard.  As 
described in the LCRI preamble, EPA did not conduct the requisite analysis, rather it relied on prior 
analyses developed to support an earlier LCR treatment technique.  That earlier analysis of the viability 
of corrosion control for small systems did not consider the management of lead release as required by 
the LCRI proposal.  EPA has a responsibility under SDWA to conduct the appropriate analysis to 
demonstrate the feasibility of corrosion control necessitated by this proposal for systems serving 10,000 
persons or less.  EPA appears to have only considered alternative technology solutions for systems 
serving 3,300 persons or less.  The feasibility of corrosion control given the distribution of water quality 
characteristics of small systems and states’ prior experience with oversight of small system compliance 
with the less challenging performance criteria of the LCR warrants more through consideration.  Given 
EPA’s historical reluctance to set a different small system technology standard, this analysis has 
implications for the viability of the proposed action level / monitoring framework/exceedance 
calculation proposed in the LCRI.   
 
87 Proposed § 141.85. 

 
65 
3.8 
Corrosion Control 
Request for Comment 39: “The proposed determination that the CTT treatment technique is feasible and 
prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible.” 
EPA has not described with any rigor in the Proposed Rule Federal Register notice or provided analysis in 
the associated docket that demonstrates that the proposed treatment technique’s optimized corrosion 
control treatment element is technically feasible.  In this rulemaking that element of the treatment 
technique includes: a lower lead action level, applies a new sampling protocol for homes with lead 
service lines, changes the sample pool to include homes with galvanized piping in the home, and retains 
high-dose orthophosphate addition as the anticipated optimal corrosion treatment.   
1. Prior experience under the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) does not provide EPA with data to 
demonstrate that the systems with water characteristics targeted by the Proposed Rule 
(e.g., those that were reliably compliant under a lead action level of 15 µg/L but not 
reliably below a lead action level of 10 µg/L can indeed make that transition within the 
constraints described in the Proposed Rule). 
2. Prior to this rulemaking EPA has focused the LCR on controlling the solubility of lead and 
copper. The LCRI rulemaking, for the first time, adds control of iron release to the 
regulatory corrosion control paradigm, as the stability of iron scales will underpin 
compliance for those systems sampling from Tier 3 structures.  
3. CCT methods reflected in the proposed LCRI and existing EPA corrosion control guidance 
are designed to address soluble lead through the formation of less soluble lead 
compounds such as forming hydrocerussite at higher pH or lead phosphate compounds. 
These CCT strategies do not control particulate lead or iron corrosion. Research by Zhao et 
al. show that orthophosphate addition can instead increase lead particulate release in 
lead service lines.88  
Also see response to Request for Comment 38 above regarding the lack of demonstration that small 
systems can effectively use corrosion control to comply with the Proposed Rule.   
The degree that the revised action level, monitoring protocol, monitoring tiers, and action level 
exceedance calculation will provide improved public health protection is not clear when (1) the 
proposed LCRI will require the replacement of all LSLs and GRRSLs and (2) the time required for 
evaluating and transitioning from one corrosion control treatment approach to another, when LSLs and 
GRRSLs are present, approaches the timeframe EPA proposes for replacing all such service lines.  In 
particular triggering change to a new CCT based on a fifth liter sample drawn from a LSL which will be 
removed within 10 years offers a limited period for public health benefit to accrue while requiring a 
substantial commitment of organizational focus and resources. 
To be clear, the available data also do not substantiate the feasibility of an action level lower than 10 
µg/L.  As EPA is aware there are primary drinking water standards for lead in other countries at lower 
concentrations (e.g., 5 µg/L) however, those regulatory frameworks do not employ comparable 
 
88 Juntao Zhao, Daniel E. Giammar, Jill D. Pasteris, Chong Dai, Yeunook Bae, and Yandi Hu. 2018. Formation and 
Aggregation of Lead Phosphate Particles: Implications for Lead Immobilization in Water Supply Systems.  
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2018, 52, 21, 12612–12623. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02788. 

 
66 
conservatism in the combination of required sampling protocol, sample site tiers, and exceedance 
calculation to make regulatory determinations.    
Request for Comment 40: “Comment on whether it would be more appropriate to require water systems 
to re-optimize again following an action level exceedance regardless of meeting their optimal water 
quality parameters and to provide the State with the authority to waive this requirement.”  
As described, the provision to not require re-optimization in the Proposed Rule is in the singular case of 
a system having already re-optimized and (2) the system is meeting required optimal WQPs (i.e., 
§141.81(a)(1)(A – C), (2)(A – C), and (3)(A-C)).  The proposed approach has merit in that re-optimization 
can involve a protracted process of analysis, preparation of the distribution system for a new or 
modified CCT strategy, implementation, and then transition to the new CCT strategy.   
Moreover, as the trigger for additional action (e.g., the lead action level, targeted sample pool, sampling 
protocol, exceedance calculation, and monitoring frequency) becomes more sensitive, the challenge of 
further adjustments to CCT practice becomes more challenging.  This is especially true when systems are 
facing simultaneous compliance challenges (e.g., DBP control), managing corrosion of multiple materials 
(e.g., lead and iron corrosion control), and consecutive systems (e.g., managing water(s) that others are 
stabilizing).  The emphasis on Tier 1, 2, and 3 sample sites in combination with a decision criterion set at 
the 90th percentile occurrence create a data stream where a few outliers in the exceedance calculation 
can significantly effect whether a CWS exceeds the action level of 10 µg/L.  This variability stems from 
factors beyond the CWS’s control.  With implementation of the LCRI sampling protocols will further 
exacerbate this variability.  
Request for Comment 41: “The proposed option for a water system to delay OCCT until after the system 
has replaced all of its LSLs and GRR service lines, while the system achieves at least 20 percent removal 
per year and must have no LSLs, GRR service lines, or lead status unknown service lines remaining at the 
end of the five-year period.”  
Recognizing that CWSs should not be attempting to optimize or re-optimize CCT in the midst of a 
significant transition in the materials of construction at issue, is an important improvement in the rule.  
Providing CWSs with the opportunity to remove LSLs and GRRSLs prior to optimization and re-
optimization should be included in the final LCRI.   
As a practical matter, the standard for receiving this relief as drafted (§ 141.81(f)(1)(ii)) will be too 
challenging for systems with any appreciable number of LSLs or GRRSLs to achieve, in that: 
1. All LSLs and GRRSLs must be fully replaced 
2. All LSUSLs must be characterized (and replaced if LSLs or GRRSLs) 
3. Every year of the five-year period the CWS must maintain a replacement rate of at least 
20%  
Consequently,  
1. A single uncooperative property owner would be sufficient to prevent a system from 
obtaining this relief (e.g., unwilling to participate in material identification or unwilling to 
participate in full service line replacement)   

 
67 
2. CWSs that face legal barriers to full replacement will be unable to utilize this provision 
3. CWSs that exceed the action level prior to their replacement program being fully mature 
will not be able to meet the annual replacement target (e.g., systems that exceed in the 
initial monitoring rounds under the new LCRI sampling pool and sampling protocol) 
Beyond the logistical impediments to using the provision as drafted, the cost of accelerated service line 
discovery and replacement would be significant.  For CWSs with even moderate numbers of LSLs, 
GRRSLs, and SLUSLs the long-term water quality benefits of delaying optimization cannot be realized 
due to the cost and logistics of meeting the Proposed Rule requirements.  The final LCRI provision 
providing this relief should be achievable both from a CWS and state oversight perspective, as both the 
CWS and state will have to (1) agree at the onset that the system can meet the conditions of the delay 
and (2) manage the situation in the event that the system does not actually meet the conditions. 
Prior comments regarding inventory, identification, and replacement would be relevant to improving 
the feasibility of this provision as well, including: 
1. Remove service lines for fire service and other non-potable purposes from the inventory – 
removing vacant properties from the inventory, identification, and replacement counts 
2. Allow administrative measures to prevent the use of a currently unused service line until 
such time as the service line is fully characterized and, if necessary, replaced – removing 
vacant properties from the inventory, identification, and replacement counts 
3. Recognizing that multiple attempts to engage a property owner in achieving either 
material characterization and service line replacement is adequate to consider the CWS’s 
duty as fulfilled 
The feasibility of the provision would also be enhanced by: 
1. Removing the annual replacement target 
2. Extending the identification and replacement window to 7 years in keeping with the 
schedule for a validation study under Proposed Rule § 141.84(b)(5)(i) 
Request for Comment 42: “The treatment recommendation and CCT study process can take multiple 
years to complete. For systems with existing corrosion control, the system may be able to alter the 
existing treatment (e.g., increase pH and/or orthophosphate dose) without a new CCT study on a much 
faster timeframe rather than waiting for study results that may recommend that same change. EPA is 
requesting comment on whether there are situations and/or conditions where existing treatment 
modifications may achieve similar lead reductions rather than delaying new treatment for two-and-a-
half years while a study is underway.”  
Corrosion Control Studies that are Fit-for-Purpose -- EPA is correct, there are instances when corrosion 
control can, and should, be modified without the delay associated with a pipe rig study.  That is not to 
say that there is a simple list of situations where there is a single no-regrets corrosion control solution, 
and high dose orthophosphate addition is not a panacea.  Rather corrosion control should be assessed 
through a thoughtful analysis that documents current conditions and evaluates corrosion control 
options, taking into account other likely changes underway.  In some instances, this analysis can be 
accomplished in days or weeks, and in others it will require supplemental data collection and perhaps 

 
68 
laboratory studies that require weeks or months to accomplish.  In the LCRI proposal § 141.82(c) 
describes corrosion control studies broadly.  It is possible to triage analysis and data collection more 
efficiently than is reflected in the Proposed Rule text.  Ideally corrosion control modifications do not 
involve major changes in corrosion control strategy which necessitate more extensive implementation 
timeframes. 
The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis assumes that only 33% of systems serving systems between 1,001 
and 50,000 with LSLs and no systems serving less than 1,000 will require any CCT study.  This is 
unrealistic given the attention to corrosion control by water systems and state regulators following the 
Flint, MI crisis (also see following comments in “The Sector Requires Additional Expertise”).89 
The Sector Requires Addition Expertise – In the LCRI preamble EPA accurately reflected that expertise to 
determine CCT in the sector is limited. That lack of expertise exists among consulting engineers, water 
system staff, and regulators.  EPA can look at the scarcity of relevant expertise in its own staff to 
recognize the ubiquity of the shortfall.  The answer to this challenge is not create a regulatory 
framework that encourages corrosion control changes and certainly not to create a rule that encourages 
such changes without a proper analysis.  
There are many instances where making a corrosion control change that seems logical can have 
unintended results. One such example is raising finished water pH assuming from theory that the scales 
that will form are hydrocerussite and that raising the pH will lower observed soluble lead. However, 
many pipes that are predicted by theory to have hydrocerussite actually have cerussite, In these 
situations at higher pH levels cerussite becomes more soluble and without the counter formation of 
hydrocerussite the lead release can get much worse. There is a similar situation that can occur with 
increasing orthophosphate addition. It is often assumed that higher orthophosphate will reduce lead 
release, or at worst, not have any observable effect. However, when iron is present on pipe scales an 
increase in orthophosphate can lead to the replacement of the amorphous anions associated with iron 
and that chemical change leads to the release of soluble lead—sometimes for an extended period of 
time.  Evaluating CCT does not always require conducting a two – three year harvested pipe study as 
described in AWWA training materials (see Appendix D) and WRF Project 5032 (see Appendix E).  There 
are many instances when a desktop study or a desktop study with ancillary benchtop studies or scale 
analysis may suffice.  But evaluation of CCT should not be skipped by either water systems or state 
regulatory agencies. 
AWWA has prepared an on-line training course outlining such an approach to adjusting corrosion 
control practice in collaboration with the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators (ASDWA) 
(See Appendix D).  WRF elaborated on this framework in WRF Project 5032 (see Appendix E) and Project 
5081 (See Appendix F).  AWWA strongly supports the recognition of a corrosion control study as an 
approach to winnow down the number of situations where corrosion control change is dependent on 
the pipe rack study described in Proposed Rule § 141.82(c)(3).  
AWWA identified the need for this more robust framework as EPA was preparing the LCRR.  More 
importantly, to implement the LCRI corrosion control provisions effectively, a robust training program is 
needed for state and federal regulators, consulting engineers, and water system operators.  AWWA 
 
89 Cornwell Engineering Group, Inc. Corrosion Control Study Pipe Loop Study Expanded Executive Summary, 
Prepared for City of Flint. Jan. 18, 2021. (see Appendix L) 

 
69 
prepared the course referenced above and is revising its Manual of Practice for Internal Corrosion 
Control M58 to support this need.  AWWA requests that EPA work with AWWA and other expert 
stakeholders to revise EPA’s current corrosion control guidance so that EPA’s guidance is aligned with 
the current state of the science and responsible practice in corrosion control optimization and 
implementation.  Integration of sector-developed guidance is not only the most rapid strategy EPA can 
pursue to update its dated corrosion control guidance, it is the only timely avenue to developing 
practical guidance.  Moreover, the utilization of robust consensus guides is consistent with the 
Technology Transfer and Advancement Act. 
3.9 
Compliance Alternatives for Lead Action Level Exceedance by a Small CWS or NTNCWS 
Request for Comment 43: “EPA is proposing that small system flexibilities be limited to CWSs serving 
3,300 persons and fewer and all NTNCWSs for the remaining compliance alternatives of point-of-use 
devices and plumbing replacement. EPA is seeking comment on whether the Agency should allow 
systems serving up to 10,000 persons (or another threshold) to be eligible to use the small system 
compliance flexibility provision.” 
Compliance alternatives should be equally available to CWSs -- The proposed LCRI small system 
flexibilities are markedly less than those included in the LCRR.  Small system flexibility does not eliminate 
(1) service line replacement or (2) public education requirements. The proposal’s flexibilities are limited 
to two alternatives to corrosion control, either (1) a permanent POU program or (2) removal of all lead-
bearing plumbing.  It is highly unlikely that either of these alternatives are feasible for systems that 
serve as many as 3,300 persons when the PWS is a village, town, city, or investor-owned water 
company.  Conversely, given the two alternative compliance mechanisms, why would EPA set an 
arbitrary limit based on service area population?  The feasibility of either of these strategies is a function 
of ownership arrangements and materials of construction, and EPA is aware that there are numerous 
examples of CWSs where the entire facility is under the control of a single entity.   EPA did not propose 
to limit the scope of alternatives available to NTNCWS based on system size; the agency should not 
place a size restriction on the applicability to CWSs.  
Request for Comment 44: “EPA is also seeking information, data, and analysis on whether point-of-use 
devices and plumbing replacement are as effective as OCCT at systems serving up to 10,000 persons (or 
another threshold).” 
EPA’s prior analysis of the viability of POU devices at larger system scales remain relevant.  This 
compliance option is limited to those CWS that are (1) an entity which has complete control of its 
plumbing (e.g., a housing complex with its own water supply) or (2) a CWS with a very small service area 
(e.g., tens of homes perhaps a bit larger).  Larger CWS serving individual customers (e.g., a town, city, 
county public service authority) might be able to distribute POU devices and obtain consent from most 
property owners to install a POU device in household kitchens.  But, the level of ongoing intrusive entry 
into every dwelling to provide ongoing maintenance and conduct required monitoring cannot be reliably 
sustained.  Even if such an effort could be sustained, the associated cost is prohibitive to conduct at 
scale on a permanent basis. 
Request for Comment 45: “EPA is requesting comment on the ability and practicality of point-of-use 
devices to address multiple contaminants.” 

 
70 
NSF International is the ANSI accredited organization in the United States setting standards to assure 
POU devices can be adequately tested to meet water quality claims.  NSF standards are publicly 
available to EPA, as are reports from the several organizations that test manufacturer’s devices against 
the NSF/ANSI standards.  The NSF/ANSI standards address removal of multiple contaminants by a single 
POU device.  EPA’s proposed drinking water standard for PFAS90, 91  illustrates how the current POU 
device testing standards, while robust, tend to trail drinking water standards.  In the PFAS rulemaking 
EPA is requiring PWSs to achieve effluent PFAS concentrations lower than required by the current 
NSF/ANSI standard and for a larger array of PFAS than the current NSF/ANSI standard includes.   
3.10 Public Education 
Request for Comment 46: “The proposed determination that the public education treatment technique is 
feasible and prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible.” 
The request for comment frames public education as a standalone treatment technique when it is in fact 
one component of the broader LCR treatment technique.  In total, the LCR treatment technique includes 
optimized corrosion control, lead service line replacement, and public education.  While the LCRI 
appropriately changes the trigger for service line replacement, separating it from OCCT, the three 
provisions within the treatment technique are deeply interwoven.  In order to assess whether the 
“treatment technique is feasible and prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent 
feasible” commenters must consider the entirety of the treatment technique not just the public 
education provisions in isolation. 
The public education provisions of the LCRI proposal contain elements that are not technically feasible 
as the Proposed Rule is currently drafted.  The Proposed Rule requires systems to contact individuals in 
timeframes that are unachievable in today’s property ownership, electronic communications-oriented 
economy due to restrictions imposed by the rule and practical constraints. 
Request for Comment 47: “Comment and supporting data on the capacity of water systems to conduct 
some or all of the required public education activities in 30 days, or another period of time that is less 
than 30 or 60 days, after the end of the tap sampling period in which a systemwide lead action level 
exceedance occurs.”   
The current expectation is that a public education program meet initial distribution requirements within 
60 days following the end of the monitoring period is already challenging.  Achieving compliance with 
the LCR public education requirements is already fraught within the current regulatory timeframe.  
1. The trigger for public education is actually the state decision that an exceedance has 
occurred.  This decision and notification of the system could occur weeks after the end of 
the tap sampling period.  
2. Provide the state adequate time to review and potentially modify educational materials 
prior to distribution to any of the targeted entities in the public education requirements.  
This review includes developing any required translated materials to the satisfaction of 
the state. 
 
90 88 Fed. Reg. at 18638. 
91 Docket Id. #: EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0114. 

 
71 
3. Procure printing and mailing services for required distribution while complying with 
applicable local, state, and federal procurement requirements including preferential use 
of minority and women-owned businesses. 
4. Meeting distribution requirements were first conceived when the local phone book 
reflected an accurate account of the entities listed in § 141.85(b)(2)(ii)(B) located within a 
system’s service area.  This is no longer the case further complicating distribution list 
development and updating.  
5. Distribute materials to entities identified by public health agencies (§ 141.85(b)(2)(ii)(A)) in 
an era of organizational databases with phone, email, and text contact information but 
not necessarily readily usable addresses for the LCR required delivery of written materials. 
The LCRI adds to an already challenging task, in that public education requirements must be met in the 
wake of a Tier 1 public notice, which for many medium and large CWSs will involve a community-wide 
notice via press release.   
The creation of additional arbitrary deadlines for facets of a public education campaign are unwarranted 
and unproductive.  Internal CWS milestones for public education are already compressed and additional 
regulatory milestones would further complicate reporting to the state and tracking of compliance by the 
state. 
Request for Comment 48: “Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water 
systems are capable of providing consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three 
calendar days of obtaining those results, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or copper 
action level, or if a longer time frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 
calendar days).” 
In the preamble EPA describes the proposal as requiring the delivery of sample results collected under 
§141.86 to the customer within three calendar days, with the option of providing the information 
electronically if there was a follow-up notification by mail within 30 days.  The preamble reads: 
“These are the same delivery options that the LCRR requires for water systems to deliver 
results that exceed the action level within three days; however, EPA is proposing that water 
systems that choose to deliver the notice by phone would be required to follow up with a 
written notice hand delivered or postmarked within 30 days of the water system learning of 
the results.” 92 
The actual proposed regulatory text does not match this description.  The proposed regulatory text 
reads: 
“Timing of notification. A water system must provide the consumer notice as soon as 
practicable but no later than three calendar days after the water system learns of the tap 
monitoring results. Notification by mail must be postmarked within three days of the system 
learning of the tap monitoring results.” (Proposed Rule § 141.85(d)(2)) 
 
92 88 Fed. Reg. at 84949. 

 
72 
… 
“Water systems must provide consumer notice to persons served at the tap that was 
sampled. The notice must be provided electronically (e.g., email or text message), by phone, 
hand delivery, by mail, or another method approved by the State. For example, upon approval 
by the State, a non-transient non-community water system could post the results in a 
conspicuous area, such as on a bulletin board, in the facility to allow users to review the 
information. Water systems that choose to deliver the notice to consumers electronically or 
by phone must follow up with a written notice to consumers hand delivered or postmarked 
within three days of the water system learning of the tap monitoring results.” (Proposed Rule 
§ 141.85(d)(4)) 
There are ample reasons to judge the Proposed Rule as infeasible, as reliably meeting the requirement 
for a postmarked envelope within three days of receipt of sample results is not feasible, including for 
the following reasons: 
1. The U.S. postal service is both closing post offices and curtailing office hours, making it 
infeasible for water systems to obtain the required postmarked envelope.  While this 
trend is particularly true in rural America, it also affects the ability of water systems 
located in urban / suburban areas, as the available remaining facilities in a metropolitan 
area may not be easily reached. In addition to being closed on Sundays and having limited 
hours on Saturdays, the postal service is closed on all 11 Federal holidays. Certain 
locations may be closed for other reasons including staffing shortages or natural disasters. 
Although it is possible to drop off mail into the postal system without visiting a postal 
location, a true postmark can only be obtained when a piece of mail enters the postal 
service’s care. It is unclear what the standard of care is for good-faith compliance.  Are the 
records required, a log of when notice was placed in the mail on a certain date or must 
the system retain proof of mailing by a certain date from the post office.  The latter 
typically requires a “certificate of mailing” (i.e., Postal Service Form 3817, 3665, 3877, 
3606, or 3606D) at additional expense and is not available with many classes of postal 
service.   
2. While neither the preamble or Proposed Rule text define “receipt of” sample results, 
virtually any practical description would include the opening of mail, an email, or 
notification of data being available in an electronic portal at a point in the day where once 
“received,” the CWS has a number of tasks for which appropriate staff must be present, 
including: 
a. Reviewing the laboratory’s work (quality assurance / quality control) 
b. Matching the sample result with the relevant occupant(s) contact information  
c. Putting the observed values into the template approved by the state for 
distribution with the education information required by the Proposed Rule 
d. Quality review of materials prior to distribution  
e. Transporting the result to the post office 
f. Documentation for required state tracking and reporting 

 
73 
EPA is proposing that this process be expedited within 3 calendar days (e.g., Monday, Tuesday, 
Wednesday, or equally, Friday, Saturday, Sunday).  In many, if not all, parts of the country this will not 
be achievable. 
With the above practical challenges in mind AWWA recommended alternative regulatory requirements 
in Sections 2.7 and 3.2 of these comments). 
Request for Comment 49: “Whether the proposed requirement for water systems to offer lead sampling 
to consumers with LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines in the notice of service line material is 
effective at reducing adverse health effects.” 
Proposed § 141.85 would require a system to “… offer to sample for lead in the tap water of any person 
served by a lead, galvanized requiring replacement, or lead status unknown service line who requests it 
…”. There is related language in § 141.85(c)(2).   
If EPA intends the CWS’s duty to be coordinating and dispatching staff or contractors to collect samples, 
this is very burdensome regulatory responsibility relative to the potential for actual risk reduction.  EPA 
should at a minimum clarify that the CWS is offering a sample kit with instructions to allow interested 
persons to sample their tap water.  EPA did not include the cost of “sampling” in the Proposed LCRI 
Economic Analysis, rather it assumed that CWSs would provide a sampling kit, collect that kit, and obtain 
laboratory analysis of the sample. 93  Because the sampling protocol required by the proposed LCRI is for 
a stagnant water sample, scheduling of “sampling” poses a considerable logistical burden well beyond 
what EPA is assuming in its presentation of the costs of the LCRI. 
Also, as this provision applies to structures with unknown service line materials there is the potential 
that such sampling would be requested by households in apartment buildings and other developments 
that are very unlikely to have a LSL or GRRSL and for that reason not prioritized for characterization early 
in the LCRI implementation window.  In this instance the burden associated with the requirement 
exceeds the likely risk reduction achieved through improved CWS access to customer property, the 
agency’s reason for the requirement.94   
In smaller structures that do have a LSL or GRRSL and have multiple housing units, the burden similarly 
exceeds the anticipated benefit as providing a single observation from one unit to a multi-unit dwelling 
would not suffice to meet this requirement. 
The burden of this provision is compounded by the associated proposed requirement that the CWS 
return the result within three calendar days of receipt and ongoing documentation the CWS’s 
performance of new responsibilities to the state.  CWSs engaged in customer requested sample 
programs routinely report that a substantial number of the customers that request sample kits do not 
actually follow through to collect and submit the sample. 
Request for Comment 50: “EPA is also requesting comment on the requirement for water systems to 
deliver consumer-initiated test results within three days of obtaining those results.” 
 
93EPA. “Oversee the customer-initiated lead sampling program (hrs_cust_request_oversee_op).” Proposed LCRI 
Economic Analysis. (2023). Page 4-37. 
94 88 Fed. Reg. at 84921. 

 
74 
EPA describes three-day delivery in the Proposed Rule in § 141.85(d)(2) as “postmarked within three 
days of the system learning of the tap monitoring results.”   There are multiple barriers to achieving this 
performance metric reliably, including:   
1. The U.S. postal service is both closing post offices and curtailing office hours, making it 
infeasible for water systems to obtain the required postmarked envelope.  While this 
trend is true of rural America.  It also affects the ability of water systems located in urban / 
suburban areas, as the available remaining facilities in a metropolitan area may not be 
easily reached. 
2. While neither the preamble or Proposed Rule text define “learning of the tap monitoring 
results” sample results, virtually any practical description would include the opening of 
mail, an email, or notification of data being available in an electronic portal at a point in 
day where once “received”, the CWS has a number of tasks for which appropriate staff 
must be present, including: 
a. Reviewing the laboratory’s work (quality assurance / quality control) 
b. Matching the sample result with the relevant occupant(s) contact information,  
c. Putting the observed values into the template approved by the state for 
distribution with the education information required by the Proposed Rule 
d. Quality review of materials prior to distribution including adequate 
documentation for required state tracking and reporting 
e. Transporting the result to the post office 
3. Delivering sample results within 3 calendar days would entail accessing the postal service 
not only on holidays (recognized federal holidays tend to create three-day weekends) but 
also during days of the week when postal office hours are very limited or post offices are 
closed (e.g., Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or equally, Friday, Saturday, Sunday).  
Although it is possible to drop off mail into the postal system without visiting a postal 
location, a true postmark can only be obtained when a piece of mail enters the postal 
service’s care. Furthermore, it is unclear if the requirement is asking that the water system 
retain records that it placed a notice in the mail on a certain date (which would address 
some of these issues) or if it is being asked to retain proof of mailing by a certain date 
from the post office. Proof of mailing typically requires a “certificate of mailing” at 
additional expense and not available with many classes of service (see 
https://faq.usps.com/s/article/Certificate-of-Mailing-The-Basics).  
This requirement has limited value as EPA describes the purpose of this task in the Proposed Rule to be 
improved CWS access to customer property.95  However, the burden of the requirement is substantial 
(e.g., the logistical challenges, cost, paperwork and public notice for states and systems that accrue 
violations for failing to meet the delivery timeframe).  The likely attributable benefit of this requirement 
is not warranted particularly when most observed values that are above the practical quantitation level 
(PQL) (i.e., reported as a numeric value rather than non-detect) are likely to be low microgram per liter 
 
95 88 Fed. Reg. at 84921. 

 
75 
concentrations that are as likely to reassure customers that there is not a problem as they are to 
heighten interest in collaborating with the CWS. 
With the above practical challenges in mind AWWA recommended alternative regulatory requirements 
in Sections 2.7 and 3.2 of these comments). 
Request for Comment 51: “Whether the types and timing of outreach activities proposed for systems 
failing to meet the mandatory service line replacement rate are appropriate and whether other activities 
should be considered.” 
The proposed outreach activities described in § 141.85(h) are appropriate to the situation and in 
keeping with outreach strategies that CWSs are able to implement at the frequency required (every six-
months). 
Request for Comment 52: “Whether EPA should require systems to annually notify consumers if they are 
served by a lead connector, in addition to notifications for sites with lead, GRR, or lead status unknown 
service lines.” 
Lead connectors do not warrant annual customer notification.  EPA was correct proposing the LCRI 
without including lead connectors in the definition of a LSL.  To require notification of customers about 
the presence (or potential presence) of lead connectors would similarly misdirect limited CWS resources 
and draw customer’s attention away from actionable risk reduction measures (Also see responses to 
Requests for Comment in Section 3.13).  Moreover, the combination of a responsibility to notify 
customers with lead connectors and customers with LSLs, GRRSLs, and LSUSLs would further complicate 
and potentially lead to duplicative notifications of the same customers. 
 Request for Comment 53: “Whether EPA should require additional public education requirements to 
further encourage swift service line replacement faster than the 10-year replacement deadline. For 
example, should water systems that have LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines five years 
after the compliance date for the LCRI be required to increase the frequency of the notification of service 
line materials from annual to once every six months?”  
Additional regulatory requirements for specific public education measures later in the service line 
replacement program would be detrimental to replacement program implementation.  First, where 
systems have significant numbers of service lines to characterize and or remove, program ramp up will 
take several years, and it is likely that there will be a significant number of LSLs and / or GRRSLs yet to be 
replaced.  Systems facing this challenge will need to maintain an organized and targeted 
communications effort.  The introduction of generic messaging like that described by Proposed § 141.85 
would distract from messaging being used to advance local programs, working within local constraints, 
and specific to local programmatic objectives.  In addition, the resources used to meet the distribution 
requirements of the public education provisions and document that effort per the regulation will be 
resources that are not otherwise available for needed community communications efforts and other 
replacement program needs. 
Request for Comment 54: “EPA is seeking information and data on when a system provides translated 
materials to consumers with limited English proficiency, what resources are used to translate materials 
(e.g., State resources, community organizations), and what barriers water systems may face in providing 
accurate translated materials.”  

 
76 
EPA has proposed requirements around translations and language assistance in its recent proposed 
updates to the Consumer Confidence Report Rule (EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0015), and AWWA provided 
detailed feedback about this issue, which it incorporates by reference here.96.  Although the 
requirements of notifications under LCRI are not identical to those of the CCR, many of the same issues 
apply.  Furthermore, because many of the requirements under LCRI are triggered by various events, the 
timeframe to complete and validate a translation will likely be shorter than the CCR. Key challenges 
include: 
1. Identifying when translations are necessary -- There appears to be no clear guideline for 
when translations are and are not necessary. Although there certainly will be instances 
where the need for translated materials is more self-apparent than others, there must be 
some threshold to guide action.  With hundreds of potential languages, translations are 
not possible for all communications for all languages (although it is closer to feasible with 
automated, on demand translation) and thus there must be clear and reasonable 
guidelines on when they are and are not needed. 
2. Leveraging federal resources for translation accuracy -- EPA required and recommended 
language tends to be complex and technical, making dialect and culturally-appropriate 
translations difficult.  Developing pre-approved translations of key materials (required 
language and templates, for example) in the most widely used non-English languages 
would reduce the burden and increase the likelihood of accurate translations, assuming 
the pre-approved translations are carefully vetted.  Absent this, there could be hundreds 
to thousands of different translations of roughly the same text, likely of varying accuracy 
and at much greater overall cost.  Even skilled translators will likely have different 
interpretations of the same words and phrases, meaning that a pre-approved translation 
is much more likely to be consistent.  
3. Understanding compliance of acceptable translations and accuracy -- What counts as an 
acceptable translation is an essential question. There are a variety of different approaches 
to translation, each with various advantages and limitations.  These include: 
a. Automated translation is an option, which typically allows for instant availability 
(and depending on the service, availability in nearly any language) and some 
studies show that automated translation rivals professional translation.97  The 
primary downside of automated translation is that it is typically not validated by a 
person and it may struggle with some technical concepts if the program has not 
previously seen them.  
b. Professional translation is another option. Although professional translation may 
be appealing from a regulatory and compliance standpoint, many highly skilled 
professional translators do not have technical backgrounds that would be 
required for accurate translation of complex technical materials.  Translation of 
many notices required under LCRI would likely require a specialized technical 
 
96 See EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0056. 
97 One example is Chatzikoumi, E. How to evaluate machine translation: A review of automated and human 
metrics. Natural Language Engineering, Vol 26, Issue 2. (2020 Mar.) Available at 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1351324919000469). 

 
77 
translator, for which it is unclear if there are enough to be able to meet demand, 
especially if the translations are needed quickly (a typical service timeline may be 
about a week, even when arrangements are made in advance).  
c. Translation by a utility employee or relative or outside entity is a third choice.  In 
systems with limited resources or who are otherwise not able to obtain a 
professional translation, it is possible a utility employee, a relative of a utility 
employee, or an outside entity (such as a community group) may be willing to 
assist with a translation.  Although this tends to require few resources, the 
accuracy of the translation can be questionable and difficult to validate.  The 
challenges with this approach lend themselves towards a combination of pre-
approved translations and automated translations (for text that cannot be pre-
written).  
Request for Comment 55: “Whether the Agency should require States, as a condition of primacy, to 
provide translation support to water systems that are unable to do so for public education materials to 
consumers with limited English proficiency.” 
In comments on the Consumer Confidence Report Revisions Rule, ASDWA described states as being 
opposed to being required to provide translation support to CWSs as a condition of primacy.98  ASDWA 
described that requirement as a conflict of interest with respect to the state’s oversight role.  ASDWA 
recommended that EPA develop resources to support translation of CCRs.  A review of the EPA website 
conducted in late December 2023, did not reveal any substantive resources to assist states or PWSs 
translate CCRs or other materials like the LCR-related public education materials and now in the LCRI 
public notice materials. 
In reviewing other available federal translation resources, the only substantive tool that seems designed 
for a similar task is the Federal Bureau of Investigations’ National Virtual Translation Center (NVTC).99 
While EPA, state drinking water programs, and PWSs do not have access to NVTC, EPA could contact the 
Bureau to discern the level of funding necessary to follow through on ASDWA’s recommendation for an 
EPA-provided translation resource. 
Request for Comment 56: “EPA is also requesting comment on additional ways to streamline public 
education and associated certification requirements (e.g., combine deadlines for systems to conduct 
public education or submit information to the State).” 
Electronic Delivery -- In revising § 141.85(b)(4) EPA provided the opportunity for NTNCWSs to 
communicate public education materials electronically, but Proposed § 141.85(b)(2) does not afford 
CWSs the same latitude.  Electronic delivery, when possible, facilitates greater integration of on-line 
resources into distributed materials.  Instructions to CWSs regarding delivery in § 141.85(b)(2) align 
distribution of public education with distribution of bills.  As customer billing is increasingly electronic, it 
is important that the public education requirements recognize this transition and allow CWSs to 
leverage the opportunities it creates. 
 
98 See EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0058, attachment_1. 
99 Available at https://www.fbi.gov/about/leadership-and-structure/intelligence/national-virtual-translation-
center.  

 
78 
Adherence to a Communications Plan – As EPA alludes to in the LCRI preamble and as a number of the 
AWWA documents referenced in the preamble convey, effective communications requires adequate 
planning and integration of required rule elements into a cohesive communication effort.  A mechanism 
to both streamline regulatory reporting, better organize required state review of public education 
materials, and achieve better integration of public education components is: 
1. Preparation of a public education plan during the period between the LCRI effective date 
and first compliance date three-years after promulgation with submittal to the state for 
review and approval.  That plan would include: 
a. Standard operating practices to log the execution of required public education 
tasks and to the degree necessary maintaining adequate documentation and 
records for audit purposes 
b. Templates that would be used to adhere to the required public education content 
c. Templates and practices that would be used to adhere to required efforts to assist 
individuals with limited English proficiency 
d. Approach to integrating available communication channels include electronic 
information delivery 
2. An annual certification by the operator in responsible charge that the system is adhering 
to the public education plan 
3. Regular review of adherence to the public education plan during sanitary surveys (e.g., 
every three years for CWSs) 
4. A mechanism for updating the public education plan on an ad hoc basis (e.g., a review and 
update of outreach plans in the event of a lead action level exceedance) 
Coordinated Distributions -- The implementation schedule for the LCRI will lead to systems (1) 
conducting regular annual outreach to customers with LSLs, GRRSLs, and LSUSLs and (2) exceeding the 
action level in years four and five post-rule promulgation.  There will be opportunities at these systems 
to combine mailings for some or all of their customers.  Taking advantage of opportunities to economize 
on distribution cost and better integrating messaging across these two parallel activities should be 
encouraged by the rule reporting and recordkeeping requirements.   
Reducing Reporting -- Even if the agency does not adopt the above recommendation for the 
development of a public education plan and annual certification to adherence to that plan in lieu of 
multiple individual filings and certifications, all of the public education requirements could be reduced 
to a single annual certification and a record retention requirement that allows the state to audit the 
certification if necessary and on a regular basis during sanitary survey reviews. 
3.11 Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances 
Request for Comment 57: “Whether water systems should be required to take additional actions when 
the system exceeds the lead action level multiple times and if so, what actions are appropriate and 
feasible, and when these additional actions should be required under the LCRI.”  
Focus Should be on CCT -- The LCRI should not require additional actions based on multiple action level 
exceedances.  Almost all of these systems are reliably maintaining lead levels below the current action 

 
79 
level of 15 µg/L.  Looking nationally, the 90th percentile population-weighted lead concentration is 2.97 
µg/L.  Still, available data indicate that under the LCRI regulatory framework on the order of 40% of 
systems with LSLs will exceed the lowered lead action level given the sampling protocol, sample pool, 
and exceedance calculation. Systems in this category will be required by the Proposed Rule to adhere to 
the routine monitoring schedule (i.e., new opportunities to exceed the action level every six months).  
The systems that find themselves in a single exceedance, will also face the increased potential for 
sample values from supplemental monitoring data being introduced into their exceedance calculation.  
This supplemental data is likely to be lower quality data, yet systems will be required to use the portion 
of this data the state believes is appropriate regardless of data quality concerns.  These systems cannot 
exit routine monitoring for at least two consecutive monitoring periods below the action level.  Systems 
that are allowed to move to reduced monitoring are then on annual monitoring with samples being 
drawn during June, July, or August, which are prone to higher lead levels.  In this monitoring regime, the 
number of systems that find themselves with multiple exceedances will be significant.   
The process of adjusting corrosion control can for multiple reasons be protracted, including (1) analysis 
to discern how to revise corrosion control, (2) testing one or more options in pipe rigs for an adequate 
period of time, (3) making adjustments in system operations to slowly transition to the new corrosion 
control strategy, (4) conducting preparatory steps like additional flushing of the distribution system, (5) 
implementing and verifying the revised CCT, and (6) when existing facilities are inadequate obtaining 
necessary financing and undertaking required construction.  EPA has not demonstrated that systems 
with challenging waters can reliably avoid exceedances at an action level of 10 µg/L, we should assume 
that many systems that exceed the action level and state regulators will be taking a careful approach to 
revising corrosion control electing to have an ongoing exceedance over multiple monitoring cycles 
rather than making an inappropriate change.  CWSs that are focused on assuring appropriate corrosion 
control and a smooth transition to that corrosion control strategy should not be penalized by the final 
LCRI framework.  
Requiring additional actions would distract from the Proposed Rule’s focus on optimizing corrosion 
control treatment.  As the purpose of the lower action level and related monitoring changes is to 
improve corrosion control rather than demonstrate compliance with a health-based concentration, 
there is not health basis for requirements that distract from the intended role of the action level trigger, 
including making filters available to consumers. 
Request for Comment 58: “Whether EPA should use three action level exceedances in a five-year period 
for identifying systems with multiple action level exceedances where additional action is warranted and, 
whether additional actions should be required sooner, or later, than the five-year period, or whether EPA 
should use a modified metric (number of consecutive action level exceedances in a set time period) or a 
different metric entirely (i.e., based on one or more factors other than the number of action level 
exceedances in a set time period).”  
EPA should not require additional actions or pursue an alternative metric to trigger additional action by 
systems that experience multiple exceedances.  See response to the prior Request for Comment 57 for 
the basis for this comment. 
Request for Comment 59: “The proposed public education activities after a system exceeds the lead 
action level multiple times. EPA is specifically seeking any information, data, or analysis on whether the 
proposed public education activities support preventing adverse health effects in this situation.”  

 
80 
As EPA has described in the preamble to the LCRI, the 10 µg/L lead action level is not a health-based 
value, it is a trigger for greater focus on corrosion control practice.  The LCR and now the LCRI contain 
public education measures that inform the public regularly about additional risk reduction steps they as 
individuals can take.  Because EPA is choosing to lower the action level, multiple exceedances, 
particularly in the initial implementation period simply reflects the sensitivity of the new trigger for that 
additional focus, not a health concern.  Recall that even using first liter, stagnant water compliance 
sample observations to represent occurrence, population-weighted lead levels under the current LCR 
are in the low single digit microgram per liter concentration range.  Additional public education 
measures is an administrative burden that neither (1) affords additional health risk reduction or (2) 
accelerates improving corrosion control practice.   
Request for Comment 60: “EPA is also requesting comment on whether systems should be required to 
conduct more than one (e.g., two or three) of the public education activities proposed.” 
EPA should not require additional public education activities by systems that experience multiple 
exceedances.  See responses to the prior Requests for Comment 57 and 59 for the basis for this 
comment. 
Request for comment 61: “Whether EPA should require water systems to make filters certified to reduce 
lead and replacement cartridges, along with instructions for use, available to all consumers within 60 
days of a system having multiple action level exceedances and whether there are any supporting or 
contrary data on whether the proposed filter requirement would be protective of public health.” 
EPA should not require water systems that exceed the lead action level multiple times to make filters 
available to all consumers. Nor should EPA require within the treatment technique the provision to 
consumers either filters or bottled water in (1) the event of an LCRI lead action level exceedance or (2) 
prophylactic until such time as LSLs or GRRSLs can be replaced.  There may be instances where 
conditions are such that one of these protective measures are warranted, but that decision should be 
made based on site-specific facts by the primacy agency in collaboration with the PWS.  AWWA has 
previously provided an analysis of the cost of providing filters and bottled water on a community-wide 
basis to EPA (See Appendix I).100  The costs of such a program are substantial, expending resources that 
could be better applied to control measures emphasized in the rule (e.g., service line replacement and 
corrosion control). 
Filters Not Beneficial to Most Consumers – EPA’s Proposal to require that CWSs make filters available to 
all consumers would force CWSs to expend resources when typical lead levels are much lower than lead 
levels observed in the highly biased compliance monitoring data set.  Exceeding the action level under 
the LCRI will occur based on stagnant water samples, from homes with LSLs / lead plumbing or 
galvanized service lines / galvanized plumbing, which is typically a limited portion of the total number of 
service lines in a community.  Data from systems with LSL that are likely to exceed the Proposed Rule 
lead action level illustrates that despite the high likelihood of an exceedance very few tap water samples 
from other service line / plumbing material configurations are likely to be elevated (see following table). 
 
100 Arcadis, Comparing the Cost of Bottled Water vs In-Home Filter Provision for a Lead Action Level Exceedance 
(2022).  

 
81 
CWS 
LCR Category 
(Population 
Served) 
EPA 
Region 
Sample Protocol 
90th Percentile 
Observed 
Lead (µg/L) 
1 
>50,000 
5 
>6 hr. stagnation, 1st L 
ND (< 5) *  
2 
>50,000 
3 
>6 hr. stagnation, 1st 
and 5th L 
< 5.6 * 
3 
>50,000 
1 
>6 hr. stagnation, 1st L 
< 3 * 
4a 
>50,000 
3 
>6 hr. stagnation, 1st L 
< 1 * 
4b 
>50,000 
3 
>6 hr. stagnation, 5th L 
< 5 
5 
>50,000 
2 
>6 hr. stagnation, 1st L 
< 3 * 
“*” indicates two or more years of data where every year the observed 90th percentile 
was less than x throughout that period 
Action Level Not Health-Based -- EPA stated clearly in the LCRI preamble that the lead action level is not 
a health-based value, exceeding that value functions solely as a trigger for action by the water system 
and state to establish or improve optimized corrosion control.  Provision of filters to an entire 
community does not contribute toward achieving the goal of the treatment technique. This proposed 
requirement does: 
1. Foreclose state and system efforts to inform the community about the challenge at hand 
and how the CWS is resolving that challenge.   
2. Contradict longstanding practice that decisions to require CWSs to provide consumers 
with additional health risk reduction information or measures (e.g., boil water notices, 
bottled water, filters) rest with the system and state, and that those decisions are fit-for-
purpose given the risk at hand, available options for risk mitigation, the scope of the 
challenge, and other situation specific variables. 
3. Conflict with the LCRI construct which is focused almost exclusively on better 
management of lead release associated with LSLs and GRRSLs.  The LCRI revises the 
sampling protocol, sample pool and compliance metric to emphasize homes where LSLs or 
GRRSLs are present – exceedance of the action level for lead is intrinsically linked in this 
rulemaking to those homes not all structures in a community. 
4. Fail to recognize ongoing public education measures which are reaching all customers 
through multiple distribution strategies that contain information about lead risk reduction 
measures that individual consumers can take based on their circumstances. 
5. Place additional stress on the supply of available water filters certified to ANSI/NSF which 
system are also required to deliver to occupants of structures where there is a LSLR or 
GRRSL replacement. 
6. Pose a substantial logistical challenge and distraction from the Proposed Rule’s priority 
risk reduction measures – removing LSLs / GRRSLs and improving corrosion control.  EPA 
has underestimated the number of systems that will be triggered into this provision by the 
Proposed Rule and underestimated the expense of implementation. 

 
82 
7. Present a practical implementation hurdle for very large CWSs or even CWSs of more 
moderate size, obtaining a supply of filters to make them available to consumers within 
the required timeframe would face the practical hurdle of inadequate supply and the 
administrative and financial hurdles of obtaining the supply while also complying with 
local, state, and potentially federal procurement policies.  Note, this is not a declared 
emergency where administrative requirements can be streamlined because there is a 
pressing public health risk.  This is now a routine aspect of rule implementation where the 
rule is requiring an additional prophylactic measure which in most instances will not 
provide actual health risk reduction benefits because typically few homes have sources of 
lead as severe as the targeted compliance sample pool. 
In estimating the cost of this provision EPA also makes several assumptions that should be revised to 
reflect the cost of the provision more accurately.  The current analysis severely underestimates the cost 
of such a program: 
1. EPA should assume that all systems that exceed the lead action level trigger this provision.  
With the requirement to return to routine monitoring (i.e., every six months), lower action 
level of 10 µg/L, revised sampling protocol, revised compliance algorithm, addition of 
highest lead observations from supplemental monitoring, and revised sample tiers not 
only will a significant number of systems exceed the action level, but they will do so for 
multiple monitoring periods soon after compliance with the final rule requirements 
begins. 
2. Once triggered into provision of filters the period of performance will represent both (1) 
the time required to complete the required corrosion control studies, including required 
pipe rig testing as specified, and (2) the criteria for ending the filter program.  
3. The EPA analysis draws on first and fifth liter occurrence data from Michigan’s compliance 
data, but it goes on to apply a multiplier based on the average incidence of exceedances.  
This approach is inappropriate for estimating the upper tail of the occurrence distribution.  
4. The analysis goes on to annualize the cost of the filter program over 35 years when the 
cost of the program will be borne by the systems under for a much shorter period. 
5. The agency analysis appears to discard large cities from its cost estimate when the 
analysis actually indicates that those systems would be triggered to make filters available.  
Request for comment 62: “The proposed requirements for systems to develop a filter plan and submit to 
the State after the system has multiple action level exceedances for the first time, and whether EPA 
should require systems to take additional actions to facilitate filter distribution.” 
EPA should not require water systems that exceed the lead action level multiple times to make filters 
available to all consumers.  If EPA finalizes the rule including such a requirement, it should make every 
effort to minimize the burden the requirement places on water systems. 
Request for Comment 63: “Alternative requirements for systems with multiple action level exceedances 
to provide filters to their consumers, such as requiring water systems to provide filters and replacement 
cartridges to consumers served by an LSL, GRR service line, or unknown service line or to all consumers, 

 
83 
or to require systems to consult with the State upon meeting the criteria for multiple action level 
exceedances, after which the State determines the appropriate action to reduce lead exposure.” 
EPA should not require water systems that exceed the lead action level multiple times to make filters 
available to all consumers.  If EPA finalizes the rule including such a requirement, it should make every 
effort to minimize the burden the multiple action level exceedances requirement places on water 
systems.  For example, most systems in this situation will be exceeding the action level based on a 
dataset drawn from a subset of buildings with service line / plumbing material characteristics that are 
not typical of the bulk of buildings in a CWS’s service area.  Consequently, if filters were to be made 
available there should be a focus on that subset of households rather than “all consumers.”  See 
responses to Requests for Comment 57, 59, and 61 for the basis for this comment.  
Request for Comment 64: “An additional provision providing discretion to States to allow systems with 
multiple action level exceedances to discontinue the proposed required actions sooner if the system takes 
actions (e.g., installs optimized or re-optimized CCT, completes mandatory service line replacement) and 
is at or below the lead action level for two consecutive monitoring periods.” 
If this provision (§ 141.85(j) and associated requirements) is retained in the final LCRI, EPA must specify 
clear criteria a state must use to “tailor” requirements.  If the authority is going be explicitly included in 
the federal rule it must have a clear basis that can be consistently applied.  The wiser alternative is to 
eliminate the multiple action level exceedances provision from the final federal rule.   
Request for Comment 65: “Whether, in addition to the proposed requirements, EPA should provide 
States discretion to determine appropriate action following a multiple action level exceedance that is 
tailored to meet specific system needs.” 
If this provision (§ 141.85(j) and associated requirements) is retained in the final LCRI, EPA must specify 
clear criteria a state must use to “tailor” requirements.  If the authority is going be explicitly included in 
the federal rule it must have a clear basis that can be consistently applied.  The wiser alternative is to 
eliminate the multiple action level exceedances provision from the final federal rule.   
3.12 Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities 
Request for Comment 66: “Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or to sample 
more frequently in schools and child care facilities.”  
EPA should not require CWSs to (1) collect more water samples for lead analysis from individual schools 
or child care facilities in any one round of monitoring, (2) collect samples from a broader group of 
schools or child care facilities, (3) collect the required samples in schools more quickly, or (4) participate 
in additional cycles of monitoring for lead in schools.  As discussed in Section 4 of these comments, the 
current requirements are beyond the intended scope of SDWA. 
Facility owners have a duty -- Schools and child care facilities have a responsibility to provide a healthy 
environment for the children in their care.  Most states already have regulatory regimes to assure 
educational and childcare facilities provide a safe environment for the children in their care.  EPA, the 
Department of Education, the Department of Health and Human Services, and many state agencies have 
extensive guidance on the management of all environmental hazardous at these facilities.  These 
materials guide facilities toward prioritizing and managing risks across multiple media with an emphasis 
on achieving remediation.  Lead in water is no different. 

 
84 
AWWA and EPA have been engaged in a “Memorandum of Understanding on Reducing Lead Levels in 
Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities.”101 This voluntary program is not geared toward a 
few samples but rather a sampling program that is appropriate to the structures being evaluated.  
Instead, the Proposed Rule, like the previous LCRR, will inappropriately make CWSs responsible for: 
1. Sampling in facilities where they do not have authority to enter 
2. Implementing sampling protocols that require the cooperation of school and childcare 
facility staff 
3. Providing information to the school that alone is inadequate to guide decision-making 
for decision-makers responsible for those facilities 
4. Placing schools and childcare facilities in a confrontational position with their respective 
communities 
5. Place CWSs in a confrontational position with the schools and childcare facilities they 
serve 
Retention of the LCRR § 141.92 provisions with clarifications is sufficient to draw attention to managing 
lead in these facilities where it has not already occurred.  Imposing additional burden for this task on 
CWS distracts from the primary purpose of the LCRI and the role of the CWS in the communities they 
serve.   
State Legislatures Have Acted – Schools and day care facilities, while only subject to SDWA in special 
circumstances (i.e., when the state deems that facility a PWS), they are subject to state law.  In February 
2023 Environment America and U.S. PIRG Education Fund updated earlier work to reflect lead tap 
monitoring and other elements of state lead in school drinking water statutes and regulatory 
requirements. The authors report that 29 states have considered the need for and established 
monitoring requirements for lead in tap water at schools as well as other measures through state law.102  
Moreover, if Congress had intended for EPA to develop a mandatory monitoring program for lead in 
schools it would have replaced the Lead Contamination Control Act in the wake of Acorn vs Edwards103 
with such provisions and required schools to undertake tap water monitoring in schools and child care 
facilities under federal law. 
Request for Comment 67: “The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community water 
systems from the requirement for lead sampling in schools and child care facilities during the five-year 
period after the LCRI compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021 but prior 
to the LCRI compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver requirements of § 141.92(h).” 
 
101 EPA. Memorandum of Understanding on Reducing Lead Levels in Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care 
Facilities (Updating 2005 MOU). (2019). Available at https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/mou-
reducing-lead-levels-drinking-water-schools-and-child-care.  
102 Environment America and U.S. PIRG Education Fund. 2023. Get the Lead Out, Grading the states on protecting 
kids’ drinking water at school. February 2023.  
103 Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now et al versus Edwin Edwards et al. U.S. Court of Appeals 
for the Fifth Circuit. No. 94.30714. April 22, 1996. 

 
85 
Revise § 141.92(h)(5) to remove constraint that alternative state approved monitoring in schools and 
child care facilities must occur after January 1, 2021.  Some states and systems have moved forward 
more expeditiously than EPA to conduct awareness building lead monitoring these facilities before and 
subsequent to the proposal of the LCRR (§ 141.92(d)).  EPA should recognize these more proactive 
programmatic efforts subject to the other aspects of conformity with the required monitoring program 
under § 141.92. 
Request for Comment 68: “Whether or not to allow States to waive the requirements of § 141.92 for 
CWSs in schools and child care facilities that use and maintain filters certified to reduce lead, and if so, 
whether the waiver should only be allowed where schools and child care facilities are required by State 
or local law to install POU devices and maintain them.” 
Where child care and schools have installed and maintain appropriately certified point-of-use devices for 
drinking water and cooking uses, the facilities have clearly achieved the objective of the LCRR school 
monitoring program.  The facility administration is aware of lead in water as a concern, it has assessed 
the situation in the facility(ies) under its control, and it has installed and maintains a risk management 
strategy that EPA recognizes as adequate in both the LCRR and the LCRI for small CWSs and NCWSs.  The 
same attention and action by the facility’s owner / operator is true when steps have been taken to 
eliminate use of potable water for consumption and where water outlets for drinking and cooking have 
been updated with modern lead-free compliant fixtures.  In these instances, additional monitoring by 
the CWS is not necessary and should not be required. 
Addressing this situation logistically through a “waiver” would be challenging (§ 141.92(h)(1)(ii).  A more 
efficient mechanism to address this situation is to modify § 141.92(a)(1) – (2) to exclude systems with 
these risk reduction measures in place.  Associated preamble and guidance could speak to the use of 
local ordinances, school board administrative instructions, and state laws or regulations as a basis for 
CWS certification of best efforts to compile the list of schools and child care facilities it must sample 
(§141.90(i)(3)(i)).  
Section 141.92(a)(1) – (2) could be revised as follows: 
“(a) General requirements. (1) All community water systems must conduct public education 
and lead monitoring at the schools and child care facilities they serve unless  
(i) those schools or child care facilities were constructed or had full plumbing 
replacement on or after January 1, 2014 or the date the State adopted standards that 
meet the definition of lead free in accordance with section 1417 of the Safe Drinking 
Water Act, as amended by the Reduction of Lead in Drinking Water Act, whichever is 
earlier., or  
(ii) Disconnected affected fixtures used for water consumption; 
(iii) Replaced affected fixtures used for water consumption with fixtures certified as lead 
free; and 
(iv) those schools or child care facilities provide water for drinking and food preparation 
through point-of-use devices meeting NSF/ANSI Standard 53 for total lead removal 
and NSF/ANSI Standard 42 for fine particulates (Class I).    

 
86 
(2) The provisions of this section do not apply to a school or child care facility that is 
regulated as a public water system.”  
Request for Comment 69: “The minimum requirements for States to provide a waiver (e.g., should the 
waiver be limited to locations where the filter use is required by State or local law; should the waiver be 
limited to locations where State or local law requires periodic sampling or testing to ensure proper filter 
use).” 
The regulatory relief that is the topic of this request for comment should not be limited to instances 
where there is a local or state law requiring the use of filters.  See response to Request for Comment 68 
for the basis for this comment and an alternative approach. 
Request for Comment 70: “Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and child care facility 
sampling results publicly available, and if so, how frequently and in what manner.” 
The Proposed Rule, like the prior LCRR, requires the CWS to obtain the cooperation of school district 
staff and leadership, school facility staff, and child-care owner/operators and their staff.  EPA should not 
place CWSs in the position of having to disclose observed results publicly.  Rather the entities 
responsible for the care of the children in those facilities should have the opportunity to communicate 
the results to parents and staff.  Usurping the role of communicator further stretches the legal 
credibility of § 141.92 and importantly creates additional unproductive friction with these facilities, 
which will lead to lower participation rates in sampling by school and day care facilities. 
3.13 Reporting and Recordkeeping 
Request for Comment 71: “EPA is requesting comment on the expansion of the inventory reporting to 
include lead connectors and non-lead service lines.” 
EPA should not require the addition of lead connectors to the inventory.  As described in the following 
the associated potential health benefit is limited and the associated challenges shift resources from 
complying with provisions that afford additional risk reduction.  Moreover, CWSs will have just 
completed the inventories required under the LCRR and this requirement would necessitate a new 
round of records review and field investigations.  
Including Lead Connectors in Inventory -- The tracking of lead connectors should be an element of the 
system’s materials evaluation (i.e., § 141.42(d) as referenced in LCRI at § 141.86(a)(i)) rather than an 
element of the inventory as described in the Proposed Rule at § 141.84.  Lead connectors should not be 
included in the inventory at all, but if included, need not be categorized in the extraordinary detail 
included in § 141.84(a)(2)(ii).   
Lead connectors, that is a “short segment of piping not exceeding two feet” (§ 141.20), are a distraction 
that CWSs can ill afford when considered in the broader context of replacing LSLs and GRRSLs and doing 
so within the timeframe EPA proposes in the LCRI.  Where lead connectors were not already being 
replaced in the course of ongoing CWS infrastructure work, the LCRI will require CWSs to replace them 
when encountered (§ 141.84(e)). Lead connectors will almost exclusively exist where there is a LSL, 
GRRSL, or galvanized service line that has not been replaced.  In many, if not most, CWSs there is little 
distinction between a GRRSL and a galvanized service line, given the high documentation standard for 
demonstrating a galvanized service has never been preceded by lead service line.  An emphasis on 
documenting lead connectors to the degree expected for (1) regulatory filings and (2) presentation to 

 
87 
the public shifts limited available resources away from activities that EPA is emphasizing as an important 
risk reduction measure – identifying and replacing LSLs and GRRSLs.  EPA does not have strong basis for 
include GRRSLs in the LCRR / LCRI inventory and service line replacement requirements.  The premise for 
identifying and proactively targeting these two-foot long or less lengths of lead pipe is weaker still in 
that these short lengths of pipe will tend to be located at a distance from the building such that drawing 
water into the building is unlikely to result in a discernable increase in lead concentration.  As a result 
research to-date has not demonstrated a significant effect on observed lead levels from lead 
connectors. 
Including Non-Lead Service Lines in Inventory – Section 141.90 (e)(1), (2), and (4) as proposed limit the 
system’s duty to report to the LSLs, GRRSLs, and LSUSLs.  This is consistent with the currently codified 
LCRR regulatory text. Because the current proposal requirements for reporting the inventory are so 
burdensome (i.e., § 141.90(e)(4)), EPA should not require reporting of nonlead service lines.  Reducing 
the reporting to those service lines of interest in the rule  
1. Reduces the burden associated with data transfer, especially when states require the use 
of specific data submittal formats that are not amenable to bulk data submission from 
existing CWS data systems 
2. Reduces the potential for inadvertent errors as even a de minimus error rate will be 
magnified by submittal of a dataset that is ten or more times larger than the dataset 
actually needed for oversight of the rule 
3. Adding nonlead service lines to the inventory would beg the question of the applicability 
of the requirement and potentially broaden the applicability of this requirement to all 
CWSs regardless of whether they (a) never had LSLs or GRRSLs or (b) successfully replaced 
all LSLs and / or GRRSLs.  Such an expansion would eliminate the value of regulatory relief 
provided to such systems within § 141.84(b)(1)(ii) and add additional strain on limited 
state capacity to (a) manage the data submitted and (b) focus scare state resources 
effectively. 
As reflected in prior comments above in Sections 3.2 and 3.4 of these comments, the state interest is in 
total service line counts by category, including nonlead service lines. 
Also, the need to report should be distinguished from how a CWS may provide the inventory to the 
public.  As individual property owners and occupants are accessing information about their service 
line(s), the information provided from the water system will also convey nonlead status in some 
manner. 
Request for Comment 72: “EPA has heard concern over the ability of States to review all required site 
sample plans and provide approvals in time for the first tap monitoring period, and is requesting 
comment on whether EPA should consider a phased approach or alternate approach to reduce the 
burden on States following the rule compliance date.” 
EPA should revise the LCRI such that the transition to the revised monitoring pool and sampling protocol 
is phased in over time.  There are two ready alternatives  

 
88 
1. Transitioning as systems approach taking their next LCR sample under the current rule 
(e.g., systems on annual and triennial monitoring stay on their current schedule until the 
next required monitoring period following the initial compliance date) 
2. Transitioning to the new monitoring pool and sampling protocol as a function of system 
size (e.g., systems serving more than 50,000 persons transition on the next monitoring 
period following the initial compliance date, systems serving more than 10,000 but less 
than 50,000 persons transition two – three years later, and systems serving less than 
10,000 persons transition a few years later. 
The latter option based on system size  
1. Affords the greatest consistency in approach nationwide 
2. Organizes the transition in a manner that is aligned with states developing capacity and 
experience overseeing the transition 
3. Postpones the transition of the largest number of systems serving the smallest total 
population until state capacity is ready 
4. Best aligns with implementing other facets of corrosion control in the Proposed Rule, like 
expanding required monitoring of WQPs. 
5. Allows smaller systems to focus on characterizing and removing LSLs and GRRSLs during 
initial final rule implementation. 
The second option above is also preferrable because it also provides an interval between each group of 
systems starting the new monitoring requirements.  In the Proposed Rule it is a task that must be 
accomplish within a few months for a significant portion of CWSs and NTNCWSs. Processing monitoring 
plans is a substantial administrative task, but it is not as daunting a task as managing the subsequent 
surge in state responsibility when a significant fraction of each cohort of systems exceeds the new lead 
action level.  The Proposed Rule must be changed so that states are not overwhelmed by either task 
(i.e., review of monitoring plan submittals, oversight of systems in exceedance of the action level). 
A staged implementation based on system size has been employed previously to facilitate 
implementation of an SDWA regulation.  Examples include the Long-Term 2 Enhanced Surface Water 
Treatment Rule (LT2ESWTR)104 and the Stage 2 Disinfection and Disinfection Byproduct Rule (Stage 2 
DBPR).105 
Another benefit of staged implementation is the development of increased laboratory capacity to meet 
the need for additional sample analysis.  The proposed rule will result in a substantial increase in 
samples, as systems  
1. Return to routine monitoring increasing both the number of samples and sampling 
frequency 
2. Are to take samples after replacements 
 
104 71 Fed. Reg. at 716. 
105 71 Fed. Reg. at 415. 

 
89 
3. Are to offer the opportunity for samples to be taken in multiple instances 
4. Must initiate monitoring in schools and childcare facilities 
As drafted the proposed LCRI requires all systems to implement measure that result in this increase in 
samples to all occur in a single monitoring cycle (six-month window).  While laboratory capacity can 
grow to accommodate the new demand, changing the rule structure so that increased demand is 
metered into the certified laboratories such that capacity can development will reduce the potential for: 
1. Monitoring and reporting violation due to sample processing backlogs 
2. Severe price escalation 
3. Inability to utilize entire six months of routine monitoring window to overcome challenges 
finding appropriate sample site with occupants willing to participate in tap sample 
monitoring 
Where states are active managers of samples or laboratory analyses the potential for state to have to 
rapidly transition systems to undertaking themselves or purchasing from commercial laboratories would 
likely have a particularly large impact on small systems. 
Request for Comment 73: “EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be required to maintain 
records related to distribution system and site assessments conducted by water systems.”  
States should not be required to maintain records related to distribution system and site assessments.  
EPA has not articulated a purpose for or value associated with states retaining records of these 
assessments.  Retaining such records would impose both a recordkeeping burden on the state and 
further trivialize such assessments.  Greater state recordkeeping burden will lead states to take steps 
that simplify their responsibilities, like the creation of a specific form or checklist. As these assessments 
become another paperwork exercise requiring submission of a particular form by a specific deadline 
they become less thoughtful evaluations. 
Moreover, this trivialization of the rule tasks would be reinforced as EPA audits state performance.  Such 
audits emphasize process over substance, again reinforcing the view that what is in reality a challenging 
task for CWSs to accomplish is merely a paperwork exercise.  
Request for Comment 74: “EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be required to maintain 
documentation of determinations of more stringent implementation, including but not limited to 
conditions or approvals related to reduced compliance monitoring and additional information required to 
conduct a review or designate OCCT.” 
Special Primacy Requirements -- States already have a duty to maintain records with the basis for their 
decisions both generally, §142.14(a), and specific to the LCR (Subtitle I), §142.14(d)(8).  An additional 
requirement for documentation of LCRI implementation would be redundant with these existing 
requirements. 
More importantly, the LCRI does not describe the criteria a state must adhere to when it is deciding to 
be more stringent than required by the LCRI.  States have the authority under state law to be more 
stringent than the federal regulation, but if state discretion to require additional stringency is framed in 
the final federal rule, there must be clear, objective criteria for the imposition of more stringent 

 
90 
requirements.  EPA should remove the several provisions from the LCRI that suggest state latitude to be 
more stringent than the federal rule unless EPA incorporates relevant criteria into the final rule and 
amends § 142.16 – Special Primacy Conditions, to require states adhere to those criteria. 
While EPA underestimates the burden associated with implementing the LCRI, the agency does 
recognize that the burden is very high.  In light of the agency advancing this burdensome a regulation 
while it is also promulgating and requiring compliance with a primary drinking water standard for PFAS 
during a similar timeframe, which is also extremely burdensome, EPA should not create additional 
unjustified or described avenues for additional burden. 
Timely policy decisions –Section 2.6 of these comments highlights the importance of timely relevant 
guidance for effective and efficient rule implementation.  Similarly, state practice should entail the 
timely development of state-specific policies.  EPA can facilitate timely development of state policy 
decisions by: 
1. Developing guidance as requested in Section 2.6 
2. Timely engagement with states to develop early implementation agreements that 
incorporate timely state policy development 
3. Timely processing of state primacy submittals 
Under SDWA, states have at a minimum two years to obtain primacy for new rule requirements and 
SDWA provides for a two-year extension (a total of four years). In order to pursue LCRI implementation 
states will need to establish any state specific policies as soon after promulgation as possible and much 
earlier than the end of the complete primacy application process. 
States, like EPA, are better able to develop state-specific policies for SDWA rule implementation when 
they engage the professional drinking water community. EPA should consider the time needed for state-
specific expert discussion and state decision-making when it is planning and budgeting its own work to 
develop guidance, construct information systems, and evaluate state primacy applications. 
3.14 Compliance Dates 
Request for Comment 75: “Whether it is practicable for water systems to implement notification and risk 
mitigation provisions after full and partial service line replacement (§ 141.84(h)), notification of a service 
line disturbance (§ 141.85(g)), and associated reporting requirements (§ 141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) upon the 
effective date of the LCRI.” 
Notification of disturbance – Section 141.85(g) is not feasible as written.  This provision requires CWSs to  
“… provide customers and the persons served by the water system at the service connection 
with information” including “Public education materials that meet the content requirements in 
paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) through (iv) of this section” and do so “before any service line that has 
been shut off or bypassed is returned to service.”   
Setting aside that the reference to § 141.85(a) is to a section regarding the content of “written 
materials.” Systems will not be able to deliver the required notification to “customers” that do not 
inhabit the structure in time to return the structure to service in a timely fashion that meets the needs 
of the structure’s occupants.  To the degree to which EPA assumes service lines impacted by this 
provision are rentals and that a significant portion of those rentals will be inhabited by disadvantaged 

 
91 
households, this provision advertently harms the households EPA is most interested in protecting 
through this rulemaking.  It is worth emphasizing that this requirement to provide written notice prior to 
returning water service also applies to planned and emergency partial and full replacement of service 
lines. 
The only specific description of “delivery” is a footnote on page 4-185 of the Economic Analysis, where 
EPA assumes that a door hanger will be sufficient.  The conundrum is that the anticipated (and costed) 
compliance strategy is not sufficient to assure compliance with the regulatory text as drafted.  EPA did 
not account for delays in returning water service in its economic analysis. Construction to repair or 
modify a pipe, meter, or valve will involve returning water pressure to the line prior to filling any 
associated excavations.  If water service cannot be returned to a structure in a timely manner this 
extends the period of time a work crew will be dispatched to work on a service line but unable to 
complete their work, reducing the overall efficiency of the crew. EPA requests comment on broadening 
this notification provision to main construction.  The implications of extending outages to achieve 
required notification would be detrimental to potentially many impacted households. 
Successfully providing required information to customers that are not resident at the affected structure 
within 24 hours of a disturbance that did not involve discontinuing water service is also infeasible for the 
same reasons as above. Importantly, if the proposed LCRI is not allowing systems to convey information 
to building occupants by way of the customer, communicating with the customer in this instance is 
unnecessary.  An absentee landlord does not drink the water at a structure they don't occupy, so 
notifying them within a longer timeframe should be sufficient, as their health is not affected and the 
Proposed Rule requires the CWS to contact the occupants directly. 
Repeated “disturbances” at a single structure – The proposed LCRI treats each “disturbance” as a unique 
event requiring the provision of information and in some instances pitcher filters. If multiple 
“disturbances” affect a service line the final rule should provide a mechanism to not require the system 
provide multiple information packets and additional pitcher filters / replacement cartridges. 
Vibration as a disturbance – Section 141.85(g) is proposing that CWSs provide risk mitigation when LSLs, 
GRRSLs, and LSUSLs are subject to “physical action or vibration (e.g., mechanical or vacuum excavation 
during service line material investigations).”106  While “e.g.” connotes an example rather than a 
complete list, the Proposed Rule § 141.85(g) is so broadly drafted that compliance is infeasible and EPA’s 
economic analysis of the Proposed Rule is inadequate.  The Proposed Rule text reads: 
“Actions taken by a water system that cause a disturbance include actions that result in a shut 
off or bypass of water to an individual service line or a group of service lines (e.g., operating a 
valve on a service line or meter setter, or reconnecting a service line to the main), or other 
actions that cause a disturbance to a service line or group of service lines, such as undergoing 
physical action or vibration that could result in pipe scale dislodging and associated release of 
particulate lead.” 
As written, the regulatory text lacks any objective delimitation.  Neither the preamble nor the docket 
provide a technical basis for this requirement. The agency’s economic analysis of the “physical action or 
vibration” trigger condition is limited to disturbances associated with inventorying.     
 
106 88 Fed. Reg. at 84925. 

 
92 
EPA has not provided a technical basis for this provision, adequately costed the regulatory requirement, 
or articulated a demonstrable quantitative benefit. The agency should remove “or other actions that 
cause a disturbance to a service line or group of service lines, such as undergoing physical action or 
vibration that could result in pipe scale dislodging and associated release of particulate lead” from 
§141.85(g). 
Main Replacement – The provision cannot and should not be applied to encompass main rehabilitation, 
repair, or replacement.  As drafted and evaluated in the Economic Analysis, “actions taken by water 
systems” are singular events rather than multi-day or multi-step processes.  As currently drafted, a field 
crew working on a single block could be tasked with providing the required notice on multiple occasions, 
reaching occupants prior to restoration of service and reaching “customers” who may not be resident: 
1. To all the building units on a block with service lines characterized as LSUSL, LSL, or GRRSL 
per the LCRI, when initial trenching is done to set up a pipe relay for temporary service 
2. To all building units on a block when the main is valved off to insert the relay 
3. To each building unit when service is valved off to transfer service to the relay pipe  
4. To each building unit prior to returning water service to any service that would still be 
characterized as LSUSL, LSL, or GRRSL per the LCRI. 
In the instance when some or all of the structures have multiple units, the CWS’s crews would have to 
comply with the LCRI’s expectations that an effort will be made to reach all the affected units.  Not only 
would the field crew need to undertake the above but the efforts undertaken will, per the LCRI, have to 
be documented.    
Time and effort spent engaging building occupants must be used wisely, not just to effectively utilize 
CWS resources, but to assure that occupants give serious consideration to the information a CWS 
provides. 
Request for Comment 76: “Whether earlier alternative compliance dates for LCRI are practicable such 
that water systems transition directly from LCR to LCRI in less than three years (i.e., one or two years) 
based on the assumption that water systems would comply with the LCR until the LCRI compliance date.” 
The SDWA provides three years following promulgation for implementation of a national primary 
drinking water regulation unless “the Administrator determines that an earlier date is practicable” (42 
U.S. Code § 300g–1(b)(10).  The Administrative Procedures Act (APA) requires that final regulations be a 
logical outgrowth of the proposal.  EPA has not described in the preamble or docket a basis for 
promulgating the final LCRI on an expedited schedule. 
While EPA has underestimated the burden ($3.0 – 4.8 billion annualized) associated with the LCRI, EPA 
has judged this rulemaking to be much more expensive than any prior SDWA rulemaking.  The agency’s 
annualized cost reflects annualizing over 35 years the capital and operational costs that will accrue in 
communities across the U.S. in a brief 10-year period.  These costs are compared against highly 
theoretical benefits.  There is neither an expectation that 1, 2, or 3 year earlier implementation of the 
final LCRI would significantly increase any actual health risk reduction nor is there an expectation that 
earlier implementation would significantly reduce the cost burden on communities and individual 
household water rates.  Moreover, if the incremental benefits of more rapid implementation were 

 
93 
defensible, EPA would have promulgated the LCRR more rapidly and the current administration would 
have proposed this rule in a more timely manner, as well as, actively sought the infrastructure funding 
necessary to implement the rule.   It is unreasonable for the Administrator to accelerate LCRI 
implementation when the agency is not yet prepared to provide the support that communities have 
repeatedly sought over the course of this and prior rulemakings, including: 
1. Collaborate in the timely preparation of guidance to support aspects of the rulemaking, 
like corrosion control treatment, that could already be in preparation 
2. Develop and field in the foreseeable future a data system adequate to support states 
receiving all of the information transfers anticipated by the LCRI 
3. Provide translation services support that has been requested by states and water systems 
to facilitate required outreach to individuals for whom English is not their primary 
household language 
4. Provide funding for full-lead service line replacement adequate to meaningfully support 
the replacement of service lines on private property at the scale required by the LCRI 
5. Provide useful risk communication support that fairly communicates the risk posed by 
environmental exposures to lead (e.g., model lead exceedance brochures required by 
Proposed Rule § 141.85(a)(1)) 
Request for Comment 77: “Whether there are other LCRR provisions besides the initial inventory and 
notifications of service line material for which the October 16, 2024, compliance date should be 
retained.” 
EPA must act immediately (prior to the intended promulgation of the LCRI) to extend the compliance 
dates for the provisions of the LCRR that EPA does not intend to continue under the LCRI.  Currently, 
systems are expending resources to comply with the LCRR as it is the codified regulation, while EPA is 
proposing to dramatically change both the substance and deadlines for all but three of the LCRR 
requirements.  Water systems have a duty to comply and have no assurance EPA will meet it 
promulgation timeline nor that enforcement discretion will occur should EPA not publish the final rule 
prior to the LCRR compliance dates. 
3.15 Consumer Confidence Report 
Request for Comment 78: “EPA is requesting comment on the proposed requirement for systems to 
provide an informational statement in the CCR about the school sampling requirements with the 
information that consumers can contact the school or child care facility about any potential sampling 
results.” 
The consumer confidence report (CCR) is already a complicated document containing information that is 
difficult to convey within the confines of the CCR rule.  To add an additional component regarding in-
school lead sampling would be a further and substantial complication.  The CCR must already capture 
and characterize compliance monitoring which reflects parameters from both finished water and 
distribution system monitoring.  That data includes monitoring from LCR compliance monitoring.  Within 
the service area there may be multiple school systems and likely multiple child care centers, some of 
which will be engaged in monitoring in each of years one through five of the LCRI school and child care 
monitoring program.  There could also be requested monitoring, and there may be additional 

 
94 
monitoring required by state law.  Introducing this complexity into the CCR only serves to create 
confusion in the community the water system serves rather than a clear targeted communication of 
relevant information. 
3.16 Definitions 
Request for Comment 79: “EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed definitions, and 
specifically the following: b. EPA is proposing to define a two-foot maximum length of connectors. EPA 
proposes that “connectors” that exceed two feet in length be treated as a service line. EPA is requesting 
comment on the defined length of a connector.” 
Service line -- The definition of a service line at § 141.2 of the proposed LCRI is incomplete and will be 
misconstrued.  The current definition reads: 
“Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe which 
connects the water main to the building inlet. Where a building is not present, the service line 
connects the water main to the outlet.”  
The definition should be revised to read: 
“Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe which 
directly connects the community water system’s water main to the building inlet first fitting 
inside the building (i.e., connecting the service line to the building water system). Relevant 
service lines are those that supply water for drinking and cooking in the building.  The term 
service line does not include private water mains. Where a building is not present, the service 
line connects the water main to the outlet. Where a private main exists between the 
community water system main and a building, associated service lines are not subject to 
subpart I.”  
CWSs should not be responsible for (1) diagraming on-site distribution system piping networks or (2) 
taking responsibility for “distribution systems” maintained by others and only connected to the water 
system by virtue of the sale of water through a mass meter.  Many, if not most, of these situations either 
are state-recognized public water systems or are public water systems as defined by SDWA.107  Their 
status as unregulated (or less regulated) PWSs should not lead to a burden on regulated PWSs. 
Vacant and unimproved lots are addressed through other comments in this submission that recommend 
that service lines associated with such lots be addressed through administrative mechanisms rather than 
the Proposed Rule requirements (see Section 3.4 of these comments).  If EPA believes it must include 
instances where a building is not present in this definition then, the current text should be modified to 
read, “Where a building is not present, the service line connects the water main to the first outlet.” Or 
similarly revised to match the same intent if EPA revises the definition of service line as recommended in 
Section 3.16 of these comments. 
Description of Full-Replacement -- The Proposed § 141.84(d)(6)(iii)(B) description of a full-replacement is 
currently unclear and can be misconstrued. As proposed, the pipe being replaced will also have to be 
disconnected from the customer’s side of the connection.  
 
107 42 U.S. Code § 300f(4) 

 
95 
3.17 Questions from within Preamble 
Request for Comment 80: “A system’s existing authority to access the service line and complete the full 
service line replacement might provide the system with the legal authority to conduct the service line 
replacement over the objection of the property owner or resident. However, as some stakeholders noted, 
requiring service line replacement at properties where customers object to their replacement could 
create potential safety concerns for utility staff. EPA is seeking comment on whether the proposed LCRI 
should either allow systems to treat those service lines as not under the control of the system and forego 
replacement of the lines or require systems to conduct full service line replacement in situations where 
the system has legal access to conduct the full replacement but property owners or residents deny 
physical access.”  
See comments in Legal Review section of these comments (see Section 4.7). 
Request for Comment 81: “While EPA is not proposing to establish a maximum stagnation time in the 
LCRI because the Agency is concerned about samples being invalidated solely because the sample result 
it high, EPA is seeking comment and data, including modeling and sampling data, on potential maximum 
stagnation times, and specifically how stagnation times inform corrosion rates.”  
EPA should utilize this rulemaking as an opportunity to improve the clarity of the current model 
household sampling protocol instruction and incorporate elements to support final rule implementation.  
Through this rulemaking, EPA must provide the required sampling protocol instructions so that water 
systems can implement sampling without fear that their best efforts are second-guessed by state or 
federal regulators.  This will require updating the current EPA model instructions to support the final 
rule provisions.  EPA should work with AWWA and CWSs to ensure the protocol supports 
implementation as well as assure the understandability of the instructions through focus groups and/or 
consultation with experts in public health communication. 
EPA is well aware that at very long periods of protracted stagnation water quality is impacted by a 
number of chemical and biological processes, hence among other activities, the M/DBP rulemaking that 
is now underway. The more relevant question is whether a stagnation timeframe of a few days leads to 
meaningfully different lead observations from a 6, 10 or 12 hour stagnation period.  The Proposed Rule 
Tiers includes galvanized piping as well as multi-family building sample sites.  Sample sites can include 
both kitchen and bathroom faucets, even when a faucet (like a second or third bathroom) is not in 
routine use.  Systems are striving to accrue sufficient samples to meet the required number of routine 
monitoring sample sites and thus prompting households to sample even when a housing unit has been 
uninhabited (e.g., on return from a vacation or business travel).  There is clearly the possibility that 
water could be stagnant for protracted periods, sufficient to warrant simple measures to help assure 
some degree of trust that the sample result reflects what it is intended to represent.  Such measures can 
be included in the household sampling protocol instructions.  Measures like: 
1. Draw the sample from a faucet that is routinely used and has been used regularly in the 
last several days 
2. If a faucet has a single control for hot and cold make sure its last routine use was with cold 
water before starting the stagnation period 
3. If a faucet has not been used in the last 18 hours wait and initiate the stagnation period 
after more regular use is occurring 

 
96 
The LCR provides very limited opportunity to invalidate samples once accepted.  So, adherence to 
household tap sample instructions should be captured in the chain of custody tracking for the sample, 
such that when a sampler documents inappropriate sample practice, the sample can be recognized as 
problematic, discarded, and re-sampling attempted. 
Request for Comment 82: “EPA is seeking comment about the potential inclusion of samples from lower-
priority tiers (i.e., Tiers 3 through 5) that have a higher lead or copper concentration than samples from 
Tier 1 and 2 sites for calculation of the 90th percentile for systems that do not have a sufficient number 
of samples from Tier 1 and 2 sites. Additionally, EPA is seeking comment on whether to require systems 
to use samples with the highest lead and copper concentration regardless of sampling tiers, such as 
including samples from lower-priority tiers (i.e., Tier 3 through 5) in the 90th percentile calculation for 
systems that are collecting compliance samples from all Tier 1 and 2 sites.”  
Incorporating Tier 3 – 5 Sample Results in Exceedance Calculation  -- In calculating whether a system has 
exceeded the lead action level, § 141.80(c)(3)(ii), reads,  
“For water systems with lead service lines with sites identified as Tier 1 or 2 under § 
141.86(a) with enough Tier 1 or 2 sites to meet the minimum number of sites listed in § 
141.86(c) or (d) as applicable: … Lead or copper sample results from Tier 3, 4, or 5 sites 
cannot be included in this calculation.”   
EPA cannot intend to preclude systems from including Tier 3, 4, or 5 sample sites when the CWS has 
otherwise exhausted necessary efforts to otherwise achieve sampling at Tier 1 and 2 sample sites shown 
in the monitoring plan submitted to the state prior to compliance monitoring per § 141.90(a)(i).  Where 
systems have attempted but failed to successfully engage Tier 1 and 2 customers in compliance 
monitoring, Tier 3 – 5 sample sites should be acceptable in the compliance dataset, even if the service 
line inventory continues to reflect unsampled homes with lead services.  This clarification will be 
increasingly important over time as CWSs successfully reduce the number of lead service lines in their 
service area, and the remaining occupants with LSLs are either difficult to reach or uncooperative and 
where the remaining LSLs are associated with vacant properties.  The report required in § 141.90(a)(i)(B) 
provides an opportunity to report the system’s best efforts to comply. 
Highest Lead and Copper Concentration Regardless of Sampling Tiers – EPA is now in its second 
rulemaking in three years for the singular purpose of emphasizing controlling lead release from LSLs and 
GRRSLs.  The current exceedance calculation involves: 
1. Prioritizing Tier 1 and 2 sample sites 
2. If needed to complete the compliance dataset adding the highest values from 
supplemental monitoring data that fit Tier 1 and 2 sample sites and sample protocol 
requirements 
3. Then adding the highest values from Tiers 3, 4, and 5. 
The sampling pool for the Tier 1 – 5 samples other than supplemental monitoring data points reflect a 
sample plan approved by the state.  In this construct, the proposed incorporation of high lead and 
copper observations from Tier 3 – 5 will be necessary as pointed out in the comment response above. 

 
97 
A revised construct that brings Tier 3 – 5 observations forward preferentially should be accompanied by 
removal of the supplemental monitoring dataset from the exceedance calculation.  The supplemental 
monitoring dataset will likely be lower quality data in that it will be less well curated than the 
compliance data set in the approved monitoring plan.  This critical calculation should use the more 
curated dataset. 
Request for Comment 83: “A deadline for inventory completion that precedes the deadline for 
mandatory service line replacement could reduce the possibility of non-compliance with the replacement 
deadline, but it would not have the advantages of a consolidated deadline as described above. EPA seeks 
comment on its rationale for the consolidated deadline approach as compared to an earlier deadline for 
identifying unknown service lines.”  
The docket does not include information that captures the practical steps CWSs must undertake to 
implement a program such that EPA would have a factual basis for setting an alternative deadline for 
inventory completion.  CWS are balancing lead service line characterization, validation, and replacement 
activities.  EPA has acknowledged there are numerous variables specific to each CWS that will determine 
how each CWS will pursue program implementation and which elements will be prioritized over another 
in a particular CWS’s program timeline.  For example, there will be CWSs that: 
1. Have a significant percentage of their service lines that are LSUSLs due to a lack of 
information about customer-owned service line materials 
2. Are attempting to overcome barriers to program implementation that require changes in 
local or state law (e.g., access issues that EPA has alluded to in the preamble) 
3. The number of replacements required are more daunting than the remaining effort to 
complete the inventory and warrant an early focused effort on known LSLs 
4. Systems that are reliant on a successful validation study to assure state acceptance of 
their inventory (and the subset of those systems which have validation studies that fail) 
Request for Comment 84: “While water systems are required to notify consumers of disturbances 
resulting from water main replacement under these proposed requirements, EPA is also requesting 
comment on whether to require distribution of filters for this type of disturbance.”  
Disturbances as described in § 141.85(g) is so broad a scope of potential “actions” as drafted that 
providing the information Proposed Rule compliance is infeasible (see comment above in Section 2.7).   
The addition of the burden of providing filters would further complicate the logistics of field activities by 
requiring CWSs to implement a measure in additional instances that EPA has not demonstrated will 
afford any meaningful additional risk reduction beyond protections that already occur or are already 
incorporated into the Proposed Rule.  See related responses to Requests for Comment 55, 57, 59, and 
73 regarding the value of filter distribution in this scenario as well. 
4 
LEGAL REVIEW 
4.1 
Introduction to Legal Section 
The proposed LCRI revision raise serious policy and legal questions relating to the scope of EPA’s 
authorities under the SDWA and does not comply with the Agency’s obligations under the APA. For 
example, the SDWA provides that EPA can only promulgate national drinking water regulations that are 

 
98 
“feasible.” The SDWA defines “feasible” by reference to treatment techniques that “are available (taking 
cost into consideration).”108  When assessing feasibility, EPA’s analysis should be governed by several 
guiding principles: First, as EPA has previously recognized, inherent in the idea of “feasibility” is the 
notion that a standard or requirement will not result in widespread non-compliance, particularly for 
reasons outside of a PWS’s control.109  This means that even if a requirement might be “possible” for 
well-resourced systems under unique circumstances, EPA must regulate with an eye towards the nature 
of those entities it is regulating, taking into account that many are small, rural, public, or quasi-public, 
and that rate structures result in compliance costs being passed onto customers. 
Second, “feasibility” cannot be viewed in a vacuum: EPA must recognize that it has, or is in the process 
of finalizing a number of additional requirements that it will impose of these same systems during the 
same time period as this Proposed Rule.  When considering what is “feasible” for these systems, EPA 
must holistically consider the cumulative impacts of these rules in terms of their costs and resource 
demands so that it does not set these systems up for failure or create undue hardships for customers. 
Notably, while EPA has underestimated the burden ($3.0 – 4.8 billion annualized) associated with the 
LCRI, even by its own under-estimation, EPA has judged this rulemaking to be much more expensive 
than virtually all prior SDWA rulemakings. And EPA’s annualized cost reflects amortizing over 35 years 
the capital and operational costs that will accrue in communities across the U.S. in a brief 10-year 
period.  At the same time, EPA is proposing a costly MCL for several PFAS that will also require 
significant capital expenses for these same water systems. 
As explained throughout these comments, many aspects of the Proposed Rule are not feasible.  AWWA 
raises these issues in the hope that they will inform a final rule that can both further public health and 
stand on a firm legal footing.  In addition, the Proposed Rule goes beyond EPA’s statutory authority 
under the SDWA by attempting to regulate service lines and other facilities not within the control of 
PWSs. 
 
108 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(4)(D) (defining “feasible” to “mean[] feasible with the use of the best technology, 
treatment techniques and other means which the Administrator finds, after examination for efficacy under field 
conditions and not solely under laboratory conditions, are available (taking cost into consideration)”); see also 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI), 88 Fed. Reg. 84,878, 
84,901 (Dec. 6, 2023). When establishing a treatment technique in lieu of an MCL, the Agency must identify those 
treatment techniques “which, in the Administrator’s judgment, would prevent known or anticipated adverse 
effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible.” 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). Legislative history of the SDWA 
indicates that feasibility is relative to the resources of large public water systems: “[T]he Committee intends that 
the Administrator’s determination of what methods are generally (taking cost into account) is to be based on what 
may reasonably be afforded by large metropolitan or regional public water systems.” H.R. Rep. No. 93-1185, 
reprinted in 1974 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6454, 6470–71 (1974); see also S. Rep. No. 104–169, at 3 (1995) (feasibility is based 
on best available technology affordable to “large” systems). In the litigation over the original LCR, the D.C. Circuit 
found reasonable EPA’s interpretation of “feasible” to mean “capable of being accomplished in a manner 
consistent with the [Safe Drinking Water] Act.” AWWA v. EPA, 40 F.3d 1266, 1271–72 (D.C. Cir. 1994). “‘[F]easible’ 
must mean what EPA says it does: technically possible and affordable.” City of Portland, Or. v. EPA, 507 F.3d 706, 
712 (D.C. Cir. 2007). 
109 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,476 (EPA recognizing that if it set an MCL for lead, many water systems would be out of 
compliance and there is “no indication” in the SDWA or in its legislative history that “Congress envisioned 
establishment of MCLs that would result in widespread noncompliance among water systems because of 
contamination caused by conditions by their control.”).  

 
99 
Below is a more detailed and extended description of the legal and policy issues that AWWA has 
identified, focusing on points not specifically addressed in the earlier more technically based comments. 
We note that because the Agency is required to act in a lawful way that complies with the limits of the 
SDWA, the Paperwork Reduction Act, the APA, and must not be arbitrary or capricious (such as through 
inadequate or improper benefit - cost analysis) many of the comments raised throughout this letter also 
address potential legal infirmities in the Proposed Rule. What follows are additional specific points not 
addressed in detail elsewhere in this letter.     
4.2 
Legal Standard 
As EPA knows, courts will set aside agency action that is “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or 
otherwise not in accordance with law.”110 Agency action that violates its organic statute is not in 
accordance with law within the meaning of the APA,111 and to the extent the final LCRI goes beyond 
EPA’s authority under the SDWA, it therefore also violates the APA.  In addition, the APA requires EPA to 
engage in reasoned decision-making, including to “consider[] the relevant factors and articulate[] a 
rational connection between the facts found and choice made.”112  The LCRI will be set aside if the 
agency fails to provide a reasonable explanation for its decision, fails to consider an important part of 
the problem, or provides an explanation that runs counter to the evidence before it.113  “Conclusory 
explanations for matters involving a central factual dispute where there is considerable evidence in 
conflict do not suffice to meet the deferential standards” of arbitrary and capricious review 114 and 
“[m]erely referencing a [statutory] requirement is not the same as complying with that requirement. And 
stating that a factor was considered—or found—is not a substitute for considering or finding it.”115 In 
addition, the rule must be supported by substantial record evidence. EPA mut also ensure that its 
benefit - cost analysis for this rule complies with both the SDWA and APA’s requirements.116   
 
110 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A). 
111 See Nat. Res. Def. Council v. Regan, 67 F.4th 397, 411 (D.C. Cir. 2023) (Pan, J., concurring); Ethyl Corp. v. EPA, 
306 F.3d 1144, 1150 (D.C. Cir. 2002). 
112 City of Portland, 507 F.3d at 713 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); see also Env’t Def. Fund v. 
FERC, 2 F.4th 953, 967–68 (D.C. Cir. 2021) (“[T]he overarching question . . . is whether the [agency]’s decision 
making was reasoned, principled, and based upon the record.” (internal quotation marks and citation omitted) 
(alteration omitted)); id. at 968 (When the agency’s “explanation for a contested action is lacking or inadequate, it 
will not survive judicial review and the matter will be returned to [the agency] for appropriate action.”). 
113 See Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the U.S., Inc., v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983). 
114 Genuine Parts Co. v. EPA, 890 F.3d 304, 346 (D.C. Cir. 2018) (quoting Int’l Union, United Mine Workers v. Mine 
Safety & Health Admin., 626 F.3d 84, 94 (D.C. Cir. 2010)). 
115 Cigars Ass’n of Am. v. USDA, 964 F.3d 56, 62 (D.C. Cir. 2020) (quoting Gerber v. Norton, 294 F.3d 173, 185 (D.C. 
Cir. 2002)); see also Lindeen v. SEC, 825 F.3d 646, 657 (D.C. Cir. 2016) (observing that agency action is arbitrary and 
capricious if the agency fails to consider “a factor the agency must consider under its organic statute” (citation 
omitted)). 
116 Although an agency’s cost-benefit analysis is generally afforded some level of deference, “a serious flaw 
undermining that analysis can render the rule unreasonable.” Nat’l Ass’n of Home Builders v. EPA, 682 F.3d 1032, 
1040 (D.C. Cir. 2012); see also City of Portland, 507 F.3d at 713 (where SDWA permits or requires cost-benefit 
analyses, courts “will [not] tolerate rules based on arbitrary and capricious cost-benefit analyses”); Owner–
Operator Indep. Drivers Ass'n v. Fed. Motor Carrier Safety Admin., 494 F.3d 188, 206 (D.C. Cir. 2007) (vacating 
regulatory provisions because the cost-benefit analysis supporting them was based on an unexplained 
methodology). See also Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201, 1217–22 (5th Cir. 1991) (faulting agency’s 
cost-benefit analysis for failing to analyze “intermediate state[s] of regulation” and failing to account for risk-risk 
 

 
100 
4.3 
EPA Reasonably Determined Not to Set an MCL for Lead Because it Remains Infeasible 
to Do So. 
The SDWA operates by imposing either MCLs on a water system, or using a treatment-technique-based 
approach when the EPA finds “it is not economically or technologically feasible to ascertain the level of 
the [regulated] contaminant.”117 In such a case, the EPA identifies treatment techniques, that in its 
judgment, “would prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent 
feasible.”118 If EPA elects to use an MCL for a contaminant, it must set the MCL “as close to the 
maximum contaminant level goal as is feasible.”119  The maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG) is “the 
level at which no known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons occur and which allows 
an adequate margin of safety.”120  
Here, it is important to recognize that EPA is not writing on a blank slate, and both the agency and the 
public water systems have several decades of experience working through the challenges associated 
with reducing lead levels in drinking water. EPA introduced the first LCR in 1988 and in 1991, EPA set the 
MCLG for lead at zero solely based on the adverse health effects of lead without consideration of cost or 
technical feasibility.121  
Since 1991, water systems, states, and EPA have made tremendous progress in reducing lead exposure 
in drinking water and keeping communities and children safe through the use of a treatment technique-
based rule.  The number of large water systems that have exceeded the lead action level has dropped by 
over 90% and the median concentration of lead in children’s blood has dropped 95%.122  This progress 
demonstrates that use of a treatment technique to address lead in drinking water has been successful.  
AWWA appreciates and recognizes the need to do more to address these issues.  However, those who 
have advocated for an MCL, rather than a treatment technique, fail to understand the complexities of 
treating lead in drinking water, which is more effectively addressed through a treatment technique. 
 
trade-offs among alternative agency actions); Bus. Roundtable v. SEC, 647 F.3d 1144, 1149–54 (D.C. Cir. 2011) 
(faulting agency’s cost-benefit analysis for failing to “estimate and quantify” certain costs (or stating that such 
costs could not be estimated), relying on empirical studies that only provided “mixed” support, unduly discounting 
certain costs, and failing to consider the costs that the rule would be counterproductive to statutory costs). Cf. 
Michigan v. EPA, 576 U.S. 743, 752–53 (2015) (“Agencies have long treated cost as a centrally relevant factor when 
deciding whether to regulate. Consideration of cost reflects the understanding that reasonable regulation 
ordinarily requires paying attention to the advantages and the disadvantages of agency decisions.”).  The SDWA 
likewise directs EPA to analyze the costs and benefits of its proposals to set national primary drinking water 
regulations. See 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(3)(C)(ii). 
117 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
118 Id.   
119 Id. § 300g-1(b)(4)(B). 
120 Id. § 300g-1(b)(4)(A).   
121 See Maximum Contaminant Level Goals and National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper, 
Final Rule, 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460, 26,460 (June 7, 1991). Indeed, EPA typically sets the MCLG at zero for 
contaminants with carcinogenic effects and for microbial contaminants. ELENA H. HUMPHREYS, CONG. RES. SERV., 
REGULATING CONTAMINANTS UNDER THE SAFE DRINKING WATER ACT (SDWA) 13 (Jan. 5, 2022) (citing How EPA Regulates 
Drinking Water Contaminants, EPA, https://www.epa.gov/sdwa/how-epa-regulates-drinking-water-
contaminants#standards (last visited Sept. 26, 2022)). 
122 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, Proposed Rule, 84 Fed. 
Reg. 61,684 61,685 (Nov. 13, 2019); National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 
Final Rule, 86 Fed. Reg. 4,198, 4,199 (Jan. 15, 2021). 

 
101 
While MCL-advocates focus on the rate of lead service line removal, corrosion control provides the most 
immediate protection to the public and will continue to be necessary even after LSL have been fully 
removed.   
From the beginning, EPA recognized the inherent difficulties of regulating lead in drinking water, as did 
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit when it upheld a challenge to EPA’s first LCR.123  EPA has 
continued to recognize these issues in subsequent rulemakings, including for the LCRR and again in its 
proposed LCRI.  The agency is correct in identifying these challenges, which continue to make an MCL 
infeasible, and are briefly summarized below.  
First, lead contamination results primarily from corrosion of historic lines and plumbing materials 
through which treated water flows.124 While lead is no longer used when new lines are installed, many 
lead-containing lines and materials remain in place.  So unlike other contaminants, which can be treated 
at water facilities, lead contaminates drinking water post-treatment as it flows through service lines, 
private lines and fixtures before it reaches the consumer.125 Because corrosion from these historic 
materials is the primary contributor to lead in drinking water, techniques used by water systems to 
reduce water corrosivity and prevent the leaching of lead from premise plumbing and distribution 
system components have been the most effective way address lead exposure.126  
Second, and relatedly, lead was historically used in both service lines, some of which are owned and 
controlled by water systems, as well as in privately owned service lines and plumbing materials located 
on property outside of the control of those systems. Congress prohibited the further introduction of 
plumbing materials that are not “lead free” but it did not take the further step of requiring that historic 
lead-containing materials be removed; as a result, these materials continue to exist in certain older 
buildings.  While PWSs may have the ability to detect and measure lead in tap water for public-owned 
buildings and structures that they control such as water treatment plants, they do not have the 
authority to control lead in private, customer-owned structures.  Thus, it is not technically feasible to set 
an MCL for lead in PWSs.  
 
123 See AWWA v. EPA, 40 F.3d 1266 (D.C. Cir. 1994) See 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,471–73. 
124 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,897 (“Lead can enter drinking water when plumbing materials that contain lead corrode, 
especially where the water is highly acidic or has a low mineral content that corrodes pipes and fixtures. The most 
common sources of lead in drinking water are lead pipes, faucets, and fixtures.”); 86 Fed. Reg. at 4,199.  Corrosion 
is “the electrochemical interaction between a metal surface such as pipe wall or solder and water.” 84 Fed. Reg. at 
61,692.   
125 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,906 (“As EPA described in 1991, and is still accurate today, lead and copper do not 
generally occur in source water, but instead are introduced in drinking water by the corrosive action of water in 
contact with plumbing materials containing lead and copper.”); see also 84 Fed. Reg. at 61,702; 56 Fed. Reg. at 
26,473. 
126 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,910 (“Considering the above information and analysis, EPA is determining that the same 
conditions that prompted EPA to promulgate a treatment technique rule for lead and copper in 1991, still exist 
today and justify continued use of a treatment technique rule for regulating lead and copper. This includes the 
nature of lead contamination, where much of the lead in drinking water continues to originate in the distribution 
system and from sources outside the control of water systems, the condition of water systems’ plumbing and 
distribution system varying from system to system, and the variability of lead and copper levels at the tap.”); see 
also 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,476 (“Water systems can control the main contributor to dissolution of lead . . . plumbing 
materials – corrosivity of the water.”); id. at 26,477 (“The [EPA] believes that the treatment technique approach . . 
. will achieve the public health goals of the SDWA without the problems associated with establishing MCLs.”).  

 
102 
Third, even if EPA had the authority to require PWSs to determine or address the level of lead in private 
homes and other buildings, it is difficult and unpredictable to ascertain the level of lead in drinking 
water and comparing it to an MCL because lead levels vary significantly across locations, depend on 
private plumbing materials, and vary over time based on water use.  Lead levels in drinking water are 
highly variable and depend on several factors that affect water corrosivity such as the amount of lead in 
plumbing materials, temperature, age of plumbing components, chemical and physical characteristics of 
distributed water, and the length of time water is in contact with lead-bearing materials.127  
Additionally, source waters of systems vary in the degree of their corrosiveness and the extent to which 
that corrosivity can be reduced through pH/  alkalinity adjustment, or a corrosion inhibitor.128  
Developing an effective corrosion control treatment to account for these various conditions is therefore 
an inherently complex process for individual water systems.129  EPA correctly relied on updated studies 
in this Proposed Rule that demonstrate that these concerns that justified the original determination to 
use a treatment technique remain true.130  Notably, EPA has established a record that affirms that 
plumbing materials on private property continue to be a source of lead in drinking water and can be a 
source of particulate lead.131 
Recognizing these complexities, EPA correctly determined in the original LCR that “water systems should 
not be held directly responsible for plumbing materials within private home.”132 And EPA correctly 
reaffirmed this conclusion in the LCRR.133  
When the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit upheld EPA’s use of a treatment technique in a 
challenge to the first LCR., the Court explained:  
“Because lead generally enters drinking water from corrosion in pipes owned by customers 
of the water system, an MCL for lead would be neither; ascertaining the level of lead in 
water at the meter (i.e. where it enters the customer’s premises) would measure the public 
water system’s success in controlling the contaminant but not the quality of the public’s 
drinking water (because lead may still leach into the water from the customer’s plumbing), 
while ascertaining the level of lead in water at the tap would accurately reflect water quality 
but effectively hold the public water system responsible for lead leached from plumbing 
owned by its customers.”134 
The SDWA grants authority to EPA to promulgate a treatment technique for just such circumstances. 
Specifically, EPA may do so if it finds that it is not “economically or technologically feasible” to determine 
 
127 See 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,473. 
128 See id; 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,936–37; see also id. at 84,937 (noting external comments “about the uniqueness of 
each water system with respect to CCT and that CCT for each water system is different due to the water system’s 
specific mix of plumbing materials and operations.”). 
129 EPA correctly reaffirmed in the Proposed Rule that “New information available since the 1991 LCR continues to 
show that the variability of lead and copper levels make it infeasible to ascertain the level of the contaminant and 
does not meet the statutory standard for an MCL under SDWA.” See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,907. 
130 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,907-84,911.  
131 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,909. 
132 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,476. 
133 See 86 Fed. Reg. at 4,200 (“Water systems cannot unilaterally implement all of the actions that are needed to 
reduce levels of lead in drinking water.”). 
134 AWWA, 40 F.3d at 1271. 

 
103 
the level of lead in a public water system.135  The D.C. Circuit was clear over three decades ago that: 
“EPA is not required by the [SDWA] to set an MCL for lead at the tap,” because the EPA found it was not 
feasible to do so.136  Notably, EPA recognized that if it set an MCL for lead, many water systems would 
be out of compliance and there is “no indication” in the SDWA or in its legislative history that “Congress 
envisioned establishment of MCLs that would result in widespread noncompliance among water systems 
because of contamination caused by conditions by their control.”137 Thus, inherent in EPA’s assessment 
of “feasibility” is the important notion that a standard or requirement is not feasible if it would result in 
widespread noncompliance. It remains neither technically possible nor affordable to set an MCL for lead 
because PWSs lack the authority, capabilities, and financial resources to ascertain lead in privately 
owned lines and other plumbing materials. 
Additionally, as EPA recognized in 1991, setting an MCL at the tap for lead is inconsistent with the 
SDWA’s statutory structure. To set an MCL, EPA must not only determine that it is feasible to measure 
the contaminant in drinking water; it must also select a level that is as close to the MCLG as 
“feasible.”138 Given lead’s inherent variability across water systems, EPA concluded in 1991 that “there is 
no precise level at the tap that may generally be considered ‘feasible’ based upon application of the [best 
available technology] in all water systems across the country.”139 While lead levels are dramatically 
lower and more stable than they were in 1991, there is still a high variability relative to conservative 
performance criteria that EPA proposes to impose and much of that variability arises due to factors 
beyond the water system’s control.140  This variability also explains why an MCL is not only infeasible, 
but also inconsistent the SDWA’s objective of preventing “known or anticipated adverse effects on the 
health of persons to the extent feasible.”141  As EPA correctly explained in the 1991 rulemaking are 
reaffirmed in this Proposed Rule, the use of an MCL would lead to “unnecessarily high exposures of 
significant segments of the population” because systems below the MCL “would not be required to 
install any treatment to be in compliance” even when certain subsets of their customers had lead levels 
in their drinking water above the MCL.142 Simply put, an MCL does not offer the same flexibility for EPA 
to craft a rule that can address variability within a system. 
It is also worth noting that the SDWA has been amended since EPA’s 1991 rulemaking, including specific 
revisions related to the use of lead in plumbing products. While Congress redefined “lead free,” as it 
applies to lines and plumbing materials, Congress never mandated that EPA set an MCL at the tap, an 
those post-1991 amendments to the SDWA did not change the fundamental concern that setting an 
MCL for lead would increase exposure of other drinking water contaminants. In addition, while the 
SDWA amendments allow EPA to set a higher MCL than otherwise required if necessary to prevent a 
harmful increase in the concentration of other contaminants, this does not abrogate EPA’s duty to 
consider what is feasible nor what is within the control of public water systems, nor does it suggest in 
 
135 42 U.S.C. § 300f(1)(C)(ii). 
136 AWWA, 40 F.3d at 1268. 
137 Id. 
138 See 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(4)(B). 
139 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,473. 
140 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,907–09; id. at 84,909–10 (“As described above, the variability of lead and copper levels 
make it ‘technologically infeasible to ascertain whether the lead or copper level at a tap at a single point in time 
represents effective application of the best available treatment technology.’” (quoting 53 Fed. Reg. at 31,527)). 
141 See 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A)); 88 Fed. Reg. 84,907. 
142 See 88 Fed. Reg. 84,907 (citing 56 Fed. Reg. 26,477). 

 
104 
any way that EPA must restructure the treatment technique approach that has been successful since 
1991. Notably, the SDWA amendments did not remove EPA’s discretion to make a reasonable choice 
between MCLs and treatment techniques. Nothing in the statute or its legislative history show that 
subsequent amendments changed EPA’s discretion and approach to regulating PWSs.  
In sum, nothing in the record supports undermining the discretion Congress gave EPA and revisiting the 
treatment technique approach EPA chose for lead over three decades ago.  As such, it would have been 
arbitrary and capricious for EPA to change its position after so many decades without adequate support 
in the record to justify this change.143  EPA has provided a reasoned explanation based on updated 
studies and data that fully support its decision to continue to follow this approach  AWWA therefore 
supports EPA’s continued approach to use a treatment technique to address lead through the LCRI.  
4.4 
A Treatment Technique-Based Rule Remains the Most Sound Approach for Regulating 
Lead in Drinking Water and EPA is Within its Discretion to Continue to Use This 
Approach.  
EPA’s decision to continue to use a treatment technique-based rule is not only within the Agency’s 
discretion but is also a proven and reasonable approach that has successfully reduced lead in drinking 
water and effectively accounts for the inherent complexities of lead contamination.  Unlike an MCL, 
which mandates a level but does not allow EPA to select specific compliance methods, the use of a 
treatment technique for lead allows EPA to craft a rule that includes optimizing corrosion control, public 
education, water quality parameter monitoring, source water treatment, and LSL replacement. This is 
particularly important for an issue like lead, where presence in private plumbing materials or other 
factors can result in variability between specific buildings. As previously noted in these comments, a 
MCL-based rule would mean that a water system could achieve compliance with the standard even 
when certain subsets of the customer base exceeded the MCL.  While no regulatory approach is ever 
perfect, by instead using a treatment technique approach, EPA can provide a variety of risk reduction 
strategies that more holistically address this complex issue. 
Corrosion remains the primary pathway for lead entering drinking water, and it occurs when treated 
water reacts with lead-containing plumbing materials and lead is released from plumbing materials and 
into the water system.  To control corrosion, water systems can adjust the treated water’s corrosivity to 
mitigate its potential to leach lead from plumbing materials.  As such, corrosion control remains one of 
the most cost-effective and efficient methods for public water systems to address the complex problem 
of lead exposure in drinking water.  However, corrosion control is complex and effective treatment 
depends on many factors such as source water quality, composition of distribution system and 
plumbing, water pH, water alkalinity, temperature, water use patterns, and the presence or absence of 
protective scales inside pipes. While corrosion control has its own limitations, the LCRI effectively 
accounts for these variables by providing water systems with the flexibility to consider which corrosion 
control treatment methods are most effective for particular locations and particular water systems. A 
treatment technique-based rule that includes corrosion control treatment has demonstrated success in 
reducing lead exposure as the number of large water systems that has exceeded the lead action level 
 
143 See FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc., 556 U.S. 502, 515 (2009) (agencies must show “that there are good 
reasons for [a] new policy”). 

 
105 
has dropped by over 90% and the median concentration of lead in children’s blood has dropped by 95%. 
AWWA has provided supporting materials as appendices to this comment letter.144  
4.5 
A more stringent regulatory regime or implementing LCRR until LCRI goes into effect 
would not be feasible.   
AWWA supports EPA’s proposal for public water systems to continue to comply with the LCR 
requirements, other than specific LCRR provisions for preparation of an inventory, customer notification 
of service line materials, and public notification, until the LCRI compliance date.145 Given the myriad of 
specific differences between the LCRR and LCRI requirements, and the aggressive timeline for LSL and 
GRRSL removal under the LCRI, it would not only be a tremendous waste of resources for systems to 
implement the LCRR, but would also be infeasible for systems to do so and be prepared to comply with 
LCRI.  As explained further below, EPA has wisely chosen to focus the limited resources of PWSs and the 
states on preparing to implement the LCRI.  Indeed, doing otherwise would have been arbitrary and 
capricious.  As EPA has correctly recognized, preparing for and implementing the LCRR will not cause 
water systems or states to be further prepared for the LCRI but will instead detract and distract from 
their ability to do so.  
EPA must recognize the monumental difference in regulatory requirements now being proposed for 
water systems through the LCRI, and in order to make this transition possible, EPA must provide a 
further delay of the compliance dates in the LCRR (beyond those still required by the LCRI) before 
finalizing the LCRI. As detailed further below, this will save water systems from the impending need to 
devote resources to preparing to comply with a rule that EPA has already declare it intends to replace. 
LCRR compliance should not become a distraction to systems and states as they attempt to prepare for 
the LCRI. A one-year delay in LCRR compliance would likely provide sufficient time for EPA to finalize the 
proposed LCRI. With a final LCRI, water systems would clearly understand how LCRI impacts LCRR 
provisions, and they could make the proper investments to comply with the rule. In doing so, EPA would 
be following the same approach that it has recently taken for lead and copper rulemakings. In 2021, EPA 
adjusted the effective date of the LCRR twice in order for the agency to review the rule requirements. In 
the second of those adjustments, the agency made a reasoned decision to delay the rule compliance 
dates. Now is the time for EPA to take a similar action. 146 
Requiring compliance with the LCRR prior to the LCRI’s compliance date would be both infeasible and bad 
policy. -- PWSs, many of whom are small, public, or quasi-public entities, have limited resources and 
ability to rapidly respond to changes in regulatory requirements. Due to the public or quasi-public 
nature of many PWSs, they often need time in advance of new requirements to submit budget 
 
144 See  Brown et al, 2013, Strategies for assessing optimized corrosion control treatment of lead and copper, 
Journal AWWA:105:5, figure 1, https://doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2013.105.0066, (see Appendix G); see also EPA, 
"Analysis of Impacts of Corrosion Control Treatment on Lead and Copper Levels over Time" March 2014" Multiple 
figures, (see Appendix H). 
145 See Proposed § 141.80(4)(i) (“community water systems and nontransient non-community water systems must 
comply with 40 CFR 141.80 through 141.91, as codified on July 1, 2020, except systems must also comply with 40 
CFR 141.84(a)(1) through 141.84(a)(10) (excluding §§ 141.84(a)(7)); 141.85(e); 141.90(e)(1) and 141.90(e)(13); 
141.201(c)(3); 141.202(a)(10); and 141.31(d), as codified on July 1, 2023.”).  
146 See National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 86 Fed. Reg. 14,003 (Mar. 
12, 2021); Delay of Effective Date National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions; 
Delay of Effective and Compliance Dates, 86 Fed. Reg. 31,939 (June 16, 2021). 

 
106 
proposals to the bodies that approve their budgets. Even investor-owned PWSs will have to plan their 
budgets, accounting for other EPA regulations being simultaneously introduced and consider how to 
adjust water rates so that they do not rise at too rapid a pace for their customers. Given these budgeting 
and operational constraints, responding to EPA regulations, and providing safe, affordable, and reliable 
drinking water is often a zero-sum game. Every marginal dollar and staff hour spent complying with any 
given set of regulatory requirements must be shifted away from controlling other contaminants or 
implementing necessary operational maintenance or improvements. While EPA may compare costs and 
benefits for the nation as a whole, individual water systems that incur compliance costs must pass those 
costs directly to that system’s local customer base.  Those costs can result in higher rates (i.e., 
household water bills) with no corresponding benefit in water quality or public health. Such costs can be 
particularly difficult for small systems that serve a limited number of customers.  
Congress recognized, and addressed, this very concern when enacting and amending the SDWA.147 
Indeed, the SDWA defaults to a the compliance date three years after the publication of the rule, so that 
these systems and the states with primacy have the time necessary to make changes to their operations 
and prepare budgets for the new requirements.148 This unique aspect of the SDWA stands in contrast to 
most statutory schemes, where Congress has allowed agencies flexibility to determine appropriate 
compliance dates, and generally takes no position on whether a rule goes into effect within days or 
weeks of a rule’s promulgation. It demonstrates Congress’s recognition of the unique challenges posed 
to water systems in implementing national drinking water regulations and the Congressional intent to 
provide those systems with appropriate time to implement new requirements. The statute only allows 
for a shorter timeline before compliance when “the Administrator determines that an earlier date is 
practicable.”149  Notably, the Administrator has not made any such determination for this or any 
previous iteration of the lead and copper rule—nor could he, as the costs and complexity of these 
treatment technique rules would make it not only not practicable but impossible for water systems to 
begin to comply with a shorter lead time.  Because no record can be made to support a shorter period 
EPA must, at a minimum, retain the three years between the LCRI’s promulgation and effective date. 
This same default presumption of three years to prepare for compliance is also what makes EPA’s 
decision to largely transition from the LCR to the LCRI so critical: the LCRR and it’s now almost certain to 
be replaced provisions is set to go int effect on October 16, 2024.  EPA has wisely recognized that water 
systems will need the SDWA’s default of three years from final publication in order to prepare for the 
implementation of the final LCRI, and has therefore proposed a compliance date three years from the 
finalized LCRI’s publication.150  Indeed, AWWA would argue that three years is insufficient time given all 
of the requirements in the Proposed Rule, and less time would certainly be infeasible and therefore 
urges EPA to use the authority Congress provided it for just such circumstances by granting a nationwide 
 
147 See H.R. Rep. No. 104-632, at 9 (1996) (customers “are not willing to pay for complying with drinking water 
rules that provide only marginal increases in health protection at significant costs” (citation omitted)); See also H.R. 
Rep. No. 115-380 at 12 (“Most community water systems (82 percent of all CWSs) are relatively small, serving 
3,300 people or fewer; but these systems provide water to just 9 percent of the total population served by 
community water systems. In contrast, 8 percent of all CWSs serve 82 percent of the population served.”). 
148 See 42 U.S.C. § 300g1(b)(10). 
149 Id. 
150 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,897. 

 
107 
two-year extension to this deadline because of the capital improvements (in the form of LSL removal) 
required by the Proposed Rule.151 
Likewise, states with primacy have limited resources and budgets which will be better directed at 
preparing for and implementing LCRI than attempting to comply with interim requirements during a 
three-year transitional period between LCRR and LCRI. AWWA therefore agrees with EPA that  
“[a]llowing water systems to transition from compliance with the LCR to compliance with the 
LCRI, while requiring systems to prepare the initial LCRR inventory, customer notification of 
service line materials, and public notification requirements in the interim, would result in more 
resources being focused on service line characterization and subsequent full service line 
replacements and thus, broader and faster health risk reduction than if adequate planning for 
LCRI compliance did not take place because of the diversion of scarce system and State 
resources towards short-term implementation of the LCRR.”152  
This is a sound and reasonable approach that recognizes the realities of the challenges that states and 
public water systems face in addressing this complex and costly problem.  
EPA has also correctly recognized a number of places where the LCRR misdirected the limited resources 
of states and public water systems and AWWA applauds EPA’s revisions which are designed to remove 
requirements that would detract from focusing those resources on best addressing ways to remove lead 
from drinking water, including:  
1. Revising OCCT requirements because “resources would be better devoted to other 
mitigation activities rather than repeating the same steps, as well as the proposed LCRI 
would require those systems that continue to exceed the action level to conduct 
additional public education …”153  
2. Recognizing that “a requirement for the water system to document the material 
composition of each fitting and all solder in the service line would not be practicable and 
would divert resources from replacing LSLs and GRR service lines as quickly as feasible as 
well as likely result in the unnecessary replacement of lead free fittings and solder where 
documentation of their material is unable to be obtained.”154  
3. Explaining that “[e]xcavation efforts to search for lead connectors would draw funding 
and staffing resources from the identification and replacement of LSLs and GRR service 
lines, likely delaying elimination of these service lines in the system as quickly as 
feasible.”155  
4. Removing pipe loop study requirements because it “would allow water systems to 
dedicate more staffing and financial resources to replacing lead and GRR service lines 
within five years rather than focusing on a pipe loop study with results that may no 
 
151 42 U.S.C. § 300g–1(b)(10) (EPA “Administrator, or a State (in the case of an individual system), may allow up to 2 
additional years to comply with a maximum contaminant level or treatment technique if the Administrator or State 
(in the case of an individual system) determines that additional time is necessary for capital improvements”). 
152 88 Fed Reg at 84,903.  
153 88 Fed Reg at 84,902.   
154 88 Fed Reg 84,917.  
155 88 Fed Reg 84,936. 

 
108 
longer be applicable following 100 percent replacement of lead and GRR service 
lines.”156  
5. Removing the requirement to develop a LSL replacement plan based on the (different) 
requirements for triggered replacement under the LCRR, when the LCRI introduces a 
faster rate and mandatory schedule, meaning that the LCRR-based plan would likely be 
unused and obsolete by the time LCRI is in effects. 
In sum, EPA has also correctly recognized why requiring compliance with the LCRR prior to the 
compliance date for the LCRI is both infeasible and counterproductive. EPA should continue to take this 
approach in the final LCRI, as it is both reasonable and helps to ensure that the resulting requirements in 
the LCRI are feasible.  
EPA must undertake a separate rulemaking immediately to extend the compliance dates for the LCRR in 
light of the Proposed Rule. -- In addition to removing the majority of the LCRR-based requirements 
during the period between the finalization of the LCRI and its compliance date, it is critical that EPA 
undertakes a separate rulemaking in the interim (i.e., before the LCRI is finalized) to extend the 
compliance dates for the LCRR. This action is necessary to avoid the very situation that EPA’s proposed 
transition directly from the LCR to the LCRI is deigned to avoid: namely, water systems currently 
expending (and wasting) resources on preparing for compliance with the LCRR because there is no 
assurance that the LCRI will be finalized as proposed, and no assurance that it will be finalized before the 
October 16, 2024 effective date for the LCRR.  This is a small, but absolute necessary change, and AWWA 
would proposed the following revision to ensure that the LCRR does not go into effect prior to the 
finalization of the LCRI:  
“Between October 16, 2024 and October 16, 2025, community water systems and nontransient 
non-community water systems must comply with 40 CFR 141.80 through 141.91, as codified on 
July 1, 2020, except systems must also comply with 40 CFR 141.84(a)(1) through 141.84(a)(10) 
(excluding §§ 141.84(a)(7)); 141.85(e); 141.90(e)(1) and 141.90(e)(13); 141.201(c)(3); 
141.202(a)(10); and 141.31(d), as codified on July 1, 2023.” 
As noted above, in proposing the LCRI, EPA correctly recognized the challenge PWSs will face 
transitioning from meeting the current LCRR compliance deadlines and obligations and to 
simultaneously prepare to comply with new obligations under the LCRI, which differ in many critical 
respects from the LCRR. AWWA appreciates the agency’s recognition that simultaneously complying 
with the LCRR and preparing for the LCRI is not feasible or productive for public health. However, water 
systems are now in a difficult position where they must immediately expend resources to ensure they 
are prepared to comply with LCRR requirements by October 16, 2024, while they await the LCRI 
promulgation.  Those deadlines are not limited to preparing lead service line inventories and meeting 
Tier 1 public notification requirements following lead exceedances. Instead, systems must continue to 
prepare lead service line replacement plans, revisit monitoring plans, prepare to initiate monitoring 
campaigns at child-care facilities and schools, and align operating practices to support customer / 
resident notification requirements.   
Because of the nature of the rulemaking process, water systems also cannot assume that the LCRI will 
be finalized as proposed, or that EPA will not alter the provisions within LCRR which they are required to 
 
156 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,938. 

 
109 
comply before the LCRI’s effective date. In order to avoid the untenable position of risking 
noncompliance and an enforcement action based on an existing regulation, these systems are currently 
having to make the requisite investments now to assure reliable compliance by October 2024, even as 
EPA proposes to modify compliance timelines.  A parallel concern is the burden the current situations 
places on state primacy agencies, which must simultaneously guide and prepare to process water 
system LCRR submittal while also preparing for implementation under the LCRI. 
EPA also cannot assure that the current rulemaking process will be complete prior to the impending 
LCRR compliance deadline, a deadline that occurs within eight months of the close of the LCRI comment 
period.  With recent agency rulemakings as a guide, only five months will be available for EPA to compile 
and consider comments prior to interagency review.  Moreover, interagency review may take longer 
than three months.  Most importantly, EPA as a matter of practice does not provide water systems any 
assurance that compliance deadlines will be changed until the LCRI is actually published in the Federal 
Register.  Water systems will be forced to work toward current requirements, expending resources in an 
inefficient manner unless EPA immediately undertakes this small separate rulemaking.  Based on EPA’s 
own statements in the Proposed Rule, failing to extend the compliance dates would result in an 
outcome that is infeasible, arbitrary, and just plain bad policy.  
In order to avoid these unnecessary and unintended consequences, AWWA proposed that EPA simply 
do what it has already proposed to do (i.e., remove many of the unnecessary and counterproductive 
LCRR requirements), but to do so through a small separate rulemaking that will provide water systems 
and primacy states with the clarity that they need in order to avoid wasting resources during the next 
eight months.  A one-year delay in LCRR compliance would likely provide sufficient time for EPA to 
finalize the proposed LCRI and to give water systems more clarity about what they need to do in the 
interim as they await the provisions of the final LCRI.  This would be in keeping with the same approach 
that EPA has recently taken for previous lead and copper rulemakings.  For example, in 2021, EPA 
adjusted the effective date of the LCRR twice in order for the agency to review the rule requirements.  In 
the second of those adjustments, the agency made a reasoned decision to delay the rule compliance 
dates.157  Now is the time for EPA to take a similar action to avoid unnecessary costs to customers and 
distractions for water systems and primacy states as they prepare for the final LCRI. 
The proposal to remove all LSLs and GRRSL within 10 years is not feasible and raises environmental 
justice concerns. -- While some may advocate for a faster LSL and GRRSL removal schedule, it is simply 
not feasible to mandate complete lead service line replacement on a faster timeline than proposed 
under the LCRI.  Indeed, as AWWA has repeatedly noted throughout these comments, many, if not all 
systems will be hard-pressed to meet the deadlines set by EPA in the proposed LCRI, especially in light of 
all the additional requirements layered on top of the deadlines.  As noted elsewhere in these comments, 
most of the success stories cited by EPA as examples of water systems able to complete LSL in less than 
10 years were extraordinary circumstances rather than typical scenarios that are indicative of what is 
feasible for the typical system.  EPA’s examples involve unique situations where there was a public 
health crisis, and substantial external funding and technical resources (including from EPA) were 
introduced to address the problem.  By contrast, the removal requirements in the proposed LCRI leaves 
 
157 See National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 86 Fed. Reg. 14,003 (Mar. 
12, 2021); Delay of Effective Date National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions; 
Delay of Effective and Compliance Dates, 86 Fed. Reg. 31,939 (June 16, 2021). 

 
110 
systems to attempt on their own to secure funding and expertise, and all systems will complete with 
each other for these same limited resources as all systems nationwide will simultaneously be attempting 
to comply with the mandated timelines.  As noted elsewhere in these comments, EPA has 
(under)estimated the burden ($3.0 – 4.8 billion annualized) associated with the LCRI, making it more 
expensive than virtually all prior SDWA rulemakings.  EPA’s annualized cost reflects amortizing over 35 
years the capital and operational costs that will actually accrue in communities over a 10-year period 
based on the proposed implementation timeline.  
And even if EPA were to determine that the 10-year timeline, and the LCRI more generally, is feasible for 
a subset of large, municipal and regional water systems, it would be arbitrary and capricious to finalize a 
regulatory regime where the agency’s record demonstrates that the requirements cannot be met by a 
high percent of regulated entities due to limitations in their resources, their size, and the age of their 
infrastructure (and therefore number of lead service lines in their systems). 
Requiring public water systems to go replace service lines more rapidly risks also disproportionate harm 
to environmental justice communities.  When amending the SDWA in 1996, Congress acknowledged the 
burdens that regulations place on water systems, the states, and ultimately consumers.  This is because 
costs of SDWA compliance are ultimately passed on to ratepayers.  Because low-income and 
overburdened households pay a larger percentage of their income on water and other utilities, this 
means that increases in rates from regulatory requirements can also disproportionately impact 
environmental justice communities.158  And as noted previously in these comments, grants and other 
forms of funding are not as readily available to address this fiscal concern as the Proposed Rule’s 
preamble suggests.   
AWWA is therefore concerned about, and notes, the inequities borne by racially and economically 
disadvantaged communities and the increased risks of lead exposure that these communities already 
face. Setting an even more infeasible regulatory requirement would only increase the financial and 
social stress caused by this Proposed Rule in these fragile communities for which neither Congress nor 
EPA has provided an adequate financial safety net.  Not only are water systems serving disadvantaged 
communities at increased risk under a more rapid replacement program schedule, disadvantaged 
households and businesses within robust communities would also be adversely impacted.  Where 
communities must act quickly to comply with a federal mandate, the community will be forced to pass 
on the cost of the more accelerated pace to households, including low-income households.  And, like 
EPA and state government, when the timeline for action becomes overwhelming, administrative 
flexibility decreases.  The same would be true of accelerated replacement programs – disadvantaged 
households, being of limited means, would bear the greatest burden from a loss of program flexibility.  
AWWA requests that EPA take these concerns into account, in accordance with the presidential 
directives on environmental justice.159 
 
158Diego S. Cardoso and Casey J. Wichman, Water Affordability in the United States (2022), available at 
https://mleead.umich.edu/files/Event_LegislativeForum_2023/Water%20Affordability/Research%20Articles/Wate
r%20Affordability%20in%20the%20United%20States.pdf (“This analysis reveals that the vast majority of 
households facing unaffordable water service are concentrated in the lowest income deciles.”). 
159 See, e.g., Executive Order on Revitalizing Our Nation’s Commitment to Environmental Justice for All (April 21, 
2023).  

 
111 
4.6 
EPA Reasonably Interpreted the SDWA’s Anti-Backsliding Provision in Light of the 
Treatment Technique Approach  
EPA must periodically review and revise drinking water standards to ensure protection of public health, 
and each revision shall maintain or provide for greater protection of public health. 160  Through the 
proposed LCRI, EPA has more than fulfilled its statutory obligation to ensure that it is maintaining or 
providing greater protection from lead in drinking water.  AWWA believes that the proper baseline for 
comparison is the LCR, but even if it were not, AWWA agrees with the Agency that the LCRI provides 
meaningful additional requirements to lower lead levels in drinking water.  Because the protections in 
the LCRI are so extensive, this remains true even without requiring interim compliance with the LCRR 
requirements.  EPA is therefore correct that the “proposed LCRI would improve public health protection 
more than either the LCR or LCRR in accordance with section 1412(b)(9) of SDWA.”161 
First, as EPA correctly notes,  
“[a]llowing water systems to transition from compliance with the LCR to compliance with the 
LCRI, while requiring systems to comply with the LCRR inventory requirements in the interim, 
would result in more full service line replacements and thus, broader and faster health risk 
reduction than if adequate planning for LCRI compliance did not take place because of the 
diversion of scarce system and State resources towards short-term implementation of the 
LCRR.”162  
Second, in the LCRI, 
“EPA is proposing to remove the lead trigger level and reduce the lead action level to 0.010 
mg/L, which would require more water systems to take public notification and public 
education actions than under the LCR and LCRR. This change is intended to provide greater 
health protection at all systems subject to the rule including those without LSLs or GRR service 
lines as a result of the actions required of a system after an action level exceedance.”163  
Congress did not speak precisely on the question of whether the anti-backsliding provision applies to 
each change in a national drinking water regulation,164 as Congress did not define a “revision” and 
therefore, the anti-backsliding provision is ambiguous as to whether to applies to the entire regulation 
or each individual revision.  When the statute is silent or ambiguous, as it is on this question, then the 
court must uphold the agency’s interpretation of the statute if it is reasonable.  This review is a 
deferential one as courts may not substitute their judgments for that of the agencies.165  It was 
reasonable for EPA to interpret the anti-backsliding provision with reference to the entire LCRI instead 
of individual benchmarks in this case because a treatment technique rule promulgates an integrated set 
of procedures rather than a single, enforceable compliance level.  Notably, EPA has previously 
determined that it could move from an MCL-based rule to a treatment technique-based rule without 
 
160 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(9). 
161 88 Fed Reg 84,902.  
162 88 Fed Reg 84,903.  
163 88 Fed Reg 84,902. 
164 See 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(9). 
165 Department of Commerce v. New York, 139 S. Ct. 2551, 2561 (2019). 

 
112 
running afoul of the SDWA’s anti-backsliding provisions. 166  Specifically, in the Revisions to the Total 
Coliform Rule, EPA determined that after more than 20 years of using an MCL-based rule, it could (and 
did) create a treatment technique rule that was more stringent with regard to protecting public 
health.167  In that rulemaking as here, EPA appropriately considered the evolving nature of the public 
health problem and new data available after many years of regulation to help inform its decision on how 
to best protect public health going forward.168 
The SDWA does not require EPA to compare individual provisions in a treatment technique rule in order 
to comply with the anti-backsliding provision. Rather the revised rule requirements, as a whole, must 
result in a more protective rule.  EPA has done so here.  EPA’s approach is also in keeping with the D.C. 
Circuit’s decision in American Water Works Ass’n v. EPA because it takes into account “the purpose of 
the Act to promote safe drinking water generally.”169  Demanding that the EPA perform a backsliding 
analysis on every individual revision, such as lead service line replacement, is inconsistent with the 
nature carefully crafted holistic regulations and is not possible with respect to a complex treatment-
technique based rulemaking. 170  
Even if the SDWA’s anti-backsliding provision to apply to each revision of a treatment-technique based 
rule, the LCRI’s LSL replacement revisions maintain or provide for greater protection of public health 
because the LCRI initiates more LSL replacements on a faster timeline than the LCRR.  For example, the 
LCRI requires more systems to engage in LSL and GRRSL replacement than the LCRR by requiring all 
CWSs to remove these lines and explicitly removing the small system flexibility provision of the LCRR 
with respect to service line replacement. In addition, the proposed LCRI anticipates virtual all CWSs to 
complete required service line replacements within 10 years, which is substantially sooner than the 
more than 30 year replacement schedule anticipated for triggered replacement in the LCRR, and will 
result in lines being replaced at a faster rate (even taking into account the period before compliance is 
required) than under the LCRR. 
These changes in the requirements and definitions will also have the net effect of more LSL and GRRSL 
replacement and more rapid replacement.  As previously explained, the LCRI requires all systems to 
complete service line material characterization in 10 years, and has the practical effect of requiring 
characterization sooner than 10 years in order to meet other rule requirements.  The LCRI require a 
validation study to assure that service line characterization practice was sufficiently robust to distinguish 
LSLs and GRRSLs from non-lead service lines.  This validation will occur within seven years so that 
necessary corrections and subsequent replacements can be completed in 10 years. 
 
166 See EPA, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Revisions to the Total Coliform Rule, 78 Fed. Reg. 10,270 
(Feb. 13, 2013).  
167 Id. at 10,309.  
168 Id. at 10,278.  
169 40 F.3d at 1271. 
170 A treatment technique rule is not analogous to an MCL or to other statutory schemes that involve a specific 
regulatory level. This difference is made clearer in NRDC v. EPA, which explained that the CAA puts states “onto a 
one-way street whose only outlet is attainment of the NAAQS 643 F.3d 311, 322 (D.C. Cir. 2011) (emphasis added). 
The same cannot be said for states and water systems in the SDWA when it comes to lead because states and 
water systems do not need to achieve a single standard of lead in drinking water in order to comply with the Act. 
Their other outlet, in this case, is complying with a treatment technique.  

 
113 
Likewise, the revised flexibility afforded to small water systems does not violate the anti-backsliding 
provision of the SDWA because the LCRI no longer allows small systems to either replace LSLs and 
GRRSLs or implement corrosion control (or install and maintain point-of-use filters).  
4.7 
The SDWA does not allow regulation of private property outside of public water 
systems and “control” cannot be equated with “access.” 
EPA’s proposed definition is not supported by the statutory text. --The SDWA regulates public water 
systems,171 but does not provide EPA with any authority to regulate other entities, such as businesses, 
landlords, or private residences.  Similarly, it does not give EPA authority over private property or other 
persons, and therefore cannot be used to compel removal of lead in private lines or plumbing fixtures 
that are private property.  By requiring PWSs to inventory and conduct LSR replacements on property 
that is not part of the PWS, the LCRI exceeds the scope of EPA’s authority under the SDWA and is 
therefore contrary to law.172 
Based on the statutory text, it is clear that the definition of “public water systems” does not include 
portions of the drinking systems under which operators have no “control,” including over private lines 
and lead in plumbing fixtures in private homes and businesses.  Indeed, the Supreme Court has clarified 
that agencies cannot require regulated entities to go beyond their proverbial fencelines to comply with 
 
171 The SDWA defines a public water system as a “system for the provision to the public of water for human 
consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances, if such system has at least fifteen service 
connections or regularly services at least twenty-five individuals.” 42 U.S.C. § 300f(4).  
172 See Proposed § 141.84(a) (“All water systems must develop a service line inventory that identifies the material 
and location of each service line connected to the public water distribution system. The inventory must include all 
service lines connected to the public water distribution system regardless of ownership status (e.g., where service 
line ownership is shared, the inventory includes both the portion of the service line owned by the water system 
and the portion of the service line owned by the customer).”); Proposed § 141.84(a)(2) (“All water systems must 
develop an updated initial inventory, known as the ‘baseline inventory’. . . .  The baseline inventory must include 
each service line and connector that is connected to the public water distribution system regardless of ownership 
status (e.g., where service line ownership is shared, the inventory includes both the portion of the service line 
owned by the water system and the portion of the service line owned by the customer).”); Proposed § 141.90(d) 
(“Mandatory full service line replacement. (1) All water systems must replace all lead and galvanized requiring 
replacement service lines under the control of the water system unless the replacement would leave in place a 
partial lead service line. (2) Where a water system has access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full 
service line replacement, the service line is under its control, and the water system must replace the service line. 
Where a water system does not have access to conduct full service line replacement, the water system is not 
required by this rule to replace the line, but the water system must document the reasons that the water system 
does not have access and include any specific laws, regulations, and/or water tariff agreements that affect the 
water system’s ability to gain access to conduct full lead and galvanized requiring replacement service line 
replacement identified pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)(viii) of this section. The water system must provide this 
documentation to the State pursuant to § 141.90(e)(10)”); Proposed § 141.90(i) (“This rule does not establish the 
criteria for determining whether a system has access to conduct full service line replacement. Any State or local 
laws or water tariff agreement requirements to gain access to conduct full service line replacement must be 
identified in the service line replacement plan as described in paragraph (c) of this section and in the notification 
provided to persons served by lead, galvanized requiring replacement, and unknown service lines as described in § 
141.85(e).”).  

 
114 
federal law when the underlying statute omits such authority.173  The definition of “public water 
systems” in the SDWA limits systems’ responsibility to portions of the distribution system under control 
of the system as the Act defines PWSs to include “(i) any collection, treatment, storage, and distribution 
facilities under control of the operator of such system and used primary in connection with such system, 
and (ii) any collection of pretreatment storage facilities not under such control which are used primarily 
in connection with such system.”174  By drawing this distinction between facilities under a PWS’s control, 
and those which are not, Congress clearly recognized that there are facilities, lines, and other matters 
that are in some sense connected to drinking water distribution but that nonetheless were not intended 
to be regulated as part of the PWS.  By contrast, there are certain state definitions of a “public water 
system” that do not contain this same limitation (i.e., only what is under the system’s control) when 
defining the PWS, demonstrating that this was a clear legislative decision on the part of Congress in 
drafting the SDWA.175 
Here, EPA proposes to replace the statutory limit (“control”) with its own preferred term (“access”): 
“Where a water system has access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full service line 
replacement, the service line is under its control, and the water system must replace the service line.”176 
But as noted above, Congress clearly addresses this issue by delineating between parts of a system 
under a system’s control and those which are not, and did not offer a third option for other parts of the 
system that a PWS may access.  “Agencies have only those powers given to them by Congress, and 
enabling legislation is generally not an open book to which the agency may add pages and change the 
plot line.” 177 Indeed, “an agency literally has no power to act . . . unless and until Congress confers power 
upon it.”178  As a result, EPA cannot alter the definition of a PWS, even if it believes doing so would 
better meet its policy goals.  
EPA’s proposed definition is not supported by the structure or legislative history of the SDWA. -- The 
structure and legislative history of the SDWA confirm that Congress intended to limited regulatory 
authority to PWSs, not other persons or property.  As EPA recognized before, “Congress does not appear 
to have anticipated the problem encountered with corrosion by-products,” and under such 
circumstances “the consequences of setting MCLs for lead and copper at the tap run counter to the 
purposes and structure of the [SDWA].”179  Post-1991 amendments to the SDWA confirm that Congress 
takes a different approach to handling lead in drinking water from private dwellings by expanding bans 
 
173 See West Virginia v. EPA, 142 S. Ct. 2587 (2022). 
174 42 U.S.C. § 300f (emphasis added).  
175 See, e.g., Mo. Stat. § 640.102(6) (“[A] system for the provision to the public of water for human consumption 
through pipes or other constructed conveyances, if such system has at least fifteen service connections or regularly 
serves an average of at least twenty-five individuals daily at least sixty days per calendar year. Such system 
includes any collection, treatment, storage or distribution facilities used in connection with such system.”). But I 
have yet to find a case interpreting the omission as meaningful. 
176 Proposed § 141.90(d)(2).  
177 West Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2609 (internal quotation marks omitted).   
178 Louisiana Pub. Serv. Comm’n v. FCC, 476 U.S. 355, 374 (1986); see also Michigan v. EPA, 268 F.3d 1075, 1081 
(D.C. Cir. 2001).  
179 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,476. 

 
115 
on lead faucets and on the sale of leaded solder and flux. 180 Notably, the provisions of the SDWA 
providing EPA authority to promulgate this rule only apply to PWSs.181  
By contrast, Congress has mandated that other lead-specific requirement apply not just to PWSs, but to 
all persons and all residential and nonresidential facilities.  Specifically, Congress dictated that “No 
person may use any pipe, any pipe or plumbing fitting or fixture, any solder, or any flux, after June 19, 
1986, in the installation or repair of- (i) any public water system; or (ii) any plumbing in a residential or 
nonresidential facility providing water for human consumption, that is not lead free.”182  When 
introducing these provisions, Congress did not amend the statutory provisions providing EPA with 
authority to pass a national drinking water regulation, and did not expand EPA’s authority to determine 
how PWSs address lead.  This clearly demonstrates that Congress both knows how to apply a lead-
focused ban to all persons and to ensure it reaches beyond the “public water system” including 
residential or nonresidential facilities.  The differences in the scope of this prohibition highlights that 
Congress did not make such a choice.  Congress also did not take the further step of requiring the 
removal of any plumbing materials that are not “lead free.”  Instead, it allowed those lead-containing 
material to remain in place and prohibited the further introduction of such materials in installations or 
repairs.  And it is not as though the broader issue of lead in drinking water has escaped Congress’s sight 
in the years since those amendment: Congress subsequently specifically amended the definition of “lead 
free” that applied to these pipes plumbing materials.183  And despite public attention on lead-related 
crisis like in Flint, MI, Congress has chosen not taken action to amend the SDWA to extend the authority 
of EPA beyond those parts of the system under that actual ownership and control of PWSs, or otherwise 
mandated removal of lead-containing materials outside of PWSs.  
Many arguments in favor of a broader definition of “control” advocate that EPA’s current position, which 
appropriately focuses on ownership, can result in policy outcomes that they see as sub-optimal, such as 
partial line replacements and customers being required to pay for the costs of replacing their own lines.  
Even if EPA finds these concerns to be compelling, they do not alter the fact that Congress has simply 
not authorized a broader statutory authority to mandate removal by PWSs.  For better or worse, 
Congress has determined that national drinking water regulations should apply only to PWSs, and has 
defined the term in a way that does not allow for EPA’s proposed requirements.  
EPA’s proposed definition is not supported by court decisions. -- AWWA has not found any court 
decisions that would support EPA’s overly broad and flawed reading of the SDWA. In 1991, U.S. Court of 
Appeals for the D.C. Circuit declined to reach the question regarding the scope of the EPA’s authority 
under the SDWA to require water systems to enter private property without customer consent.184  By 
contrast, in Bass v. Ledbetter, the Georgia Supreme Court determined that “[c]learly, the private lines 
running from the service connections of the distribution facilities into the homes of the residents are not 
 
180 S. Rep. No. 104–169, at 95. 
181 42 U.S.C. § 300g.  
182 42 U.S.C. § 300g–6(a)(1)(A).  
183 See EPA, Use of Lead Free Pipes, Fittings, Fixtures, Solder, and Flux for Drinking Water, available at 
https://www.epa.gov/sdwa/use-lead-free-pipes-fittings-fixtures-solder-and-flux-drinking-water.  
184 See AWWA, 40 F.3d at 1275. 

 
116 
within the control of the operator, and consequently, the EPD is charged with no responsibility for those 
private lines.”185 
EPA’s proposed definition is not reasonable and contrary to the ordinary meaning of “control.” -- Even if 
Congress had not directly addressed this issue, EPA’s attempt to redefine the term “control” is not a 
reasonable one.  There is meaningful distinction between the terms “control” and “access”: the former 
evincing the authority to manage or direct by virtue of ownership (or contract or similar legal 
mechanism), and the latter requiring authorization by the person or entity with actual control.186  With 
respect to property ownership, “control” necessarily encompasses the ability to exclude others (i.e., to 
grant, deny, or revoke access), as courts have long recognized.187  EPA, however, would flip this 
definition on its head by instead equating “control” with a scenario where the party with the actual 
control and actual ability to exclude has decided not exercise that right. Granting another party access 
to your property does not indicate that you no longer control it; indeed it is a demonstration of your 
control.  
It defies logic to suggest that each time a property owner invites a guest into their home, allows a third 
party to conduct an inspection, or gives permission for a governmental authority to enter for some 
limited purpose, that they have ceded “control” over their property to that person or entity.188  Even 
where government actors are granted temporary access to property by virtue of law, there are 
recognized limits (e.g., scope, duration, frequency, location)—not to be equated with a transfer or 
cessation of control.189  Indeed, the proposed LCRI implicitly recognizes the material difference between 
access and control by including proposed provisions for when ownership of a private property changes. 
Namely, the Proposed Rule suggests that a PWS’s “control” of the private property can change when a 
new owner grants the system “access” to the property. But as this scenario demonstrates, it is the 
owner and not the PWS with control over the property.  It also ignores the fact that a new owner can 
 
185 363 S.E.2d 760, 761 (Ga. 1988).  
186 Compare Control (noun), Black’s Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019) (“The direct or indirect power to govern the 
management and policies of a person or entity, whether through ownership . . . ; the power or authority to 
manage, direct, or oversee), and Control (verb), Black’s Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019) (“To exercise power or 
influence over,” or “[t]o regulate or govern,” or “[t]o have a controlling interest in”), with Access, Black’s Law 
Dictionary (11th ed. 2019) (“A right, opportunity, or ability to enter, approach, pass to and from, or communicate 
with”). 
187 See Cedar Point Nursery v. Hassid, 141 S. Ct. 2063, 2072 (2021) (“[T]he right to exclude is ‘universally held to be 
a fundamental element of the property right,’ and is ‘one of the most essential sticks in the bundle of rights that 
are commonly characterized as property.’” (quoting Kaiser Aetna v. United States, 444 U.S. 164, 176 (1979))); see 
also Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419, 435 (1982). 
188 This is often why a sharp distinction is drawn between a license, which is revocable at will and provides no 
interest in the real property aside from use, and an easement, which is irrevocable and does provide a property 
interest. See Restatement (First) of Property: Servitudes § 512 (Oct. 2023); see also, e.g., Seven Lakes Dev. Co. v. 
Maxson, 2006 WY 136, ¶ 11, 144 P.3d 1239, 1245 (Wyo. 2006) (describing difference between license and 
easement). 
189 See, e.g., 29 U.S.C. § 657(a) (authorizing inspections of “any . . . workplace or environment where work is 
performed” during “regular working hours and at other reasonable times”); 42 U.S.C. § 5413(b) (authorizing 
inspections anywhere “manufactured homes are manufactured, stored, or held for sale” at “reasonable times and 
without advance notice”); Miss. Code Ann. § 49–27–63 (authorizing inspections of “coastal wetlands” “from time 
to time”); Mich. Comp. Laws § 208.1435(5) (authorizing inspections of any “historic resource” “at any time during 
the rehabilitation process”; Boise Cascade Corp. v. United States, 296 F.3d 1339, 1352 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (affirming an 
injunction requiring property owner to allow government agents to enter its property to conduct owl surveys). 

 
117 
deny access, even when it has been granted by a prior owner.  So, for example, if a property was sold 
while a PWS was in the midst of a replacement, the new owner could block the PWS’s access to the 
private property and thus prevent the replacement.  If a PWS had control in the true sense of the word, 
this would not be the case. 
This scenario demonstrates why EPA’s proposed definition and provisions regarding changes in 
ownership are completely unworkable.  Under the proposed LCRI, PWSs my check with a property 
owner four separate times through two separate methods before they can determine that they do not 
have access to the property and therefore do not need to count the portions of the LSL on that private 
property towards the LSL removal requirement.190  But as EPA recognizes, property ownership is unlikely 
to remain static over a 10-year period.  So, any number of properties which denied a system access in 
year one may be sold by or even in year-10, necessitating that the system restart outreach efforts and 
readjust its calculation of how many removals have been completed just as it is reaching the end of its 
allowable time to remove all lines.  Ever-shifting property ownership will make it impossible for PWSs to 
accurately forecast operational budgets for line removals.  To make matters worse, EPA puts the onus 
on water systems to somehow track changes in property ownership so that it can conduct the 
regulatorily mandated outreach.191  Specifically, the Proposed Rule would give PWSs only six months 
after a change in ownership to offer to make a full LSL replacement, and only one year to conduct the 
mandated outreach of four attempts through two different methods.192  But EPA does not explain how 
PWSs are to track these changes in ownership with certainty or account for the burden in doing so.  
While a system is often made aware when there is a change in occupant (and therefore a different 
customer), for rental properties this will not correspond to a change in ownership.  As a result, even if 
EPA retains the current and unlawful proposed definition, it must remove the requirements that water 
systems determine a change of ownership and any obligations to again provide outreach must be 
triggered off of a system being provided with actual notice of the change in ownership through some 
means other than a notice of change in occupancy.  
Another practical problem with EPA’s proposed definition is one where a law, regulation, laws, 
regulations, or water tariff agreement provisions that impacted “access” are changed during the course 
of the 10-year time period during which water systems are responsible for removing lines.  Should, for 
example, a state law be amended in year 9 of the time period, PWSs could be in the untenable position 
 
190 See Proposed § 141.84(3) (“Where a water system has legal access to conduct full service line replacement only 
if property owner consent is obtained, the water system must make a ‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain property 
owner consent. If such a water system does not obtain consent after making a ‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain it 
from any property owner, then the water system is not required by this rule to replace any portion of the service 
line at that address. (i) A ‘reasonable effort’ must include at least four attempts to engage the property owner 
using at least two different methods of communication (e.g., in-person conversation, phone call, text message, 
email, written letter, postcard, or information left at the door such as a door hanger) before the applicable 
deadline of mandatory service line replacement as described in paragraph (d)(4) of this section. The State may 
require systems to conduct additional attempts and may require specific outreach methods to be used.”).  
191 See Proposed § 141.84(3)(ii) (“Within six months of any change in ownership of the property, the water system 
must offer full service line replacement to any new property owner and make a ‘reasonable effort’ to obtain the 
property owner’s consent as described in paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section within one year of any change in 
property ownership. If the water system is unable to obtain consent from the current property owner after making 
a ‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain it, the water system is not required under this rule to replace the line. This 
paragraph continues to apply after a system completes its mandatory service line replacement program.”).  
192 See Proposed § 141.84 (d)(3)(ii). 

 
118 
of suddenly needing to contact and attempt removal of many additional lines that they had not 
accounted for in their planning processes, and that they are not financially or technically prepared to 
remove.  EPA simply cannot regulate over a 10-year time horizon based on an ever-changing target and 
doing so when there are significant enforcement risks raises due process concerns.  
The problem with EPA’s proposed definition is further highlighted by the fact that EPA declines to define 
“access.”  As EPA recognizes, this will be complex and fact-specific even under the best of circumstances, 
as it can be impacted by state and local laws and regulations, and/or water tariff agreements.193  But 
rather than attempting to provide answers, EPA instead places additional burdens on PWSs by 
mandating that they identify “any laws, regulations, and/or water tariff agreements that affect the 
water system’s ability to gain access to conduct full lead and galvanized requiring replacement service 
line replacement, including the citation to the specific laws, regulations, or water tariff agreement 
provisions.”194  This still does not answer the more fundamental question of what it means to have legal 
and physical access to a property, including who (the property owner or the occupant) has the right to 
grant such access, or what a water system should do when, for instance, the owner grants legal access 
but the occupant denies physical access.  And while it leaves this question unanswered, it does highlight 
the fact that “access” and property rights are matters of state and local law where it is not 
appropriate—particularly absent any clear directive from Congress—for EPA to assert authority.  Put 
simply, introducing requirements that are beyond the scope of what Congress intended for the SDWA to 
regulate, EPA has introduced a host of new practical problems, and AWWA therefore urges EPA to 
remove these requirements from the final LCRI.  
EPA has not provided a proper justification or explanation for its change in definition. -- Even if EPA’s 
interpretation of the statute were a permissible one, it has not justified its change in position here.195  
EPA previously equated “control” with “ownership,” appropriately recognizing that “the broader 
definition of ‘control’... could result in unintended delays and other complications.”196  EPA has not (as it 
must under the APA) justified this departure from its prior position.  EPA provides only a cursory 
statement that:  
“EPA is proposing to treat a service line as under the system’s control wherever a water 
system has adequate access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full service line 
replacement  . . . EPA is proposing to treat a connector as under the system’s control 
wherever a water system has adequate access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct 
replacement of the connector. EPA is not proposing to delineate the prerequisites or 
elements of “access” that a system would need to conduct full service line or connector 
 
193 See Proposed § 141.84(c)(1)(viii). 
194 Id.  
195 See Nat’l Cable & Telecommunications Ass’n v. Brand X Internet Servs., 545 U.S. 967, 981 (2005) (observing that 
an “[u]nexplained inconsistency” in agency interpretation could be “a reason for holding an interpretation to be an 
arbitrary and capricious change from agency practice under the Administrative Procedure Act” (citing State Farm, 
463 U.S. at 46–57)). 
196 2000 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 65 Fed. Reg. at 1950, 1966 (Jan. 12, 2000) (stating that “EPA has 
eliminated the ‘control’ terminology from the Rule” and “revise[d] §141.84(d) to require the water system to 
replace only the portion of the [lead service line] that it owns.”). 

 
119 
replacement because of the wide variation of relevant State and local laws and water tariff 
agreements as well as the potential for these to change over time.””197 
EPA provides no explanation for why access to these lines, which it readily admits can shift with changes 
in local laws, agreements, or property ownership, can be fairly equated with the statutory term 
“control.”  
AWWA also notes that EPA’s proposed definition, which would add or remove (and then perhaps re-
add) LSL on private property to the definition of “service lines” will, as a practical matter, result in the 
partial line replacements that EPA seeks to avoid.198  Specifically, the proposed § 141.84(d)(1) states that 
“All water systems must replace all lead and galvanized requiring replacement service lines under the 
control of the water system unless the replacement would leave in place a partial lead service line” and 
proposed § 141.84(d)(2) states that “Where a water system does not have access to conduct full service 
line replacement, the water system is not required by this rule to replace the line.”  But regardless of how 
EPA defines or redefines the private portion of the line, the fact remains that the LCRI will create a de 
facto requirement to conduct a partial LSR removal each time a system is denied access to a private 
property by mandating that the portion of the line under the actual control of the system is removed to 
meet the 100% LSL removal requirement.  Put simply, by playing with the definitions, EPA can change 
the requirements, but it cannot change the fact that these properties contain lead, or the risks 
associated with mandating a partial line removal when they do.  
It is also worth noting that it is hard to square general prohibition of partial line replacements with both 
this de facto partial replacement in the absence of “access,” as well as the exception when the 
replacements occur “as part of an emergency repair or in coordination with planned infrastructure 
work, excluding planned infrastructure work solely for the purposes of lead or galvanized requiring 
replacement service line replacement.”199  As noted elsewhere in these comments, due to changes in 
practices, partial line replacements do not generally present the same risks that they may have 
historically.  EPA’s allowance for these exemptions demonstrates the arbitrariness of the more general 
prohibition on partial replacements and should be revised in the final LCRI.  
EPA’s proposed requirements for schools and daycares present similar concerns and are likewise beyond 
EPA’s statutory authority. -- These same concerns noted above exist with regard to EPA’s proposed 
provisions related to the proposed school and childcare facility monitoring program, which likewise 
exceeds EPA’s statutory authority under the SDWA.  Indeed, Congress has repeatedly demonstrated its 
intent for local educational agencies, not PWSs, to oversee testing and remediation of lead 
contamination in schools and childcare facilities.  Furthermore, the program also implicates federalism 
concerns.  AWWA raised many of these concerns when EPA first proposed their inclusion in the LCRR 
and reincorporates those arguments here for the agency’s further consideration in this rulemaking.  As 
with other LCRR requirements that EPA has revisited and determined to lack a clear legal basis or a 
demonstrable health benefit, EPA must take this opportunity to revisit the Proposed Rule.  While AWWA 
deeply appreciates the need to keep children safe from exposure to lead in drinking water, schools and 
 
197 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920. 
198 See, e.g., 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,917 (“Research has found that partial LSLR has not been shown to reliably reduce 
lead levels in the short term and may temporarily increase lead levels due to disruptions of established scales or 
galvanic corrosion.”).  
199 Proposed § 141.84(g). 

 
120 
daycares are currently highly regulated, primarily at the state and local level, through a complex 
network of agencies overseeing everything from licensing to health requirements.  It is neither 
appropriate nor beneficial for PWSs to wade into these regimes, and their resources can be far better 
used when focusing on the area where they do have both the experience and authority to meaningfully 
impact public health.  
First, schools and childcare facilities are not part of the “public water system” over which EPA has 
jurisdiction for the same reasons discussed above.  Second, Congress intended that local educational 
agencies, not PWSs, oversee the type of school monitoring requirements in the proposed rule.  It is 
worth noting that health considerations in schools and childcare facilities are already highly regulated, 
indicating that this is not an area where Congress has simply failed to take action or intended for EPA to 
fill in statutory gaps.  Indeed, Congress has repeatedly visited these concerns and declined to follow the 
approach proposed by EPA here.  For example, in the Lead Contamination Control Act of 1988, Congress 
required states to establish programs to assist local educational agencies in monitoring and remediating 
lead contamination from schools.200  However, the Fifth Circuit found that this requirement violated the 
Tenth Amendment.201  More recently, in the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act, 
Congress directed EPA to “establish a voluntary school and child care program lead testing grant 
program to make grants available to states to assist local educational agencies in voluntary testing for 
lead contamination in drinking water at schools and childcare programs under the jurisdiction of the 
local educational agencies.”202  Both times, Congress demonstrated its intent for states and local 
educational agencies, not PWSs, to oversee testing and remediation of lead contamination in schools 
and childcare facilities.  
The school monitoring program likewise exceeds EPA’s monitoring authority.  EPA can require PWSs to 
“conduct such monitoring . . . as the Administrator may reasonably require” to assist in 1) establishing 
new regulations, 2) evaluating compliance with existing regulations, 3) administering financial 
assistance, 4) “evaluating the health risks of unregulated contaminants,” or 5) “in advising the public of 
such risks.”203  The last category is most relevant here.  The phrase “advising the public of such risks” is 
informed by the preceding clause, which refers to the “health risks of unregulated contaminants.”  EPA 
can therefore require water systems to conduct reasonable monitoring to assist EPA in advising the 
public of the health risks of unregulated contaminants.  Lead is not an unregulated contaminant.  Thus, 
EPA’s monitoring authority also does not provide grounds for the school monitoring program proposed 
here.  The proposed school monitoring program exceeds EPA’s authority under the SDWA and is 
therefore contrary to law.  The Proposed Rule assigns this task to PWSs, in contravention of Congress’ 
demonstrated intent. the school monitoring program raises federalism concerns.  Some state public 
utility commissions (PUCs) prohibit utilities from “cross-subsidization,” where certain customers’ rates 
are used to subsidize other customers’ services.204  A PWS using ratepayer funds to fulfill the school 
 
200 Acorn v. Edwards, 81 F.3d 1387, 1388-89 (5th Cir. 1996).   
201 Id. at 1392-94.   
202 42 U.S.C. § 300j-24(d)(2)(A).   
203 42 U.S.C. § 300j-4(a)(1)(A). 
204 By way of example, California law requires “government owned public utility rates be based on the cost of 
service. This precludes cross subsidies within and among customer classes[.]” EPA, Drinking Water and Wastewater 
EPA, 2016, Utility Customer Assistance Programs at 18, available at 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-04/documents/dw-ww_utilities_cap_combined_508.pdf.   

 
121 
monitoring requirements would be engaging in cross-subsidization because the program is targeted to 
benefit a small class of consumers. PWSs in a state that prohibits cross-subsidization will not be able to 
comply with the school monitoring program and their PUC rules at the same time. 
AWWA notes that this does not mean there is no solution to the issue. As EPA itself recognizes in the 
proposed LCRI, regulation over lines and plumbing fixtures on private property and regulation of schools 
and daycares remain issues of state law and regulatory authority, and the states---almost all of which 
already have primacy under the SDWA---have the ability to take further steps in this area beyond EPA’s 
authority. 
4.8 
The Proposed Rule creates federalism concerns and risks creating unnecessary conflicts 
with state and local laws.  
The Proposed Rule takes the unusual and unnecessary step of mandating that: 
“ Where the State determines that a shortened replacement deadline is feasible for a water 
system (e.g., by considering the number of lead and galvanized requiring replacement 
service lines in a system’s inventory), the State must require the system to replace service 
lines by an earlier deadline than required in paragraph (d)(4) of this section and establish a 
different minimum replacement rate in accordance with paragraph (d)(5)(iv)(A). The State 
must make this determination in writing and notify the system of its finding. The State must 
set a shortened deadline at any time throughout a system’s replacement program if a State 
determines a shorter deadline is feasible. This paragraph also applies to systems eligible for 
a deferred deadline as specified in paragraph (d)(5)(v) of this section.”205 
The SDWA of course gives the states the freedom to pass more stringent water regulations, so long as 
they do not conflict with federal law and are not otherwise preempted.  This allows states and their local 
constituency the freedom in our democratic system to govern themselves as they see fit and to respond 
appropriately to local determinations about how to balance competing demands, including those 
related to public health and the corresponding costs and benefits of taking certain actions.  But here EPA 
proposes to take the additional step of mandating that states set more stringent requirements, based on 
nebulous criteria, for systems that it determines can feasibly replace lines on a faster timeline.  This 
provision has no basis in the SDWA, places an extraordinary additional burden on states, deprives them 
of their traditional police powers to oversee public health and welfare, and would cause them to create 
unnecessary and unjustified enforcement risks for PWSs within their jurisdiction by creating a shifting 
and unpredictable compliance schedule for service line removal.  This provision, and any other 
provisions mandating that states set stricter requirements must be removed from the final rule.  
Likewise, the mandate that “be required to identify potential barriers to full service line replacement in 
State laws, including statutes and constitutional provisions, in their application for primacy for the 
LCRI”206 has no basis in the SDWA and will only serve to create unnecessary tensions between states and 
EPA.  EPA makes clear that the purpose of this requirement is to create political pressure for states to 
change their laws: 
 
205 Proposed § 141.84(d)(5)(iv). 
206 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,928.  

 
122 
“By identifying these potential barriers and making the information publicly accessible in the 
replacement plan, these proposed requirements can better support a community discussion 
about where barriers exist and how best to address them as part of the replacement 
program.”207 
But pressuring sovereign states into taking actions that align with EPA’s policy goals is not the 
appropriate role of federal regulation, and is a role best left, if at all, to Congress.  Absent a clear 
congressional directive EPA cannot and should not finalize such a requirement.  
EPA’s proposed provisions regarding removal of lines outside of a PWS likewise create unnecessary 
conflict with state law.  For example, some states already have provisions in place addressing when and 
how utilities may replace public lines.  In a scenario where a water system replaces a customer’s portion 
of a line and does so at the water system’s expense, those costs will likely be passed on to all of a 
system’s customers in the form of higher water rates. But some state public utility commissions (PUCs) 
prohibit utilities from “cross-subsidization,” where certain customers’ rates are used to subsidize other 
customers’ services.208  In such circumstances, a water system may have “access” to a customer’s lines, 
but if the customer refuses to pay for the removal, then the system would have no way to recover the 
costs of removal.  Other states allow for the replacement of customer-owned lead service lines, but 
include PUC-approved caps on the number of such lines that can be replaced annually.209  Such caps 
could easily conflict with the Proposed Rule’s ten year mandatory line replacement provisions unless 
EPA revises the definition to only include lines within the PWS as defined in the SDWA.  
5 
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
EPA’s Economic Analysis of the proposed LCRI contains a number of fundamental flaws. 
5.1 
Estimate of Lead Risk Reduction is Not Substantiated 
To support these comments AWWA obtained an expert review of EPA’s analysis and presentation of the 
benefits anticipated from the proposed LCRI.  That review is attached in whole as Appendix A to these 
comments.  The following is a summary of the detailed recommendations arising from this review: 
1. The inclusion of cardiovascular and pulmonary (CVP) mortality significantly increases the 
estimates of both lifetime health risk and economic benefits of mitigation.  That increase, 
however, is largely dependent on how the analysis treats the value of a statistical life. 
Greater justification for this value is required to clearly explain the economic benefits and 
why CVP mortality plays such a large role in the LCRI analyses. 
AWWA supports consideration of CVP mortality effects in EPA’s decision-making, and the 
focus on the studies in Exhibit 21 of the Abt’s 2023 report.210 However, AWWA seeks 
 
207 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,928. 
208 By way of example, California law requires “government owned public utility rates be based on the cost of 
service. This precludes cross subsidies within and among customer classes[.]” EPA, Drinking Water and Wastewater 
EPA, 2016, Utility Customer Assistance Programs at 18, available at 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-04/documents/dw-ww_utilities_cap_combined_508.pdf.   
209 See, e.g., 66 Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes 1311(b)(2)(vi). 
210 Abt. “Selection of Concentration Response Functions between Lead Exposure and Adverse Health Outcomes for 
Use in Benefits Analysis: Cardiovascular-Disease Related Mortality”, Revised Report. (2023) EPA-HQ-OW-2022-
0801-0587. 

 
123 
greater clarity on how the decision was taken to now consider the database sufficient to 
not only claim that lead is a risk factor for CVP mortality, but that it is now scientifically 
justified to quantify the exposure-response characteristics at levels of lead in drinking 
water found in homes. 
2. The proposed LCRI economic analyses require extrapolation of health effects from high to 
low levels of exposure (or blood lead levels (BLL)) typical in homes. Total benefits of lead 
mitigation in the U.S. population contain a large fraction of benefits attributable to 
mitigation at very low levels of exposure but encompassing large populations.   
a. The proposed LCRI benefit analysis does not break down the contributions to 
population benefits by level of lead exposure in water (or BLL), although such 
information will have been generated at some point during the analysis and would 
be available to EPA. It would be useful to provide this breakdown so decision 
makers and the public can better understand how much of the calculated benefit 
is attributable to benefits at low levels of exposure where questions might arise 
over the justification for linear extrapolation to zero. 
b. EPA’s most authoritative and current summary of lead health effects211 does not 
contain evidence that rules out a threshold for IQ decrement effect, or at least a 
large degree of non-linearity, below BLLs of 5 µg/dL.  Assuming IQ decrement 
occurs below 5 µg/dL and can be calculated on the basis of linear extrapolation 
downwards is consistent with policy default assumptions but leaves decision 
makers with the mistaken impression that the estimates of IQ decrement, and 
hence the benefits of mitigation, in the large population of children with BLLs 
below 5 µg/dL is well established by the available scientific data rather than being 
the result of the policy default assumption. 
There is a similar but less severe concern with the extrapolation of CVP mortality. 
Again, the agency should explain why the risk coefficient from the range of 
observed effects is appropriate for extrapolation to a lower range of BLLs. 
3. Co-benefits are described qualitatively.  While the SDWA requires consideration of both 
quantifiable and nonquantifiable health risks, absent evidence of whether these co-
benefits are large or small compared to the primary health risks and benefits underlying 
decisions on lead mitigation.  It is not clear how the co-benefit claims add to the analysis 
and conclusions of the Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis. 
4. In finalizing the economic analysis for the LCRI, EPA should clarify the claim in the current 
analysis that economic benefits to the total U.S. population from mitigation attributed to 
CVP mortality are correct.  The Proposed Rule analysis does not demonstrate that the 
economic benefits to an individual in a given home are dominated by CVP mortality.  This 
distinction is important to decision makers determining if and how to finalize the rule 
requirements as well as to risk communication to the public. 
5. Research shows that fifth liter sample lead observations are on average approximately a 
factor of five higher than time-weighted average (TWA) values presumed in health effects 
 
211 EPA. Integrated Science Assessment (ISA) for Lead (2024) EPA/600/R-23/375. 

 
124 
models. If this factor of five is accounted for, both the IQ and CVP benefits calculated on 
the basis of compliance samples would be reduced by a factor of five and the net benefit 
to cost ratio is considerably less. 
EPA’s analysis indicates a low scenario benefit of ~$17 billion and cost of ~ $2 billion. 
Reducing the benefit by five due to not using TWA substantially alters the benefit-to-cost 
ration.  Simply comparing an adjusted EPA estimate of benefit accounting for this factor 
against EPA’s estimate of the cost of the proposed LCRI brings the benefit-to-cost ratio 
closer to one. 
6. In summarizing the benefit cost analysis for the proposed LCRI the Federal Register reads 
“…the Administrator has determined that the quantified and nonquantifiable benefits of 
the proposed LCRI NPDWR justify the quantifiable and nonquantifiable costs.”.212 By 
including ‘nonquantifiable’ in this statement, the EPA is implying that the nonquantifiable 
benefits play some significant role in the judgement that costs are justified; this is not 
true, and should be stated as such in the LCRI rationale. This distinction is not only 
important to decision makers determining if and how to finalize the rule requirements but 
to risk communication to the public. 
7. The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis considers qualitatively the impact of public 
information and education on effects and benefits, with no attempt to quantify this, 
including no attempt to show whether public education will have a significant or 
insignificant impact on effects and benefits. It is notable that there is no review of the 
extensive literature on ‘uptake rates’ of behaviors in response to environmental policies, a 
literature that would inform a decision as to how effective public information can be on 
behavioral change.  
8. EPA proposes an expanded and enhanced program of public education on the risks of lead 
exposure and the benefits of reducing that exposure.  This includes improvements to the 
Consumer Confidence Reports, capturing the recent advances in understanding risks and 
benefits.  This is appropriate both because the public needs to understand these risks and 
benefits to take informed decisions, and because the proposed LCRI relies in part on 
voluntary behavioral changes by consumers.  However, the language suggested in the 
proposed LCRI is inadequate.  It speaks too often of vaguely defined terms such as ‘no safe 
level’, ‘possible effects are…’, ‘can cause serious health effects in people of all ages’.  
The problem here is not that these statements are factually incorrect, but rather that they 
fail to provide the public sufficient information to take informed decisions. 
Simply stating that lead can cause effect “X” is insufficient to inform the public of health 
risk and associated benefits of mitigation.  Comparative risk assessment was developed to 
help the public understand how the probability and severity of a given stress such as lead 
in water compares against the universe of other concerns they might have and for which 
they probably have a better level of understanding and emotional grasp (road safety, 
smoking, gun violence etc.).  
 
212 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,034. 

 
125 
Consider the case of children exposed at the proposed Action Level of 10 µg/L. As 
explained previously, this will result in an IQ decrement of 0.4 points. It is necessary to 
establish whether such a decrement is clinically significant, including whether it will lead 
to any decrease in the lifetime earnings.  Systems for classifying IQ scores generally 
contain 6 or 7 categories of differential ability on tasks that are expected to influence life 
chances. Those categories have a width of approximately 10 IQ points.  For the vast 
majority of children (more than 97%), a shift of 0.4 points up or down would leave them in 
the same category of performance and life chances.  The Proposal documentation should 
at least mention this issue, explaining why small changes in IQ are assumed to produce 
the levels of change in lifetime earnings per IQ point change that have been developed 
from studies that examine economic impacts of significantly larger IQ differences.  
Language such as that provided in the proposed LCRI required communications, preamble 
and supporting documents fails to do this, leaving the public improperly informed as to 
the magnitude of effects and benefits.  In addition, the language in the proposed LCRI fails 
to place waterborne lead into the context of all other sources of exposure to lead. Such an 
understanding of context would allow the public to better assess whether their primary 
concern should be on mitigating Pb in water, or dealing with problems of Pb in paint, dust 
etc. 
9. A distinction must be drawn between the economic benefits of IQ decrement and CVP 
mortality.  For IQ, the economic benefits are measurable effects on lifetime earnings (at 
least at the high values of BLL underlying the studies of this effect). IQ decrement can 
therefore be described as having an objective economic effect based on market 
transactions, as they will have an impact on the life chances of an individual child and on 
the magnitude of the economy (such as per capita gross domestic product (GDP)). By 
contrast, the CVP mortality benefits in the Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis are based on 
Value of a Statistical Life (VSL) drawn from willingness to pay surveys and thus are not 
actual economic impacts, either to the individual consumer or to society. They have no 
direct impact on the life chances of an individual or the magnitude of the economy, since 
they involve no economic transactions.  The use of VSL’s in economic analysis is only 
sound when it is presented in a manner that appropriately informs decision makers and 
the public.  The proposed LCRI docket contains the factual basis for the benefits analysis 
but the agency is not forthcoming and transparent in the implications of its approach for 
policymakers. 
5.2 
Health Burdens (Costs) Not Addressed in Analysis 
While EPA attributes a number of potential health benefits to marginal improvement in lead exposure 
achieved through the LCRI proposal, the agency does not consider the real-world health risks associated 
with the rulemaking.  EPA encourages regulated entities like CWSs to fully consider the environmental 
and social impacts of their actions, EPA should hold itself to a similar standard in its economic analyses 
as is reflected in EPA’s “Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses,” 
 
“To be complete, an estimate of social cost should include both the opportunity costs of 
current consumption that will be foregone as a result of the regulation, and the losses that 

 
126 
may result if the regulation reduces capital investment and thus future consumption.” 
(Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses, 2010 (as amended), page 8-2)213 
 
Where opportunity costs are defined as, “… the value lost to society of any goods and services that will 
not be produced and consumed as a result of a regulation.”214  In this instance the lost value is foregone 
public health protections. 
In addition to not comporting with EPA guidance for economic analysis these gaps are at odds with 
EPA’s efforts to meet the expectations of Executive Order 13045 (Protection of Children from 
Environmental Health and Safety Risks), Executive Order 12898 (Federal Actions to Address 
Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations), and Executive Order 14096 
(Revitalizing Our Nation’s Commitment to Environmental Justice for All).  By not address opportunity 
costs EPA neglects analyzing whether the proposed LCRI requirements pose a net benefit to these 
important groups as directed by Executive Order. 
 
Adverse Impacts of Proposed Rule Provisions -- The current analysis does not consider: 
1. The potential loss of fire protection to structures when the LCRI ban on partial 
replacement and LCRI requirement to provide customer notification prior to return to 
service prevents water systems from returning water service to a structure.  As the LCRI is 
currently drafted this risk applies to both water service lines that are providing potable 
water service and to service lines that serve fire suppression systems. 
2. The potential illnesses associated with inadequate sanitation when water service is not 
returned to residences in a timely manner as described above, when the increased cost of 
service associated with the LCRI leads to a failure to pay for water service and associated 
shutoffs, and where states and localities to assist CWSs implement the LCRI ban partial 
replacements more broadly. 
3. The pace and nature of accelerated service line replacement programs deteriorating 
street pavement, such that accidents result. 
4. The introduction of heavy equipment and excavations in residential and commercial areas 
creates the opportunity for vehicular accidents as well as accidents involving pedestrians.   
At the scale and pace of LSL and GRRSL replacement reflected in the LCRI, the above risks are not trivial 
and should be considered in the agency’s analysis. 
Alternative Investments of Scarce Resources -- A more challenging analysis that the agency also does not 
consider is the public health consequences of directing limited available resources toward the 
requirements of the proposed LRCI. Resources that are expended to meet the agency’s directive to 
achieve a marginal theoretical health risk reduction at the pace and scale proposed, mean that those 
resources are not available to for other purposes including: 
1. Replace failing distribution system infrastructure with the associated potential fire, flood, 
and sanitation implications 
 
213 EPA, Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses (as amended) (2010)  
214 Id. at 8-1.  

 
127 
2. Investing in maintaining and improving drinking water treatment facilities for currently 
regulated contaminants of health concern 
3. Investing in water infrastructure investments needed to assure a reliable and safe water 
supply into the future, whether those investments are due to climate change or other 
factors, such as EPA’s failure to protect waters of the U.S. from contaminants like PFAS 
4. Investing in water supply infrastructure to assure adequate water supply to continue to 
provide the fire protection and public health benefits of a centralized water system into 
the future. 
CWS have limited resources and must effectively use those resources to protect public health.  EPA is 
familiar within its own organization with the effects of shifting priorities leading to the loss of funding 
for important programs.  The effect of a federal rule is similar.  A sound economic analysis weighs the 
benefits of action against the missed / foregone risk reduction opportunities expending resources to 
achieve those risks cause. 
Social Cost of Greenhouse Gas – This administration has placed a particular strategic focus on the 
reduction of greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide.  The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis 
provides a cursory response to “Order 13211: Actions That Significantly Affect Energy Supply, 
Distribution, or Use” but does not attempt to address “Sec. 5.  Accounting for the Benefits of Reducing 
Climate Pollution” of “Executive Order 13990: Protecting Public Health and the Environment and 
Restoring Science to Tackle the Climate Crisis.”  In September 2022 EPA published “Report on the Social 
Cost of Greenhouse Gases: Estimates Incorporating Recent Scientific Advances.” The report describes 
the discounted cost of carbon dioxide for use when evaluating regulatory proposals.  EPA has not 
incorporated the greenhouse gas effects of this rulemaking into its benefit-cost analysis.  As EPA 
describes in other elements of the rule cost analysis there are: 
1. Extensive mobilization of staff, contractors, and other service providers to undertake all 
facets of the LCRI.  These mobilizations will require travel using automobiles, trucks, and in 
some instances require the use of heavy equipment.  At present these vehicles will be 
primarily diesel and gasoline powered.  Tasks involving vehicles include: 
a. Service line material characterization 
b. Service line material validation study 
c. Service line replacement 
d. Public education requirements including delivery of pitcher filters 
e. Sample kit delivery and collection 
2. The anticipated increased use of pH / alkalinity control and the addition of 
orthophosphate at increased doses to achieve targeted OCCT.  There are embedded 
carbon cost in the anticipated increase in treatment by required by the LCRI proposal, 
including 
a. Production, transportation, and use of orthophosphate addition 
b. Wastewater treatment costs associated with removal of phosphate  

 
128 
c. Production, transportation, and use of chemical feeds used to adjust pH and 
alkalinity 
The above referenced report was published as part of the economic analysis of “Standards of 
Performance for New, Reconstructed, and Modified Sources and Emissions Guidelines for Existing 
Sources: Oil and Natural Gas Sector Climate Review”215 which specifically references the above Executive 
Order. In that rulemaking, EPA estimates the cost of greenhouse gases by discount rate per year with 
costs per metric ton ranging from $130 to $370 at 2.5 and 1.5 percent discount rates, respectively, in 
2026.   
 
5.3 
Distributing Cost over Time 
The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis (as described by the agency) distributes the Proposed Rule’s 
financial impacts over time when as a practical matter the fiscal impact of the rule will impact 
communities in a very small window of time.   
While capital costs, particularly large infrastructure capital expenses are funded through debt and debt 
with interest is paid over a period of years.  Many of the costs of the Proposal are operational costs that 
will be funded as operational expenses.  As fiduciaries CWSs will not, except under the most extreme 
situations, incur debt for operational expenses.  Not only is such practice poor financial practice it is at 
odds with the basic tenants of rate making where rate payers are charged for the services, they 
themselves receive.   
In addition to appropriately representing the period in which expenses are incurred, EPA must consider 
the bolus of tasks that are required simultaneously by the rule, such that operational expenses are 
required in the same, and in this rule, limited portion of the period costed.  Examples of operational 
expenses in the rule that EPA cannot annualize over an extended period and to a substantial degree will 
occur at the same time include: 
1. All of the rule’s public education provisions 
a. Notification to customers of service line materials 
b. Notification to occupants of service line related construction 
c. Outreach and notification in the wake of a lead action level exceedance 
d. Provision of filter instructions and filters associated with service line construction 
/ disturbance 
e. Making filters available when there is a continuing lead action level exceedances 
f. Support for customer requested sampling 
g. Tier 1 public notification  
2. It is also inappropriate to annualize costs over a period that exceeds the useful life of the 
item that has been purchased.  The clearest example in the economic analysis being 
 
215 EPA. 2021. Standards of Performance for New, Reconstructed, and Modified Sources and Emissions Guidelines 
for Existing Sources: Oil and Natural Gas Sector Climate Review. EPA Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2021-0317. 

 
129 
pitcher filters and POU filters when provided following as a prophylactic measure 
associated with service line construction / disturbance, an action level exceedance. 
5.4 
Cost of Service Line Replacement 
The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis significantly underestimates the cost of LSL replacement. This 
underestimate affects the benefit-cost analysis for the Proposed Rule and it underestimates the 
cumulative cost of replacement programs at the national or state level.  The latter being central to 
decisions regarding federal funding that is needed.  
In 2022 AWWA provided EPA with a detailed engineering analysis of actual service line replacement 
programs.216, 217  The AWWA cited CDM Smith Report has costs reported by over 25 CWSs for full LSL 
replacement and over 20 CWSs for partial replacement.  The table below summarizes the costs reported 
adjusted to 2022 dollars.  The replacement costs themselves are actual prices and represent what CWSs 
have to pay for direct replacement to outside contractors.  Also, included are required ancillary costs 
such as engineering services, permitting, administration, outreach and post-replacement costs.  EPA’s 
Proposed Rule also recognized the need for ancillary services.  In this analysis ancillary costs are not in 
the “replacement” costs except restoration.  Therefore, the total cost estimates for service line 
replacement are the bottom-line figures of $7,600 to $37,800 with an average cost of $12,500. 
LSLR Component  
Minimum 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Average 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Maximum 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
  
  
  
  
Full Replacement (CWS and Private Side) 
$6,000 
$9,900 
$30,000 
Restoration 
$1,769 
$2,919 
$8,847 
Utility Side Replacement 
$2,300 
$4,990 
$10,000 
Private Side Replacement 
$4,150 
$7,150 
$25,000 
  
  
  
  
Engineering Services 
$660 
$1,090 
$3,300 
Field Inspection (Per SL) 
  
  
  
Customer Provided Data 
-- 
$10 
-- 
Door-to-Door Inspections 
-- 
$69 
-- 
Vacuum Excavation 
-- 
$320 
-- 
Mechanical Excavation 
-- 
$1,120 
-- 
  
  
  
  
Internal Labor Administration 
$175 
$289 
$876 
  
  
  
  
Customer Outreach 
$108 
$178 
$539 
  
  
  
  
Permitting 
$576 
$950 
$2,879 
  
  
  
  
 
216 AWWA, Lead and Copper Rulemaking Improvements Rulemaking (2022), Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0813 
(Federalism Comments). Attachment 1. CDM Smith. Final Report. Considerations when Costing Lead Service Line 
Identification and Replacement, (Nov. 2022). (see Appendix K) 
217 EPA, Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis Appendices at A-6 (2023). 

 
130 
LSLR Component  
Minimum 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Average 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Maximum 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Post-Replacement Provisions 
$78 
$118 
$158 
Pitcher Style Filter with 6 Months of Cartridges 
-- 
$58 
-- 
Water Sample 
$20 
$60 
$100 
Totals (rounded to nearest hundred) 
$7,600 
$12,500 
$37,800 
 
The cost estimate in the Proposed Rule Economic Analysis is summarized in the table below. The values 
shown in the economic analysis for minimum and maximum costs were reported as representing the 25 
and 75th percentile. No average cost was presented but presumably the modeling resulted in a median 
cost in the middle of the two values. The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis notes that the costs include 
ancillary costs other than those included elsewhere.  Note that neither analysis has inspection services 
for overseeing the replacements which are needed and significant. As an example, it is estimated in the 
response to Request for Comment 14 above that a crew can replace at best three service lines per day. 
An inspector cost for one day is approximately $480 or $160 per replaced service line.  This cost would 
need to be added to the average cost.  
LSLR Component  
Minimum 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Average 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Maximum 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
  
  
  
  
Full Replacement (CWS and Private Side) 
$6,507  
$0  
$8,519  
Partial Replacement 
$1,920  
$0  
$5,400  
GRR Replacement 
$1,920  
$0  
$5,400  
 
Comparing the above tables illustrates the significant underestimate in the costs reflected in the 
Proposed Rule Economic Analysis.  The Proposed Rule economic analysis reflects a maximum cost that is 
approximately the same as the actual minimum cost for full LSLR, which AWWA provided EPA in 
December 2022 (in the above table costs extracted from EPA’s analysis are in 2020 dollars and CDC 
Smith report costs are in 2022 dollars).  In the Proposed Rule economic analysis EPA eliminated high 
costs and only used the 75th percentile value at the high end of the replacement cost range.  This 
approach incorrectly eliminates actual costs being paid by CWSs; the upper values are not “statistical 
outliers”.  
Appendix A to the Proposed Rule Economic Analysis stated that  
“EPA did not utilize the auxiliary cost data due to potential issues with double counting 
because some auxiliary costs (such as planning, data management, customer outreach, filters, 
and sampling) are already accounted for elsewhere in the estimated rule costs for the 
proposed LCRI, and other costs (such as engineering and inspection costs) are already included 
in the DWINSA data.”  
However, as can be seen the Proposed Rule Economic Analysis costs are much lower than those in the 
CDM Smith report.  Accounting for the ancillary costs elsewhere does not result in a true cost benefit 

 
131 
analysis of replacement costs and again underestimates (1) the burden associated with the proposed 
LCRI and (2) the amount of federal funds necessary to achieve the rule requirement.  Even when 
comparing only CDM Smith construction costs to Proposed Rule Economic Analysis costs that include 
some ancillary items, the economic analysis costs are much lower.  The average CDM Smith report 
construction only cost is $9,900 compared to the economic analysis maximum cost with some ancillary 
items of $8,500. 
For comparison purposes the data from the CDM Smith report was analyzed to produce 25th and 75th 
percentile values as well as 10th and 90th percentiles (in 2022 dollars). The comparison with the Proposed 
Rule economic analysis is shown in the table below. These costs are only the actual construction costs 
for the CDM Smith report. Even at 75th percentile values the Proposed Rule economic analysis 
significantly underestimates actual costs. But again, the upper end costs should not be discarded.  
 
CDM Smith Estimate 
10% 
25% 
(Minimum 
Cost) 
75% 
(Maximum 
Cost) 
90% 
Full Replacement (CWS and 
Private Side) 
$7,053  
$8,113  
$10,537  
$13,329  
Partial Replacement 
$4,523  
$4,994  
$8,552  
$11,502  
 
 
 
 
 
LCRI Proposal 
10% 
25% 
(Minimum 
Cost) 
75% 
(Maximum 
Cost) 
90% 
Full Replacement (CWS Private 
Side) 
-- 
$6,507  
$8,519  
-- 
Partial Replacement 
-- 
$1,920  
$5,400  
-- 
 
EPA presented two arguments for why the Proposed Rule Economic Analysis costs were lower than the 
CDM Smith report costs and acceptable.  One argument was that the economic analysis had a larger 
data set than did AWWA. However, as shown in Exhibit A-3 the differences are not significant with 
AWWA having 38 cost estimates and the economic analysis having 43 cost estimates.  The second 
reason given was that the CDM Smith report data was only from systems serving populations larger than 
10,000 persons and may not have factored in smaller system costs. 218  Depending on which exhibit is 
used in the economic analysis, roughly 85% of all LSLs are in CWSs serving more than 10,000 persons. 
The cost estimates should not be biased downward for small systems when by far the costs will be 
borne by larger systems with more issues related to traffic control, coordination, and restoration.  
Cost estimates reviewed in preparing these comments indicate that CWSs are facing, still higher 
replacement costs. Restoration costs in particular are increasing, especially where replacements are not 
associated with main replacement projects.  
In summary 
 
218 EPA. Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis Appendices. (2023) A-6. 

 
132 
1. The costs used in the Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis are low and do not reflect true 
costs. 
2. The costs should include ancillary costs to construct a true value for lead line 
replacements and the total costs should be used in the cost benefit analysis.  
3. It is not reasonable to exclude the top 25% of CWS reported costs as these are true costs 
being borne to replace lead lines. 
4. The CDM Smith Report on replacement costs should not have been dismissed as 
representing systems serving more than 10,000 persons as such systems are burdened 
with replacing 85% of all the lead lines.  
EPA’s Estimate is in 2022 Dollars – The agency’s Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis and the above 
described CDM Smith report escalated available cost information to 2022 dollars.  The information on 
replacement costs provided to EPA in 2022 do not yet reflect more recent increases in costs.  The above 
per-line replacement costs do not reflect recent cost trends that are continuing to increase the cost of 
service line replacement programs: 
1. Inflation as an over-arching economic trend 
2. Recent rapid increases in spending on public infrastructure construction is resulting in 
increased demand for available construction resources and with that demand price 
escalation. 
3. Federal funding for infrastructure investment has with it federal cross-cutter requirements 
including wage, material origin, environmental impact assessment, and other 
requirements that both directly increase costs and represent additional logistical and 
administrative burdens, which themselves impose both operating expenses and create 
opportunity costs by introducing timing delays and uncertainty into project 
administration. 
Even well-established programs funded through CWS resources with established contractor pools are 
experiencing substantial cost increases.  One large CWS in EPA Region 3 received bids for service line 
replacement in the Fall of 2023 more than one-third higher than pricing reported previously in the CDM 
Smith report (adjusted to 2022 dollars).   
Engineering Standard of Care in Cost Estimation -- The American Association of Cost Engineering 
describes five classes of cost estimates that are distinguished by maturity level of project definition, end 
usage, methodology, and the expected accuracy range. A Class 1 estimate represents a level of project 
definition exceeding 50% where a detailed unit cost and detailed take-off have been used to estimate 
the costs and the cost could be as much as 15% higher. Alternatively, a Class 5 estimate represents a 
level of project definition of less than 2% where concepts are being screened and the use of parametric 
models were used and so the costs could be as much as 100% higher. In consideration of the data that 
are available for EPA to consider in estimating costs and given that site-specific conditions cannot be 
factored into the estimate, the EPA LCRI service line replacement cost estimate is likely to be considered 
a Class 4 or Class 5 estimate where costs could be 50% or 100% higher. EPA’s current cost estimate does 
not incorporate contingency costs or communicate estimate uncertainty in keeping with the recognized 

 
133 
engineering profession standard of care. As a result, (1) the cost of lead service line replacement is likely 
underestimated and (2) the range of uncertainty is not adequately conveyed to decision makers. 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) – EPA notes that BIL provides $15 billion over five years (i.e., $3 
billion per year in federal fiscal years 2022 – 2026).219, 220 In proposing the LCRI the agency estimates that 
service line replacement will cost more than $2.4 – 3.5 billion per year when annualized over 35 years.  
The federal funding afforded CWSs through BIL is important and helpful, but EPA should not hold that 
funding up as significantly addressing the cost implications of the proposed LCRI. 
5.5 
Likelihood of Additional WQP Sampling Site 
The proposed LCRI changes the sampling pool, returns many systems to routine monitoring, and reduces 
the concentration of lead in individual compliance samples at which CWSs must conduct WQP 
assessments.  The LCRI also expands ongoing monitoring implications to systems that do not operate 
under OCCT.  As revised, constraints on placement of evaluation sites following a high lead observation 
are: 
1. In the same sized water main 
2. In the same pressure zone 
3. Within a one-half mile radius of the LCR compliance monitoring site that was elevated 
This is a continuing provision of the proposed LCRI, consequently, 
1. As initial LCRI implementation proceeds systems will be seeking increasingly scarce Tier 1 
and 2 sample sites, and then Tier 3 sample sites 
2. Late in the LCRI implementation sample sites will be geographically dispersed as the state 
directs the compliance monitoring pool to be widely representative across the water 
system as the system transitions to Tier 4 and 5 sites. 
In either scenario there is little reason to assume close proximity between tap sample stations and WQP 
monitoring stations, as the two monitoring networks are geared toward two different facets of the rule.  
The compliance tap monitoring sample set as sentinel sites for lead release and the WQP monitoring 
sites as a check on operational control.   
CWSs do not have uniform density.  There are CWSs that serve urban centers, but there are also CWSs 
serving suburban and rural development patterns.  EPA does not have a basis for assuming that WQP 
monitoring stations suitable for a continuing monitoring requirement that meet the above criteria are 
readily available. 
Yet, in the Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis221 EPA assumes that only 10% of the required sample site 
and distribution system assessments will result in a new WQP monitoring site in a system serving more 
than 100,000 persons and only 20% for systems serving more than 1,000 but less than 100,000 persons.  
The basis for this this probability is not explained. For EPA to conduct this economic analysis with 
 
219 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Pub. L. 117–58). 
220 88 Fed. Reg. at 84881. 
221 EPA. Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis. (2023) Page 4-157. 

 
134 
credibility, it should assume that every compliance monitoring sample over 10 µg/L results in a new 
WQP monitoring station until the system reaches the cap on the number of sites.  
Given the requirement for WQP monitoring sites on similar sized mains and in close proximity to the tap 
sample site, the WQP sites will tend to be in residential areas.  CWSs must have reliable access to 
sample locations for parameters requiring routine monitoring like WQP sampling.  EPA should not 
establish a regulatory requirement that requires systems to rely on poor quality sampling stations like 
fire hydrants.  EPA has not incorporated a mechanism for or the cost of systems transitioning from the 
sample site used in the required timeframe following a high lead observation and construction of 
dedicated sampling stations.   
5.6 
Assuming No Reduction in Lead Exposure 
EPA cannot assume that lead exposures will be constant for the duration of the LCRI economic analysis 
as described in the Proposed Rule Economic Analysis.222  EPA is conducting this Economic Analysis in the 
context of: 
1. A White House and EPA Administrator led “Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan” that is 
intended to be an all of government effort to reduce exposures to environmental sources 
of lead (see Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis, page 1-2).  At EPA alone, there are two 
completed rulemakings and four rulemakings underway as part of this plan.  EPA has the 
analyses from these rulemakings that the agency can use to inform the LCRI rulemaking. 
2. There is a continued ongoing decline in observed lead levels in the U.S. population, 
including the upper percentile blood lead level concentrations in children. Levels have 
declined so significantly and to such low levels that the Centers for Disease Control has re-
framed both its metric to guide primary exposure reduction and recently once again 
lowered that reference blood lead level concentration to 3.5 µg/dL (i.e., the 97.5 
percentile blood lead level in children one to five years old in the U.S.). 
“The geometric mean BLL in U.S. children aged 1–5 years has declined over time 
from 15.2 µg/dL in 1976–1980 to 0.83 µg/dL in 2011–2016 (Table 2) (8). During 
the same period among U.S. children aged 6–11 years, the geometric mean BLL 
declined from 12.7 µg/dL to 0.6 µg/dL.” (Ruckart et al., MMWR, October 29, 2021, 
Vol. 70, No. 43) 
While the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) does not report a 
97.5 percentile geometric mean for children aged one to five the 95th percentile value is 
2.02 µg/L.223 
Both the overall declines in BLLs and the likely doses of environmental lead exposure from multiple 
media (e.g., water, dust, soil, air, etc.) must be considered when evaluating public policy choices with 
such large costs for small incremental reductions in lead exposure.  Zatarian et al.224 which underpins 
 
222 EPA. Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis. (2023) Page 5-22. 
223 CDC, National Exposure Report Home, Biomonitoring Data Tables for Environmental Chemicals, Blood Lead 
(2011 - 2018), CAS Number 7439-92-1) (2023) https://www.cdc.gov/exposurereport/index.html.  
224 Zatarian V, Xue J, Tornero-Velez R, Brown J. Children’s Lead Exposure: A Multimedia Modeling Analysis to Guide 
Public Health Decision-Making,” Environmental Health Perspectives. Environ Health Perspect. Sep 
12;125(9):097009 (2017). 

 
135 
EPA’s lead health risk assessment clearly demonstrates that relative source contribution is a significant 
factor in lead exposure, even in special scenarios like the case of bottle-fed infants.  
5.7 
Understanding Post-Partial Lead Concentrations 
As noted in the above response to Request for Comment 21, EPA’s analysis of lead exposure post-partial 
replacement does not take into account modern lead service line replacement practice.  As seen in 
Exhibit 5-4: Summary Statistics for Tap Water Lead Concentrations by LSL and CCT Status Combinations, 
Country, and Citation225 the dataset underpinning EPA’s Economic Analysis predates the 2017 
AWWA/ANSI C810 standard for lead service line replacement and subsequent WRF research that inform 
current practice.  EPA does not account for the benefits of the AWWA/ANSI standard in subsequent 
steps in the analysis. 
 
5.8 
Costing Expectations for CCT Decision-making 
The Proposed Rule and the associated Economic Analysis project that adapting corrosion control to 
comply with the LCRI revisions (e.g., action level, sampling protocol, sampling pool, sampling frequency, 
and action level calculation) merely entails three things (1) a state instruction, (2) in some instances a 
pipe rack study and (3) installation or adjustment of   chemical feeds.    The agency analysis does not 
capture the level of care that must go into either a state issuing instructions or a system discerning how 
it will cope with: 
1. The unintended consequences of complying with the state’s direction (e.g., the addition of 
orthophosphate, ending the application of a polyphosphate, etc.) 
2. Preparing the distribution system for a change in corrosion control (e.g., removing 
sediment, revising water supply diversification practices, etc.) 
EPA describes the scope of CCT analysis and CCT adjustment in its Economic Analysis.  Note that EPA did 
include costs for which it does not offer a well-reasoned explanation, such as inclusion of a relatively 
low-cost activity of spot flushing as a means of improving water quality near LCR sample sites (page 4-
151).  This is an unlikely approach for most system under the LCRI given the nature of the relevant water 
quality drivers and an impractical strategy given the uncertain nature of the compliance sample 
collection process.  If EPA utilized this strategy to substantially alter the cost consequences of the rule 
within the SafeWater model, it should be removed from the economic analysis. 
5.9 
Analysis Misjudges the Impact of Orthophosphate Addition on Cost 
Inclusion In Economic Analysis-- EPA did not include the cost of orthophosphate removal from 
wastewater in the agency’s analysis beyond an informational addition.226  This is contrary to EPA’s 
internal guidance for the development of Economic Analyses and is inconsistent with the intent of 
SDWA’s requirement that attributable costs of a regulation that will be borne by the households paying 
for implementing the primary standard be included in the health risk reduction and cost analysis 
required by the rule.227  EPA cannot forgo including these costs when weighing the benefit-cost ratio for 
the Final LCRI because EPA must assume that give CWA policies, the incremental cost burden on 
wastewater treatment facilities will in most instances be borne by the same customers as the CWS 
 
225 EPA. Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis. (2023) Page 5-9. 
226 Ibid. Page C-3. 
227 42 U.S. Code § 300g–1(b)(3)(C)(i)(III) 

 
136 
applying orthophosphate.  The Economic Analysis already notes the use of water quality trading as a 
mechanism for such cost transfers to CWSs where there is not a one-to-one correspondence between 
the impacted wastewater agency and the CWS. 
Analysis Inconsistent with EPA Program Goals -- The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis conflicts with the 
greatest programmatic emphasis in EPA’s CWA program, the control of nutrients.  EPA has had a 
Nutrient Reduction Strategy across multiple administrations for multiple decades, see 
epa.gov/nutrientpollution. That strategy includes supporting numeric nutrient criteria and National 
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions under existing narrative criteria. In November 
2023 EPA published the National Rivers and Streams Assessment 2018 – 2019.  In that assessment EPA 
found “Forty-two percent of the nation’s river and stream miles were in poor condition, with elevated 
levels of phosphorus, and 44% were in poor condition for nitrogen.”  Yet in the Proposed LCRI Economic 
Analysis, EPA describes the impact of orthophosphate addition as a negligible concern.  In short, EPA 
argues that one of the most sustained regulatory programs under the CWA is irrelevant because, 
1. CWA requirements are not a legal or technical constraint on SDWA requiring phosphate 
addition for corrosion control, because publicly operated treatment works (POTWs) will 
remove the added phosphate under CWA requirements 
2. Currently most POTWs are not subject to phosphate limits so the implications of CWA regulation 
are only pertinent to a few locales 
3. The CWA related costs associated with orthophosphate addition are not significant  
4. The incremental difference in phosphate addition between the LCRR and LCRI is small 
5. This incremental addition of phosphate to waters of the US is a small marginal addition 
compared to all other anthropogenic sources 
For decades, EPA’s CWA policy has been to reduce existing anthropogenic sources of nutrients from 
every regulated point discharge, prevent new influxes of anthropogenic nutrient pollution, and to utilize 
regulatory pressure on point dischargers to motivate control of nonpoint nutrient releases.  To evaluate 
the Proposed LCRI as though this decades long CWA regulatory framework will not have meaningful 
consequences for CWSs and the costs borne by households as a result of the Proposed LCRI is not sound. 
A Significant Local Constraint -- This administration did not oversee the decision to issue a variance to 
Denver Water (December 16, 2019), so it may not be aware of how central a role the issue of nutrient 
control under the CWA plays in local decision making.  A review of the record for that decision in Region 
8 would illustrate that addition of orthophosphate for purposes of corrosion control will lead to 
implications for water systems well beyond EPA’s estimated annualized increase of $4.2 - $5.9 million.  
Denver Water operates in a semi-arid environment but federal and state emphasis on nutrient control is 
a ubiquitous regulatory pressure nationwide.  Slabaugh et al. (2015)228 demonstrated that much less 
significant changes than those undertaken in the LCRI would account for hundreds of millions of annual 
costs for phosphate removal.   
 
228 Slabaugh, RM, RB Arnold Jr., S Chaparro, and CP Hill. National Cost Implications of Potential Long-Term 
LCR Requirements. Journal AWWA Vol. 107, Issue. 8, Pages 389 – 400 (2015) 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2015.107.0097. 
 

 
137 
5.10 Alternative Definition of Lead Content Service Lines to be Replaced 
The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis both under-estimates the cost and overestimates the public 
health benefits associated with including galvanized services preceded by a lead connector in the 
definition of service lines warranting replacement.  In Exhibits 8-14 – 8-17 of the Proposed LCRI 
Economic Analysis229 EPA presents its “high scenario” annualized cost and health benefit estimates at 3 
and 7% discount rates.  EPA presents that the expanding the definition of service lines requiring 
replacement to include “Lead Connectors and Galvanized Lines Downstream or Previously Downstream 
of Lead Connectors Must be Replaced” would have a substantial net positive benefit (see following 
table).   
 
Discount 
Rate 
Total Annualized 
Difference 
 ($ Billions [2022 USD]) 
LCRI 
Increment 
3% 
Cost 
$0.20  
$0.20  
Benefit 
$2.07  
$2.07  
Net Benefit 
$1.87  
$1.87  
7% 
Cost 
$0.24  
$0.24  
Benefit 
$1.25  
$1.25  
Net Benefit 
$1.01  
$1.01  
 
EPA does not describe a defensible basis for estimating any benefit associated with this alternative.  Any 
benefits analysis is constrained by: 
1. The alternative definition’s inclusion of “or Previously Downstream of Lead Connectors 
Must be Replaced” must be assumed, given the information provided, to be similar to 
EPA’s treatment of potential historical presence of lead service lines in GRRSL definition.  
In this instance EPA cannot attribute any increased incremental benefit from galvanized 
pipe preceded by lead connector because EPA has no information on which to base the 
likely occurrence of actual galvanized service lines preceded by lead. 
EPA could attempt to craft such a probability distribution based on the 2023 Needs Survey 
but that dataset is so troubled that EPA has (1) chosen not to report the lead connector 
data in the survey and (2) resorted to a supplemental information collection request for 
the lead service line characterization data previously collected. As illustrated by rows 2 – 4 
of the following table, the Needs Survey has marked differences in the occurrence of 
service line materials (see following table). The differences are as likely to be the result of 
an inadequately representative sample and a difficult to complete survey questionnaire, 
as to be credible differences in material occurrence.  This concern would likely be 
especially evident if the data were normalized for date of construction. 
 
229 EPA. Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis (2023) Pages 8-12 – 8-14. 

 
138 
AWWA demonstrated in information submitted to EPA during the Federalism consultation 
for the Proposed LCRI.230 The nature of available records and the distribution of 
galvanized service lines nationally are such that the states where EPA is otherwise 
collecting better quality service line material data are not where galvanized service lines 
are most likely to be found. 
Service Line Material 
Large and 
Medium Systems 
Small 
Systems 
1.    Lead Service Lines 
3% 
1% 
2.    Standalone Galvanized Service Lines 
5% 
1% 
3.    Lead- and Galvanized-Free Service Lines 
18% 
61% 
4.    Unknown Service Lines 
56% 
37% 
5.    Unreported Service Lines 
18% 
0% 
Total 
100% 
100% 
 
2. EPA’s definition of service line is such that any analysis of exposure and thus benefits will 
misrepresent health risk because service lines that are in fact not delivering water to 
potable water uses in structures are included in the service line replacement requirement. 
3. Also described earlier, EPA lacks a demonstrable linkage between lead connectors (i.e., a 
less than two-foot-long length of lead that is typically located at the main) with elevated 
lead exposure levels.  Just applying back-of-the-envelope comparison of benefits with and 
without the additional service lines, it appears that EPA treated removing 2 feet of lead as 
having the same incremental public health benefit as removing an entire lead service line. 
4. Because few systems will have strong records for the use of lead connectors, any 
galvanized service line not otherwise captured in the GRRSL category will have to be 
included in the cost of: 
a. Service line characterization 
b. Service line replacement  
c. Implications for communities meeting the goal of replacing all targeted service 
lines in 10-year and annual 10% replacement rate 
d. Application of all public education provisions associated with replacement or 
disturbance, including distribution of pitcher filters, customer requested samples, 
etc.  
e. Response to requests for replacement  
 
230 EPA. Summary Report on Federalism and Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (UMRA) Consultation for the 
Development of the Proposed LCRI National Primary Drinking Water Regulation. (2023) EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-
0500.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1135 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Michael S Regan Administrator 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Mail Code 28221T
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20460
Dear Administrator Regan: 
The following comments on the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements (LCRI), Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–080 are submitted on behalf of the Jersey 
Water Works Lead in Drinking Water Task Force.
Background
Jersey Water Works is a collaborative effort of many diverse organizations and individuals who embrace 
the common purpose of transforming New Jersey’s inadequate water infrastructure by investing in 
sustainable, cost-effective solutions that provide communities with clean water and waterways, healthier, 
safer neighborhoods, local jobs; flood and climate resilience; and economic growth. 
The Task Force is part of the Jersey Water Works (JWW) collaborative, where a diverse group 
of government entities, water utilities, academics, and environmental and public health 
organizations align to achieve practical, cost-effective, equitable, and permanent solutions to 
removing lead in drinking water. 
Members of the Task Force work to identify practical and politically feasible policy solutions 
around the key recommendations outlined in two milestones reports: 
●
The 2019 report Lead in Drinking Water: A Permanent Solution for New Jersey, which focused on 
lead in drinking water for New Jersey homes, schools, and child care facilities and 
●
The 2021 report, Lead in Drinking Water in Child Care Facilities: Ensuring the Future for New 
Jersey’s Children, outlined key strategies and targeted solutions for state-regulated childcare 
facilities. 
Together, these two reports provide a road map for tailored solutions that continue to advance the work of 
lead service line replacements in New Jersey. 
Jersey Water Works is pleased to see that the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has incorporated 
many of the best practices honed in New Jersey in its newly proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvement 
requirements. We’re proud as New Jerseyans and as a collaborative that our collective leadership has 
shaped national standards as we work together to eliminate lead from our environment. We look forward to 
continuing to support cities and towns in New Jersey and throughout the country in this imperative public 
health effort to deliver safe drinking water to the nation.

Overview 
Jersey Water Works acknowledges the dedication and commitment of the EPA to protecting the public's 
health and delivering clean, safe drinking water to the nation. The Task Force is proud that the EPA adopted 
New Jersey’s framework for the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, citing the City of Newark 
as an example. However, we offer comments on the equity, efficiency, and cost-effectiveness of the 
proposed 10-year goal of total lead service line (LSL) replacement and the proposed reduction in the lead 
action level from the current 15 ppb to 10 ppb requirement. Equitable LSL replacements and health-based 
compliance standards for schools and childcare centers are needed nationally for the greatest impact on the 
most affected populations. The Task Force recommends the following two critical considerations for 
improvement on EPA’s National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
(LCRI). 
The Task Force recommends that customers not be charged a cost share, enabling all customers to 
participate in the replacement program, and provides the following comments for consideration in 
eliminating customer-cost shares as a barrier to equitable LSL replacements nationwide.
●
Maximizing participation among communities most at risk
LSLs are typically jointly owned: the water system owns the portion from the water main to the curb 
stop, and the property owner owns the portion from the curb stop to the home. The places 
nationwide with the highest concentrations of LSLs tend to be lower-income communities and 
communities where a majority of residents are renters. As such, many residents must rely on 
absentee property owners to consent to make their properties available for work and to coordinate 
LSL replacements. Without free LSL replacements for water customers, the only LSLs remaining 
will be those in lower-income areas, exacerbating the equity concerns. The Task Force 
recommends customers not be charged a cost share, enabling all customers to participate in 
replacement programs.
●
Maximizing the opportunities for private-side replacement of LSLs
Many LSLs will remain without sufficient funding for private-side replacements since many 
families in disadvantaged areas cannot pay for private-side replacements. In most states, water 
systems do not believe they can use the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, also known as the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, financing for private side replacements since they must repay the loan 
with ratepayer funds. In New Jersey, water systems can use ratepayer funds to remove private-side 
LSLs in the interest of public health for the greater public good due to a state law passed in 2021. 
Without the recommendation for states to allow the use of rate-payer funds for private-side 
replacement and/or the provision for additional grant funds for water systems to use specifically for 
the private side, replacement will become quite difficult.
●
Minimizing property owner refusal for private side replacement of LSLs
In reality, cost-shares do not work, and in most cases, they increase the number of property owner 
refusals. Whether the locality is a disadvantaged city, an urban area with an abundance of absentee 
landowners, or a more affluent neighborhood, investor and government-owned water utilities 
encounter many property owners who simply refuse to participate if required to pay a cost share. 
Consequently, water utilities waste time on outreach, and the replacement process lacks 

coordination and becomes inefficient, resulting in the replacement of far fewer pipes at a 
significantly higher cost.
The Task Force recommends strengthening compliance standards for Schools and Childcare Centers.
Lead Action Level
The Task Force recommends further reduction of the action level for lead in drinking water for 
schools and childcare facilities to 5 ppb. The current action level of 15 ppb and subsequent proposal 
for 10 ppb set by the federal LCR and proposed by the LCRI is not a health-based standard but 
rather a technology treatment measure that gauges the effectiveness of corrosion control treatment, 
which minimizes lead leaching. Since exposure to small amounts of lead can seriously impact 
children’s health and cognitive development, and current science cannot identify a safe level of 
exposure, lead concentrations in drinking water at schools and childcare facilities should be kept as 
low as reasonably achievable.
Filters
There is no safe level of lead exposure. The Task Force recommends strengthening the filter 
provisions for schools and childcare facilities. Though lead exposure poses a risk to people of all 
ages, children are most vulnerable. Even in small doses, infants, toddlers, and pre-schoolers up to 
age six are particularly susceptible, as their growing bodies absorb lead much faster than adults. For 
children, prolonged exposure can cause irreversible damage to the brain and nervous system, 
slowing growth and development and prompting behavioral, hearing, and speech problems. And the 
long-term damage is not just physical. Lead exposure can also trigger severe learning disabilities, as 
well as emotional and social health impacts. Point-of-use filters should be used to reduce lead and 
particulate at all fixtures intended to supply water for drinking, food preparation, or baby formula in 
schools and childcare facilities.
Submitted by the Jersey Water Works Lead in Drinking Water TaskForce  
Task Force chair contact:
Amy Goldsmith
agoldsmith@cleanwater.org
Jersey Water Works backbone staff contact:
Deandrah Cameron
dcameron@njfuture.org

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0768 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Donohue, Steven A. <sdonohue@GFNET.com>  
Sent: Wednesday, January 24, 2024 3:46 PM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Subject: Lead Service Lines and Corporation Stops 
 
 
Dear EPA, 
 
I have a question regarding lead service line replacements.  We have a client in PA that is preparing a 
project to replace lead service lines and a question came up about replacement of older corporation 
stops connected to the main.  Do older corporation stops need to be replaced as part of the lead service 
line replacements?  Would these be included in the portion of the service identified as a connector?  As 
you know, some older brass corps may contain some amount of lead, so confirmation on whether or not 
these require replacement would be beneficial.  We’ve read through much of the recent proposed LCRI 
and corps do not seem to be mentioned, but connectors are mentioned throughout.  It is more difficult 
and costly to replace the taps on these older mains, which is the reason for the question.  Please let me 
know if there is any requirement for replacement of older corp stops either currently or in the proposed 
LCRI from EPA’s perspective.  If you need more information or wish to discuss, please let me know. 
 
Steven Donohue, P.E. | Senior Project Manager 
Gannett Fleming | 2 Executive Drive, Suite 100, Marlton, NJ 08053 
C 215.208.8830 | sdonohue@gfnet.com 
Excellence Delivered As Promised 
gannettfleming.com | Stay connected: LinkedIn | Facebook | Twitter  
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2273 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2272 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
NORTH
Dakota
Environmental Quality
Be Legendary”
February 2, 2024
•Aa
PostmarkecfJ
?4
enter
RE:
To Whom It May Concern:
The Environmental Protection Agency’s (ERA) goal of 100 percent removal of all lead and 
galvanized service lines that are downstream of lead service lines and lead connectors 
throughout the nation is a worthy goal. However, remember that both the Lead and 
Copper Rule (LCR) and Lead and Copper Rule Revised (LCRR) were both Treatment 
Technique based rules (40 CFR 141.80(b) Scope) as opposed to the Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements (LCRI) maximum containment level that EPA is currently 
promulgating.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency requested comments on the proposed Lead 
and Copper Rule Improvements that revise the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions. The 
North Dakota Department of Environmental Quality respectfully submits the following 
comments into Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801.
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Environmental Protection Agency
Mail Code 28221T
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 
Washington, DC 20460.
Division of 
Division of
Municipal Facilities Waste Management 
701-328-5211 
701-328-5166
Division of 
Air Quality
701-328-5188
Division of Chemistry 
701-328-6140
2635 East Main Ave 
Bismarck ND 58501
(jjj W I 
J
Comments by the North Dakota Department of Environmental Quality 
(NDDEQ) For the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Under the LCR and LCRR, public water system (PWS) with proven track records (i.e., well­
run corrosion control treatment (CCT)) and a 90th percentile less than the Lead Action 
Level demonstrated by lead and copper sampling, would now under the LCRI be viewed 
by EPA as needing full lead service line replacement within ten years of the LCRI 
completion date. And yet, EPA allows for partial lead service line replacement if the water 
system has only “operational control” over the public side of the service line if there are no 
Federal, State or Local law/ordinances mandating full lead service line removal. This 
scenario will likely continue to require CCT and result in a huge economic burden to those 
least able to afford the Lead pipe removal cost and with minimal health benefits. When 
science can show that corrosion control treatment is working why would EPA require the 
replacement of every lead line? North Dakota’s public water systems under the Safe 
Drinking Water Act have a compliance history of 99.4% or greater for all health-based 
rules.
| deq.nd.gov
Division of 
Water Quality
701-328-5210
EPA Docket
4201 Normandy Street | Bismarck ND 58503-1324 
| Fax 701-328-5200
Director’s Office
701-328-5150

J
2
NDDEQ would like to argue that the water suppliers should be 
responsible for determining whether laws, statutes or constitutional 
provisions exist that pertain to a water system’s access to conduct full 
LSLR. NDDEQ recommends that ERA delete this paragraph.
NDDEQ has concerns with the proposed requirement for states to 
identify any State laws, including statutes and constitutional 
provisions, that pertain to a water system’s access to conduct full­
service line replacement and notifying water systems in writing 
whether any such laws exist or not.
Many ordinances may be set at a local level. (Such as Zoning 
regulations and “right to access” by a Community Water System, etc.) 
This requirement will create a significant burden for state staff to 
research and identify laws, statutes, constitutional provisions, or local 
ordinances to develop and maintain a list.
Service line lnventory_and Replacement__
Recommendation for ERA
A top priority of the ERA to improve LCCR with LCRI was to 
strengthen lead service line replacements. Instead of ERA using their 
authority to mandate full-service line replacement, their approach to 
achieve this goal was to rely on community water systems (CWS) to 
gain access to customer-owned portions using “any specific laws
regulations, and/or water tariff agreements”. It is only mandated that 
CWS replace all lead and galvanized requiring replacement (GRR) 
service lines under their control. If legal access to fully replace a lead 
service line can only be accomplished with consent of the property 
owner, the CWS must now attempt to engage the property owner four
Rule 
Reference
§141.84(d)
Because of inconsistencies with the rules, including the lack of a federal rule to mandate 
full lead line removal and because North Dakota cannot be any more stringent than the 
federal rule you are promulgating, the North Dakota Department of Environmental Quality 
(NDDEQ) requests that ERA provide other alternatives to lead service line removal when 
water systems have historically shown that they have proper corrosion control treatment in 
place.
Due to the numerous concerns regarding LCRI implementation, which includes 
implementation, confusion, and lack of expertise at all levels; the NDDEQ recommends 
that the US ERA withdraw or postpone rule finalization. As currently written, the proposed 
rule results in yet unknown costs on the community water systems and states as well as 
resulting in major implementation confusion to the detriment of public health. We believe 
the rule should be redrafted to address the concerns of NDDEQ. Any redraft should seek 
additional public review prior to final approval. To support the NDDEQ concerns we 
provide the following comments listed below.

§141.84
§141.84
>
3
NDDEQ continues to recommend that ERA incorporate good-faith- 
effort flexibility into LSLR provisions. This flexibility could be similar to 
the allowance in the Revised Total Coliform Rule for a PWS to request 
a deadline extension after consultation with the state.
In addition, both options above should also contain information to 
explain what water sample results mean, contexts of service line 
material and whether the CWS is in compliance for Lead & Copper 
samples. This will provide future and present homeowners/renters 
with a better explanation of the entirety of the situation.
NDDEQ proposes ERA implement one of two options:
1) Work with the National Realtor’s Association to require disclosure 
under their regulations nationwide or
2) Add in the required disclosure language pertaining to the future 
sales or rental of a property into the final LCRI rule.
different times using two different communications to obtain consent. If 
consent is not obtained from the property owner, the CWS is 
prohibited from conducting a partial service line replacement under 
LCRI unless it’s part of an emergency repair or coordinate with 
planned infrastructure work. This will result in numerous full lead 
service lines that will remain in operation. Since most municipalities in 
North Dakota as well as the State do not have laws mandating the full 
removal of lead services lines, many will remain connected to the 
water systems. Without any local and/or State law in North Dakota
CWS will struggle to obtain consent from property owners to conduct 
full lead service line replacement. If the main goal of LCRI is to 
remove all lead service lines across the Nation to protect health as 
currently written, this will not be achieved in many States including 
North Dakota.
Under §141.84 (d)(3)(ii), a CWS must offer to replace a lead or GRR 
service line within 6 months after the sale of a property to new owners. 
This is a step in the right direction to truly achieve full lead service line 
replacement across the Nation. NDDEQ proposes ERA take this idea 
one step further and require full disclosure of known lead, GRR and 
unknown service lines in future sales or rental of a property in the final 
version of LCRI.
It was explicitly stated under 40 CFR §141 IV.B, Review of the 
National Drinking Water Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and 
Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR), Planned Actions to Address Lead In 
Drinking Water, Implementation of the Lead and Copper Rule 
Revisions, Compliance Deadlines, published on December 17, 2021 
that:

4
NDDEQ disagrees with the mandatory inclusion of connectors in the 
LSL inventory under LCRI. Instead, ERA should honor their original 
language included in LCRR as well as its review and reinstate the 
voluntary status of connectors in LSL inventories. NDDEQ also 
proposes that all other connector requirements under LCRI be
The inclusion of connectors was not required in the LSL inventories 
under LCRR and ERA only recommended reviewing records on 
connectors and including any relevant information on their existence 
and locations in the LSL inventories. Contradictory to their stance in 
LCRR and its review, ERA reneged their assurance that connectors 
would not be required, and the LSL inventory would not change. 
Under LCRI, a records review of connectors and their inclusion in the 
LSL is now mandatory. This creates a profound problem for States 
that already finalized and distributed their inventory spreadsheets to 
the many CWS because LSL inventories are due by October 16, 
2024. Many systems have also already begun completing the LSL 
inventories and conducting field investigations to determine service 
lines under the assumption that the required information would not 
change. CWS that already started their inventories and did not include 
connectors will have to backtrack and have to both revisit records and 
repeat field investigations to determine the presence of connectors 
and their composition. This is an incredible waste of time and funding.
“The final rule does not include a requirement to investigate or 
inventory lead connectors...EPA recommends reviewing 
records on connector material composition during the records 
search for the initial inventory. EPA also recommends but is not 
requiring that water systems inventory connector materials 
where records exist to provide additional information to 
consumers about additional lead sources that could contribute 
to lead in drinking water serving the residence."
For over two years, States were preparing CWS to submit LSL 
inventories by October 16, 2024, under the assumption that there 
would be no significant changes to the required information. As stated 
under 40 CFR Parts § 141 and 142 III.C.3, National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, Revisions to 40 
CFR Part 141, Subpart I, Control of Lead and Copper, Lead Service 
Line Inventory, Final Rule Requirements,
“At this time, EPA does not expect to propose changes to the 
requirement for information to be submitted in the initial LSL 
inventory...”

§141.84
§141.84
• >
1
§141.84(b)(3)(ii)
§141.84(h)(iv)
5
If ERA maintains the inventory requirement for connectors, NDDEQ 
recommends that the Agency provide further clarification.
In some states full-service line replacement within 6 months is not 
feasible. For water systems in colder areas of the country, North 
Dakota, for example, if a service line is identified in late October or 
November we are already in winter season with frozen ground, 
making full replacement impossible. North Dakota can have snow and 
frozen ground until late April to the beginning of May which is already 
7 months later. Additionally, northern states have a very limited 
construction season and getting materials and contractors is 
increasingly difficult because many are already doing projects.
NDDEQ recommends that the Agency add a clause to allow states to 
add additional time as is reasonable/feasible for water systems to 
complete the replacement.
In the proposed LCRI, ERA requiring water systems to identify where 
lead connectors have been replaced in the past increases the 
workload on the system owners and operators. It makes more sense 
to allow them to focus their time and resources on the other inventory 
and replacement requirements, rather than having them review 
records to determine where lead connectors don't exist anymore.
NDDEQ recommends that ERA remove the requirement to identify 
where lead connectors have been replaced in the past and instead 
make the “Replaced Lead” category optional.
removed except for § 141.84 (e) Replacement of lead connectors 
when encountered by a water system.
Since there can be connectors from the main, between the meter, etc. 
but not always, there's a big question of how many connectors to 
report and which ones. If there are multiple connectors associated 
with a single service line, how will those be tracked individually? Will 
we need unique IDs for the connectors as well?
NDDEQ has concerns that offering to collect a follow-up 1st and 5th 
liter sample for every emergency repair may result in large costs for 
water systems. In a multifamily complex, a single replacement could 
be very expensive with 1st and 5th liter samples for every resident that 
requests one. Especially with other required mitigation efforts such as 
the pitcher filter/Point-of-Use (POU) devices and 6 months of 
replacement cartridges. Who pays for the sample? The consumers or 
the water systems? NDDEQ would like to know if one 1st and 5th liter 
wouId count as the follow-up for the entire multi-family complex if the

6
§141.81 and 
§141.82
test results are posted and shared among the rest of the complex? 
NDDEQ would like ERA to clarify this component of the proposed rule.
In the proposed rule, ERA has determined that systems with CCT 
installed, but who have not previously been “deemed optimized” 
because they have not had an action level exceedance (ALE),
Sections 141.81 and 141.82 remain as complex as initially written 
under the LCRR. With so many conditional statements and 
complexity throughout these two sections of the LCRI, it will 
remain difficult for program staff to ensure state-wide compliance 
with the requirements, train new staff on the requirements, and 
answer questions from systems about the requirements.
§141.80 (a)(1)(i) 
and §141.81
Additionally, NDDEQ recommends that the rule only requires water 
systems to offer to conduct follow-up samples once per emergency of 
the service line. NDDEQ wants ERA to clarify how the system needs 
to document if the customer refuses to conduct any follow-up testing.
What does "started to install CCT" mean in this context? Does 
this refer to after the systems obtain approval and install 
chemical feed pumps, when the plan and specs are submitted for 
approval, or does this refer to the installation period as a whole? 
Or does this refer strictly to after the system starts feeding the 
designated treatment to the system? NDDEQ recommends that 
ERA clarify what it means when a system has “started to install 
CCT” in the context of this rule. In addition, NDDEQ would prefer 
that this remains a state determination.
NDDEQ recommends that ERA develop comprehensive 
decision-trees, flowcharts, or schematics clearly depicting the 
regulatory triggers and steps for corrosion control treatment 
optimization, re-optimization, and optimal water quality parameter 
(OWQP) designation. These tools should be developed and 
shared with state agencies ahead of the compliance date for the 
rule to aid in compliance determination. ERA should have 
nationwide; as well as regional in-person and online training for 
this section of the rule.
Rule Reference
Preamble Exhibit 
1 - FR 84890
Corrosion Control Treatment
Recommendation for EPA
In Exhibit 1 in the preamble, under the section on Corrosion
Control Treatment (CCT), ERA indicates that “Systems with P90 
lead level > 0.010 mg/L: No CCT: Must complete CCT installation 
regardless of their subsequent P90 levels if system has started to 
install CCT."

7
§141.81(a) and
(b)
Currently these systems are going above and beyond existing 
requirements and NDDEQ has concerns that such systems may 
now be motivated to cease CCT treatment so as not to be 
subject to OWQP monitoring requirements.
NDDEQ would like for ERA to provide additional clarification for 
states on how to handle such systems. Are all systems with CCT 
who are not currently deemed optimized expected to be deemed 
to have optimized CCT and subject to OWQP monitoring? What 
is the expected time frame for implementing this requirement?
Corrosion Control Treatment is not “set it and forget it”. Achieving 
and maintaining effective and optimized corrosion control
NDDEQ is concerned that EPA has simply replaced the trigger 
level with the Practical Quantification Limit (PQL) for triggering 
systems into CCT requirements. Under the proposed rule, 
systems with 90th percentile results between the PQL (5ppb) and 
the AL (10ppb) will be subject to standard monitoring, installation 
of OCCT and subject to OWQPs. Maintaining two separate levels 
to trigger water systems into different requirements is confusing 
and not a simplification of the rule as was requested by States.
NDDEQ has concern on this section of the LCRI on the overall 
comments on pipe loop requirements.
Further, determining which systems are “deemed” optimized has 
become even more complex with the proposed regulatory 
language.
NDDEQ recommends that EPA further clarify and simplify the 
language in this section. NDDEQ recommends that EPA move 
forward with using a single number to trigger treatment technique 
requirements, such as the proposed action level of 10 ppb, rather 
than using the AL as well as the PQL for triggering CCT-related 
actions under the rule. Alternatively, NDDEQ suggest leaving the 
re-optimization determination up to the state, especially for 
exceedances of the PQL and not the AL, in lieu of using the PQL 
as a “trigger level.”
Again, EPA has proposed two numbers for water systems to 
commence an action when the nationwide comments under the 
LCRR/ LCRI by states was to use one (1) number.
§141.81(d) and 
(e)
will now be required to be optimized by the State and subject to 
OWQPs, regular water quality parameters (WQP) monitoring, 
etc.

8
ERA should allow states discretion in determining the final 
timelines for the completion of CCT studies, allowing them to 
establish shorter timeframes where feasible.
NDDEQ has concerns that ERA’S proposed requirements for 
pipe-loop studies are overly prescriptive, especially when applied 
to small water systems that make up the majority of North Dakota 
water systems. Desktop and bench-scale evaluations are much 
more cost effective and expeditious when compared to pipe-loop 
studies. Pipe-loop testing could be cost-prohibitive for water 
systems and take many months to reach the same conclusions 
that otherwise would be identified through alternative evaluation 
approaches.
Further, the timeframe allowed under the proposed rule for pipe­
loop studies, while it may be necessary for completing such 
studies, may put consumers at unnecessary risk, when the 
system could install and operate CCT more quickly based on a 
desktop or bench-scale evaluation. This also holds true for water 
systems that already have CCT installed and need to re-optimize. 
In such cases, allowing up to 30 months for a CCT study could 
be unnecessary. Depending on the specific details of the 
situation, a slight adjustment to existing CCT may be more 
effective at addressing elevated lead levels across the water 
system.
treatment (OCCT) is just as much of an art as it is a science. 
While it’s admirable that ERA wants to try to encourage systems 
to invest in pipe-loop studies in an attempt to get it “right” the first 
time, there are diminishing returns with this requirement. In 
almost every case, there are two viable corrosion control 
methods: pH/alkalinity adjustment and/or orthophosphate 
inhibitor addition. A determination of which combination of 
methods to use at a particular system can often be made using 
theory and best practice, along with an evaluation of water quality 
parameters.
Additionally, NDDEQ recommends that pipe-loop corrosion 
control studies should be optional and required on a case-by- 
case basis as determined by the state and based on an 
evaluation of the water quality and existing treatment at the PWS. 
This determination should be made by the state in collaboration 
with the system and their engineer and should be based on the
NDDEQ recommends that ERA establish different maximum 
timelines for re-optimization vs. initial CCT installation.

9
States with experience reviewing pipe-loop studies indicated that 
often the results were inconclusive or without statistical 
significance to recommend one CCT option over another. They 
also indicated a typical pipe-loop study review ranged from 20-40 
hours, depending on complexity. The potential increase in the 
state workforce burden is concerning for NDDEQ.
materials in the distribution system, the complexity of the water 
quality, and potential expediency of the installation of viable CCT.
In order to make a CCT decision for water systems, a strong 
understanding of the theory and science behind corrosion control 
is important. There is a critical need for up-to-date, in-depth 
guidance and training to ensure the best state of the science 
information from ERA Office of Research and Development, and 
other experts in the field of corrosion control, is passed on to 
state regulators and review engineers. Currently, there is limited 
knowledge at the state level in reviewing and approving pipe-loop 
studies, as many CCT studies have historically been submitted 
using ERA’S CCT Desktop Evaluation Form or equivalent, in 
accordance with ERA’S LCR implementation guidance 
documents. NDDEQ has no staff personnel that have ever 
reviewed and approved a pipe-loop study. In addition, NDDEQ 
has limited staff with experience reviewing and approving CCT 
studies.
NDDEQ recommends that ERA prioritize the development of in- 
depth guidance and training, in collaboration with states, for the 
review and approval of CCT studies, specifically pipe-loop 
studies. This should include an update to ERA’S Guidance 
“Optimal Corrosion Control Treatment Evaluation Technical
Recommendations” and should cover CCT studies in response to 
ALEs, as well as CCT studies and Evaluations ahead of a source 
or treatment change.
ERA should offer further flexibility in implementing CCT, allowing 
systems to make incremental changes once CCT is installed; as 
this would have a stronger, more expedient impact on public 
health than requiring pipe-loop studies in all cases for systems 
with LSLs. Pipe-loop studies are a tool that should be used by 
LSL systems with complex water quality who anticipate future 
source or treatment changes that would affect corrosion. ERA 
should leave this determination to the state primacy agencies 
and should collaborate with ASDWA in developing 
comprehensive guidance for making these determinations based 
on the most up-to-date science.
§141.81(d) and 
§141.82

§141.82(g)
§141.820)
10
§141.81 and 
§141.82
Will the consecutive systems receive a violation if the provider 
does not meet OCCT or OWQP set levels?
In addition, ERA should clarify when consecutive systems are 
subject to OCCT and OWQP requirements.
NDDEQ has concerns that there is no guidance about safe 
cessation of CCT. It is not clear when or if a system with CCT or 
OCCT would be allowed to stop application of CCT.
Will States have the flexibility to work with Systems to show they 
are working towards meeting the OCCT and OWQP?
NDDEQ also recommends that this comprehensive training be 
deployed ahead of the LCRI compliance date, updated, and 
offered on a regular basis, and be easily accessible by all 
primacy agencies.
NDDEQ recommends that CCT-related training and guidance 
cover what steps are to be taken when a system plans to stop 
CCT following complete replacement of LSLs and GRRs. In 
addition, EPA should give states the authority to require 
continued CCT in cases where cessation could pose a risk to 
public health of a water system.
NDDEQ recommends that EPA clarify the requirement to collect 
a sample within a half-mile radius of the original sample location 
under DSSA and include verbiage to include a clarification that 
the sample should be collected from a sample location within 0.5 
miles or at the next closest tap sample location, to help offset 
rural area tap locations.
NDDEQ requests that EPA provide additional clarification 
regarding the requirements that apply to consecutive water 
systems. As written, the requirements are not clear and seem to 
differ from current LCR requirements. With the new LCRI, are 
consecutive systems always required to monitor their 
wholesaler’s OWQPs?
NDDEQ has some implementation concerns around the
Distribution System and Site Assessment (DSSA) requirements. 
The requirement to collect a follow-up sample from a sample tap 
within a half-mile radius, as outlined in the rule, is not realistic in 
many rural areas.

§141,82(j)(1)(ii)(B)
11
ERA should collaborate with ASDWA and States on 
implementation guidance for this requirement. ERA should 
provide clear expectations as to the documentation and 
evaluation of OCCT that will be needed.
NDDEQ recommends that ERA should ensure that guidance and 
draft templates for ALL the various Public Education and Public 
Notices are developed ahead of the compliance deadline.
Finally, NDDEQ has concerns regarding the workforce burden for 
the DSSA provisions, both at the state and system-level. Not only 
is there a significant increase in data collection and reporting 
following any elevated samples, but the requirement also adds 
significant complexity to the rule. The Safe Drinking Water 
Act requires states to report drinking water information 
periodically to ERA. Currently systems do not have the 
capabilities to report this data and states do not have the 
capability to collect or store this data in the ERA approved Safe 
Drinking Water Information System (SDWIS) database system. 
NDDEQ recommends that ERA give states the option to waive 
some or all of the DSSA requirements depending on the situation 
at the system. Additionally, NDDEQ recommends ERA ensure 
the new replacement for SDWIS; now called DW-SFTIES; 
includes ways for primacy agencies/states to capture and track 
all the follow up actions based on elevated sample results.
In North Dakota, the review of OCCT will not be completed by 
sanitary survey inspectors. They do not have the expertise for 
conducting an OCCT review just as they do not have the 
expertise to conduct cyber security evaluations. Instead, it would 
be completed by state review engineers with expertise in 
corrosion control treatment.
NDDEQ also recommends that ERA further clarify which 
components of DSSA are required for which systems 
emphasizing small systems. It is not clear which components of 
DSSA would be required for small systems, both with and without 
CCT installed. NDDEQ recommends a post-sampling flowchart 
or decision tree could be helpful to ensure systems and states 
understand the requirements following an individual elevated 
sample result.
Public Education &Notification_________
Recommendation for ERA
Rule 
Reference
§ 141.85

§141.85
§141.85(c)(1)
§141.85(c)(2)
§141.850)
12
Under 141.85(c)(1) The statement that a water system “must offer” 
to sample for lead in the tap water of any customer who requests it,” 
is unclear. Who is expected to pay for sampling analysis when it is 
requested by the customer?
NDDEQ requests that ERA clarify what is meant by the term “must 
offer” and explain who is responsible for the cost of customer 
requested sampling. NDDEQ recommends the ERA allow the CWS 
to make that determination and not the states.
NDDEQ recommends that ERA consider the system cost and 
burden for substantially increased numbers of customer sampling 
requests.
This is a common statement made throughout many parts of this 
rule due to all the documentations/certifications/records that ERA is 
requiring water systems and state primacy agencies to track 
collect, correlate, review, and approve.
NDDEQ has concerns with the provision for systems with 3 or more 
Lead Action Level Exceedances (ALE) to distribute filters to the 
entire service area. The LCRI targets the highest risk sites for 
monitoring and evaluating the Action Level, as such, filters should 
be targeted at sites that are at risk of lead exposure, i.e., locations 
with Lead Service Lines (LSL), GRR, or unknowns based on the 
system’s inventory. High risk locations may only represent a small 
percentage of consumers served by the system. Providing filters to 
consumers served by known and non-lead lines could undermine 
public confidence in drinking water and introduce unnecessary cost 
and risk to the water system and their consumers.
For supplemental monitoring and notification of results, NDDEQ is 
concerned that homeowners will repeatedly request sampling if the 
water system must pay. Example: Homeowners will request that 
their water be sampled weekly by the PWS no matter the past result 
of the water test showing that there is not an issue. This could 
become a burden for the water system.
NDDEQ recommends that water systems be required to submit a 
communication strategy at the start of the LCRI rule which will also 
include the 24-hour notice requirement due to a Lead action level 
exceedance. This will ensure that the water systems are prepared 
and not scrambling to produce and distribute public education 
materials.

§141.850(3)
13
NDDEQ has questions on what an adequate filter plan is since the 
rule requires the State Primacy agency to approval all ALE filter 
plans. NDDEQ requests that ERA should add the filter plan 
requirement under the lead service line replacement plan. 
NDDEQ recommends that ERA provide guidance on what is 
required in the filter plan (for Lead ALEs) and require the filter plan 
to be added and submitted as part of the Lead Service Line 
Replacement plan, so the system is better prepared.
In addition to the requirements mentioned in the preceding 
paragraph, the public education and reporting for § 141.92 
Monitoring for lead in schools and child care facilities in LCRI will be 
extensive, time consuming and difficult to track for CWS with limited 
resources. CWS may have difficulty implementing these 
requirements because there are several different time frames (30 
days, annually, once during the first five years after compliance, 
every five years after compliance, sample by request) when various 
types of information (sampling instructions, sample results, health 
risks of lead information, outreach attempts, etc.) must be 
generated and distributed to schools and child care facilities.
NDDEQ recommends that ERA amend this requirement to require 
filter distribution to consumers served by LSL, GRR, or unknown, 
and provide states authority to require distribution to the full 
community at their discretion, based on sample locations, existence 
of CCT, etc.
Schools & Child Care Facilities
Under § 141.92 Monitoring for lead in schools and child care 
facilities, CWS must generate a list of all schools and child care 
facilities served by them, submit it to the State by the compliance 
date and provide updates every five years. From those lists and 
within the first five years after compliance date, all elementary 
schools and child care facilities must be notified by their CWS about 
their eligibility to be sampled once for lead. Although encouraged, 
an elementary school and/or child care facility can ignore or refuse 
the request for sampling. Furthermore, LCRI only requires CWS to 
annually offer sample collection to secondary schools. As currently 
written, LCRI does not guarantee that any schools and child care 
facilities will be sampled and tested for lead.
School & Child Care Sampling
Recommendation for ERA
Rule 
Reference
§141.92 ’

>
14
NDDEQ can also form a similar partnership to implement the public 
education and sampling requirements more efficiently for child care
Instead, NDDEQ proposes the ERA consider adding language to 
LCRI that allows States the flexibility to either implement a new 
program or use an existing program that is as stringent as the 
requirements described in § 141.92 Monitoring for in lead schools 
and child care facilities but is not ERA’S 3-T’s Program.
Currently, NDDEQ does not have a lead testing program for schools 
and child care facilities. However, there are already other State 
agencies that are better equipped than CWS to efficiently generate 
a list of schools and child care facilities, distribute information to 
them and collect lead samples at those locations.
If a compliance option was available to implement a State program 
as stringent as currently written in § 141.92 Monitoring for lead in 
schools and child care facilities, then states could develop, if they 
choose to, a State law as part of primacy that better protects the 
health of children and creates a partnership with other state 
agencies to more efficiently fulfill the public education and sampling 
requirements for schools and child care facilities. This would relieve 
some of burden placed on the community water systems to 
implement § 141.92 Monitoring for lead in schools and child care 
facilities while simultaneously executing the rest of LCRI.
NDDEQ does not oppose the proposed public education and 
sampling of schools and child care facilities within a community 
water system. However, § 141.92 Monitoring for lead in schools and 
child care facilities does not protect the health of children because 
elementary schools and child care facilities are only required to be 
tested once in the first 5 years and can either ignore or deny 
requests for lead sampling in their facilities. Furthermore, child care 
facilities open and close very quickly in some areas. Sampling only 
once during the first five years could cause some licensed child care 
facilities to miss inclusion in any of the sample schedules. 
Additionally, the public education and reporting mandated under § 
141.92 Monitoring for lead in schools and child care facilities may 
create an additional burden for CWS that also will struggle to 
implement increased six-month monitoring, lead service line 
inventories, lead service line replacement plans, updated sample 
site plans, lead service line replacements, increased public notices 
and other public education requirements under LCRI. NDDEQ 
recognizes the importance to protect the health of children where 
they spend a significant amount of time during their young lives, but 
§ 141.92 Monitoring for lead in schools and child care facilities will 
not accomplish this goal as currently written.

J
§141.2
15
This is not an unprecedented request under LCRI. A similar 
proposal is already written under 40 CFR § 141.84 V.B.8, Proposed 
Revisions to 40 CFR Subpart I, Control of Lead and Copper, 
Service Line Replacement, Impact of State and Local Laws on 
Service Line Replacement. ND requests the same framework to 
utilize “State or local laws...” to implement a program as stringent 
as 40 CFR § 141.92 V.J.1, Proposed Revisions to 40 CFR Subpart 
I, Control of Lead and Copper, Lead Sampling at Schools, and Child 
Care Facilities, Proposed LCRI Requirements. If this proposal is 
included in the final version of LCRI and once it is promulgated, 
states then have three years to develop and pass a state law and/or 
establish a program as part of their primacy application to comply 
with 40 CFR § 141.92. By allowing States, if they chose to do so, to 
voluntary implement their own lead monitoring programs in schools 
and child care facilities, testing can become mandatory rather than 
voluntary as written under LCRI.
facilities if EPA added language allowing States to use existing or 
newly developed laws or programs to comply with § 141.92 
Monitoring for lead in schools and child care facilities. This is a more 
efficient option to fulfill the goal of protecting the health of children 
for many of the same reasons explained in the preceding 
paragraph. For example, state agencies already possess a list with 
addresses and contact information of all licensed child care facilities 
in the state. NDDEQ can work with these agencies to coordinate 
testing for lead in drinking water as part of the licensing permit of 
child care facilities. This plan would require the child care facility to 
test for lead in its own building/s. This would ensure all licensed 
child care facilities have their water tested for lead more frequently 
than once in five years and without the ability to decline the testing 
as the currently written under LCRI.
NDDEQ is requesting additional clarification on the existing 
definitions for school and child care facilities. A lack of clear 
definitions has resulted in several questions:
1) How should daycares that offer pre-school be categorized?
2) What does “licensed” mean for child care facilities? Is there a 
minimum population served to qualify for either definition?
3) How do mixed-use buildings that include child care factor into 
these definitions, for example a high rise with a day care on 
one floor of the building?
EPA should add additional details for the various definitions of 
schools and a better explanation and/or definition of child care 
facility.

§141.92(a)
§141.92(a)(b)
§141.92(b)(1)
I
16
NDDEQ is requesting additional clarification from ERA on the review 
process expected by states when receiving the CWS list of schools. 
Additional clarification is needed on how the list will be maintained 
as child care facilities will go online and offline very quickly.
NDDEQ recommends that ERA revise the rule to clarify that the list 
of schools and child care facilities should exclude those with full 
plumbing replacement or those constructed after January 1, 2014, 
or the date the State adopted standards that meet the definition of 
lead free in accordance with section 1417 of the Safe Drinking 
Water Act.
NDDEQ overall recommendation for this section of the proposal is 
for ERA to allow states to use their existing lead testing in schools 
and child care facilities programs and add language in the LCRI that 
would allow states without an existing program to develop a
program as stringent as ERA’S proposed LCRI. Many states already 
have an existing testing program, and honoring these programs 
would significantly reduce burden on the states and systems. Much 
of the paperwork proposed by ERA could be handled by the state’s 
Department of Public Instruction or Health and Human Services 
which may already have email addresses and physical addresses 
for schools and child care facilities.
State drinking water programs do not have enough information or 
resources to assess the validity of a community water system’s list 
of schools and child care facilities.
NDDEQ recommends that while the list may be turned into the 
state, there should be no expectation that the state drinking water 
program review the list for accuracy. Additional clarity is also 
needed on the maintenance of the list of schools and child care 
facilities. Based on the proposal, NDDEQ assumes this list will be 
made once every five years and the list will not be updated until the 
next five-year period.
Many states already have lead testing in schools and child care 
facilities programs; and other states are concerned about starting a 
program but want to ensure it is a streamlined process with other 
state agencies.
In the proposed LCRI, the list of schools and child care facilities 
appears to include all schools and child care facilities, where the 
general requirements exclude schools and child care facilities with 
full plumbing replacement or those constructed after January 1, 
2014.

§141.92(e)&(f)
17
ERA needs to provide clarity on the handling of schools requesting 
sampling and how the water systems will record these requests and 
submit them to the state for compliance.
To ensure compliance with existing requirements from LORR 
related to inventory management, primacy agencies employed a 
variety of solutions - from low-tech, in-house, applications to 
expensive 3rd party-developed and add on modules.
NDDEQ is concerned with portions of the rule moving forward in 
SDWIS State with uncertainty regarding how LCRI would impact 
data and record keeping longer term. In addition, NDDEQ is 
concerned with data migration - what will DW-SFTIES 
accept/manage and what will be left to state-developed systems?
It is critical that primacy agencies understand what, if any, 
functionality will be lost because of transitioning to the new data 
system. ERA must continue to communicate transparently about 
development timelines and capabilities of DW-SFTIES, so primacy 
agencies understand how transition will impact our programs.
NDDEQ is concerned over how data will be tracked and used for 
compliance with lead testing in schools and child care facilities. 
Where will the various lists be hosted and how will the state receive 
and store them? Where will data from sample results be stored? 
How will this new data be entered, and will it allow users to enter 
things like sample volume?
NDDEQ recommends that ERA clarify how data will be stored, 
entered, and used for compliance in regard to lead testing in 
schools and child care facilities.
NDDEQ recommends that ERA provide additional detail describing 
how water systems should record school or child care facility 
requests for additional testing and how these recorded lists should 
be submitted to the state for compliance. NDDEQ also recommends 
that the proposal detail how states shall use sampling request lists 
submitted by their water systems.
Data Management________________________________________________
Recommendation for ERA
Lack of Sufficient Rule Support in SDWIS
Given the timelines associated with SDWIS and DW-SFTIES 
primacy agencies lack a sufficient data system to effectively 
manage the LCRR and LCRI rule.
§141.92(b) (c) 
&(f)
Rule Reference 
§141.90

J
»
§141.90
§141.90
»
§141.90(a)(2)(iii)
18
LCRI requires the water system to notify the state they are going 
to perform a future requirement such as to supply sample results to 
the public within 60 days of the end of the monitoring period.
Where possible, ERA must provide updated templates, guidance 
and data entry instructions (DEI) with enough lead time to allow 
primacy agencies to plan for and implement all changes.
NDDEQ recommends that ERA reduce the number of certifications 
or combine some of the certifications, so states don’t have to track 
as many items. This will help make the rule less complex for both 
the state and water systems.
NDDEQ has concerns regarding the data management for: 
Point of use devices (POU) and pitcher filters within various 
sections of the LCRI rule. PWS must provide POU device plans, 
track locations and sampling data of POU devices. Also, ensure 
that POU devices are sampled at a rate of 30% per year for 3 
years as part of the LSL replacement, ALE, and small system 
compliance flexibility for CCT.
Currently states lack the mechanism and infrastructure to 
effectively track the abovementioned requirements. NDDEQ 
requests that EPA ensure that the DW-SAFTIES Database system 
is enabled to track all the required reporting data listed within the 
LCRI and streamline the tracking mechanism as much as possible.
EPA must consider how the timelines for DW-SFTIES, including 
time necessary to transition into production, will impact primacy 
agencies’ ability to effectively implement the rule.
Currently some state primacy agencies have templates and 
processes in place for collecting and managing inventory data, and 
now there will likely be an expansion of the data collected there 
which will require new templates, processes, and training, and 
further calls into question the information already collected.
Currently NDDEQ has counted 24 certifications in the LCRI. Some 
certifications in the LCRR have been changed from a certification 
to “water system must demonstrate”, which is just a terminology 
change but still a certification. If those are counted the total 
number of “certifications” goes up to 26. Most are in section 
141.90, but one certification is in 141.86(h). The LCRI rule has 
gotten more complex not less. In addition, none of the certifications 
under LCRR/ LCRI were streamlined or combined as State’s 
requested in their comments for the LCRR and LCRI.

§141,90(e)(10)
§141.90(f)(3)
19
NDDEQ recommends that the certification of consumer notice 
deadline remain as written within the LCRI.
40 CFR 141.86(h)(3) requires the water systems to make the 
results available and certify to the state that it has been 
completed.
NDDEQ is requesting that ERA develop a template to track an 
acceptable record of a customer refusal. This template could be 
used by the PWS for tracking purposes and submitted once to the 
primacy agency for the entire system, rather than per connection. 
In addition, ERA should further develop guidance to aid utility staff 
with tracking and reporting customer engagement to the state.
Also, tracking a water system’s notification to the state that they 
will complete a future requirement (Notification that they will make 
sample result publicly available prior to each monitoring period) is 
redundant for other part of the rule that the CWS are already doing.
Under this section of the LCRI systems are required to report 
monitoring data within 10 days from the end of the monitoring 
period and are required to send consumer notification within 3 days 
of learning of the results. It is also noted that the LCRI also allows 
a 3-month allowance for certifying consumer notice.
NDDEQ is requesting guidance from ERA on our concerns about 
timeliness associated with notification if the customer is not 
responsive and notification timelines are missed.
Some states have all the results on Drinking Water Watch or some 
other public facing website so this requirement is taken care of, but 
states that don’t do this will need to track another item (where 
CWS publicly make available their sample results). Also, 40 CFR 
141.85(d)(1) requires that individual results be given to the specific 
customer that collected the sample.
To reduce the complexity of the rule, 141,90(a)(2)(iii) requirement 
should be removed because it is a duplication of other parts of the 
rule requirements. If a water system doesn’t comply with 40 CFR 
141.86(h)(3), they will receive a violation and be required to do PN 
and have it included in the CCR.
NDDEQ is requesting clarification on what is valid documentation 
of customer refusal. Does every attempt need to be tracked by the 
state, or a single certification that all steps were followed by the 
PWS?

§142.15
If you have any questions, please contact Sandi Washek, my staff at 701-328-5190.
20
NDDEQ is asking the following question.
“Does the data in SDWIS used by primacy agencies to submit the 
required quarterly reports to EPA satisfy record keeping?
L. David Glatt, P.E.,
Director
North Dakota Department of Environmental Quality
Sincerely

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0932 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Department of Health 
Center for Drinking Water Quality 
Room 209, 3 Capitol Hill 
Providence RI 02908-5097 
www.health.ri.gov 
Phone: (401) 222-6867 
Fax: (401) 222-6953 TTY: 711 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
Michael S Regan 
Administrator 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-080 1 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
The Rhode Island Department of Health, Center for Drinking Water Quality (RIDOH/CDWQ) appreciates 
the opportunity to comment on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
(LCRI) published by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on December 6, 2023. 
As an initial matter, as a member of the Association of Safe Drinking Water Administrators (ASDWA), 
RIDOH/CDWQ largely supports the comments submitted by ASDWA. Secondly, RIDOH/CDWQ, also 
largely supports the comments submitted by New England Interstate Water Pollution Control 
Commission (NEIWPCC). 
The overarching challenge presented by the proposed rule is the lack of resources, namely funding, to 
enable effective implementation of the LCRI.  EPA must include increased state staff positions (full-time 
equivalents-FTEs) and the training needed for those staff to implement these new standards and to ensure 
system compliance. At present, Rhode Island is utilizing Bipartisan Infrastructure Law funding set-asides 
to fill this need, but that funding source is expected to go away around the time of the compliance date of 
the LCRI. Pulling this funding from the current funding levels of the federal Public Water Supply 
Supervision Program (PWSS) grant or the Base State Revolving Fund (SRF) set-asides will divert 
resources from other core drinking water programs (including inspections, technical assistance and 
training, permitting/plan approvals, and compliance/enforcement).  
 
Again, thank you for the opportunity to provide public comment about this important issue. 
 
Very truly yours, 
 
 
 
Amy Parmenter                                                                                                                                                
Chief Administrator                                                                                                                                     
Drinking Water Quality

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2265 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Comments of the Attorneys General of New York, California, 
Connecticut, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, 
New Jersey, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Wisconsin, and the 
District of Columbia,  
on 
the Environmental Protection Agency’s Proposed National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
(LCRI)  
88 Fed. Reg. 84,878 (Dec. 6, 2023) 
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
 
 

 
i 
 
Table of Contents 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..........................................................................................................1 
I. 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................4 
A. States’ Interest in Addressing Lead in Drinking Water .................................................4 
B. Procedural History .........................................................................................................8 
1. Comments on 2019 Proposal ...................................................................................8 
2. Litigation Over 2021 Rule .....................................................................................10 
II. 
COMMENTS ON PROPOSED RULE ......................................................................11 
A. Lead Service Line Replacement ..................................................................................12 
1. Mandatory Replacement ........................................................................................12 
2. Deferred Deadlines ................................................................................................16 
3. “Under Control” Provision and Cost Sharing ........................................................18 
4. Reasonable Attempts to Access .............................................................................25 
5. Mitigation Activities ..............................................................................................26 
6. Service Line Replacement Plan .............................................................................28 
7. Environmental Justice ............................................................................................29 
B. Revised Lead Action Level and Corrosion Control Treatment ...................................35 
1. Revision of Lead Action Level ..............................................................................35 
2. Elimination of Lead Trigger Level ........................................................................37 
3. Deferring Requirement to Optimize Corrosion Control 
Treatment ...............................................................................................................37 
C. Compliance Flexibilities for Small Water Systems .....................................................39 
D. Public Education ..........................................................................................................42 
1. Testing Notification Requirements ........................................................................42 
2. Language on Lead Hazard Communications .........................................................42 
3. Language Translation Requirements .....................................................................43 
E. Lead Sampling at Schools and Childcare Facilities .....................................................43 
1. Lead Action Level..................................................................................................46 
2. Sampling ................................................................................................................47 
3. Filtration .................................................................................................................50 
III. 
CONCLUSION ...............................................................................................................53 
 

 
1 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The Attorneys General of New York, California, Connecticut, Illinois, 
Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, Oregon, 
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Wisconsin, and the District of Columbia (together, 
“Attorneys General”) submit these comments on the Environmental Protection 
Agency’s proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and 
Copper: Improvements (LCRI), 88 Fed. Reg. 84,878 (Dec. 6, 2023) (Proposed Rule).  
 
We commend EPA for the Proposed Rule, which represents a significant 
improvement over the previous rule the agency finalized in 2021. We particularly 
applaud the agency’s decision to generally require the replacement of all lead 
service lines within ten years. We also support revisions EPA has made to 
strengthen its 2021 rule in several areas, including lowering the lead action level, 
increasing protections for customers of small water systems, and improving public 
education on the dangers of lead. 
 
Despite these significant improvements, the Attorneys General remain 
concerned that the Proposed Rule does too little to protect public health generally 
and specifically to address the disparate impacts of lead-contaminated drinking 
water on underserved communities. Therefore, as discussed in the comments below, 
we advocate for EPA to strengthen several aspects of the proposal. 
 
Below we highlight some of the main points in our comments: 
 
• Lead service line replacement. Mandatory replacement of all lead service 
lines within ten years is the heart of the Proposed Rule’s public health 
protections. Based on the experience of several of our states and cities, such a 
deadline is achievable provided adequate funding is available. We generally 
support EPA’s proposal to allow water systems with a large number or 
percentage of lead service lines additional time to complete replacements, 
subject to state oversight and ability to compel more expedited compliance. 
However, to increase the likelihood that lead service line replacements will in 
fact occur in all communities—regardless of income levels—we urge EPA to 
consider reviving its previous presumption that water systems control the 
entirety of the lead service line and/or narrowing the circumstances under 
which lack of access can be used to excuse mandatory replacements. EPA 
should also provide incentives to water systems to ensure that full 
replacements of service lines happen in all communities. As to other aspects 

 
2 
 
of lead service line replacement, we generally support the Proposed Rule’s 
requirements on reasonable attempts by water systems to secure access to 
private property to do replacements, to mitigate lead concentrations after a 
lead service line has been disturbed, and to prepare and publish online lead 
service line replacement plans that (i) set forth strategies for replacement 
and (ii) identify barriers to full replacements. EPA should take the following 
additional steps to ensure that the final rule remedies longstanding 
inequities from lead exposure in drinking water by: (i) providing more specific 
language directing water systems on how to identify underserved 
communities and to prioritize replacing lead service lines in these 
communities; (ii) finalizing its proposed prohibition on water systems 
counting disconnections at vacant buildings toward their annual replacement 
requirements; (iii) adopting its proposed ban on partial service line 
replacements unless conducted in response to emergency repairs or planned 
infrastructure work; and (iv) finalizing its proposed provisions requiring that 
water systems develop funding strategies for (a) achieving full service line 
replacement that accommodates customers who are unable to pay for the 
replacement of private services lines, and (b) replacing lead service lines in 
rental properties and informing renters about the quality of their water.      
 
• Revised lead action level and corrosion control treatment. We strongly 
support EPA’s proposal to reduce the lead action level to 0.010 milligrams per 
liter (mg/L) to better protect public health, and encourage EPA to consider a 
more protective level of 0.005 mg/L in the near future. We also support 
eliminating the current regulations’ trigger level in conjunction with reducing 
the action level to 0.010 mg/L. Focusing on a single, health-protective number 
for systems to reach will be simpler to implement and reduce confusion. With 
respect to whether water systems should be allowed to defer optimal 
corrosion control treatment requirements based on plans to replace lead 
service lines, we suggest that EPA tighten up the final regulations to ensure 
that water systems first have concrete plans to promptly replace lead service 
lines.   
 
• Small water system compliance flexibility. We support EPA’s proposed 
changes to compliance flexibility for small systems that exceed the lead 
action level, including (i) narrowing the eligibility for compliance flexibility 
from water systems serving 10,000 people to systems serving 3,300 or fewer 
people, and (ii) eliminating lead service line replacement as an option 
(instead of a requirement). Both of these changes will better protect public 

 
3 
 
health. Regarding the compliance alternatives to optimizing corrosion control 
treatment—installing point-of-use filters and replacing lead plumbing—we  
provide some suggestions for ensuring that these alternatives result in 
equivalent reductions in lead concentration as corrosion control treatment.   
 
• Public education. We support EPA’s improvement of several public 
education requirements, including shortening the period for mandatory 
notice of lead tap sampling testing results, modifying lead hazard warning 
language to better inform the public about the health effects from lead in 
drinking water, and adding language translation requirements to increase 
the likelihood non-English speakers understand the risks of lead exposure.   
 
• Lead sampling at schools and childcare facilities. The Proposed Rule’s 
provisions concerning lead sampling at schools and childcare facilities are 
inadequate and should be significantly strengthened. First, EPA should 
adopt a lead action level of 0.005 mg/L for schools and childcare facilities. 
This would obligate for community water systems serving these buildings 
and schools and childcare facilities that operate their own water systems to 
take corrective action if the level is exceeded. Second, EPA should require a 
more robust sampling program for these facilities, such as mandatory 
sampling in secondary schools, improved outreach, increased sampling 
frequency and quantity, and improved reporting of test results. Third, in lieu 
of requiring increased sampling frequency and quantity, EPA should consider 
giving water systems the alternative of installing and maintaining point-of-
use water filters, similar to the “filter first” approach that Michigan adopted 
last year. EPA has the authority to require water systems to adopt this 
method, which could be a more cost effective approach to removing lead until 
a more permanent solution (e.g., removal of lead service lines and lead 
plumbing fixtures) is implemented.    
 
Our comments are organized as follows: Section I is an introduction, which 
discusses our interest in protective drinking water standards and related advocacy 
in EPA’s rulemaking and in litigation. In Section II, we present our comments on 
the following aspects of the Proposed Rule: (A) lead service line replacement;        
(B) revised lead action level and corrosion control treatment; (C) compliance 
flexibilities for small water systems; (D) public education; and (E) lead sampling at 
schools and childcare facilities. Finally, we offer some concluding thoughts in 
Section III. 
 

 
4 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A.  States’ Interest in Addressing Lead in Drinking Water 
Lead is a highly toxic heavy metal that can adversely affect almost every 
organ and bodily system.1 In adults, lead exposure can cause brain damage 
resulting in problems with thinking (cognition), difficulties with organizing actions, 
decisions, and behaviors, abnormal social behavior (including aggression), and 
difficulties in coordinating fine movements, such as picking up small objects.2 
Adults have increased risks of heart disease, high blood pressure, muscle and joint 
pain, reproductive problems, kidney damage, and nervous system problems 
including those related to memory and concentration.3 According to one multi-year 
study on the impacts of low-level lead exposure, “of 2.3 million [cardiovascular] 
deaths every year in the U.S., about 400,000 are attributable to lead exposure.”4 
This study concludes that lead, even at low levels, is a key risk factor for deaths 
from cardiovascular disease.5 In women exposed to lead before or during pregnancy, 
lead can transfer to the fetus through the placenta, increasing the child’s risk of 
harmful health effects.6  
The health risks associated with lead exposure are even more dire for 
children. In particular, there is abundant evidence that links high lead levels in 
children’s blood with “increased diagnosis of attention-related behavioral problems, 
greater incidence of problem behaviors, and decreased cognitive performance as 
indicated by (1) lower academic achievement, (2) decreased intelligence quotient 
 
1 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), “Toxicological Profile 
for Lead,” (Aug. 2020) at 14, https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp13.pdf. The most 
studied effects of lead exposure are: neurological, renal, cardiovascular, hematological, 
immunological, reproductive, and developmental. Other health effects associated with lead 
exposure are: respiratory, hepatic, endocrine, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, ocular, and 
cancer. Id. at 14-16. 
2 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), “What are the Health Effects of 
Lead?” https://www.epa.gov/lead/learn-about-lead#effects; Centers for Disease Control, 
“What are Possible Health Effects from Lead Exposure?” 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/csem/leadtoxicity/physiological_effects.html.  
3 ATSDR, Toxicological Profile for Lead, supra note 1, at 14. 
4 Lanphear, et al., “Low-Level Lead Exposure and Mortality in US Adults: a 
Population-Based Cohort Study,” 3 Lancet Public Health e177, e182 (Mar. 12, 2018), 
https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpub/article/PIIS2468-2667(18)30025-2/fulltext.   
5 Id. 
6 EPA, What are the Health Effects of Lead?, supra note 2. 

 
5 
 
(IQ), and (3) reductions in specific cognitive measures.”7 Childhood lead poisoning 
can cause health effects for individuals later in life including hypertension, renal 
effects, reproductive problems, and developmental problems with their offspring.8 
The American Academy of Pediatrics states that no amount of lead exposure 
is safe for children, and recommends that state and local governments take steps to 
reduce lead levels in school drinking water to less than or equal to 1 part per billion 
(ppb).9 Similarly, a 2017 paper concluded that three decades of studies have shown 
that certain toxins, including lead, do not exhibit a threshold and are 
proportionately more toxic at the lowest levels of exposure.10 The paper noted that 
“an increase in blood lead from <1 µg/dL to 30 µg/dL (<10 ppb to 300 ppb) was 
associated with a 9.2 IQ deficit, but the largest fraction of the deficit (6.2 IQ points) 
occurred below 10 µg/dL (100 ppb).”11 Based on these findings, the author 
recommends that “regulatory agencies should strive to achieve near-zero exposures” 
for several toxins, including lead, to better protect public health.12 
Drinking water can be a significant source of lead exposure. EPA estimates 
that drinking water can make up at least 20 percent of a person’s total exposure to 
lead.13 However, infants who consume mostly formula mixed with tap water can 
receive 40 to 60 percent of their exposure to lead from the water used in the 
formula.14 An analysis of EPA data by the Natural Resources Defense Council found 
that between 2018 and 2020, 186 million people in the United States were served by 
water systems detecting 90th percentile lead levels exceeding the level of 1 ppb 
recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics to protect children from lead 
 
7 National Toxicology Program, “Health Effects of Low-Level Lead, xviii (June 2012), 
https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/ohat/lead/final/monographhealtheffectslowlevellead_newissn_5
08.pdf.   
8 Centers for Disease Control, What are Possible Health Effects from Lead 
Exposure?, supra note 2. 
9 American Academy of Pediatrics, “Prevention of Childhood Lead Toxicity,” 138(1) 
Pediatrics 1 (July 2016), https://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/138/1/e20161493.    
10 Lanphear, “Low-Level Toxicity of Chemicals: No Acceptable Levels,” 15(12) PLoS 
Biology 1, 5 (Dec. 19, 2017), 
https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.2003066.   
11 Id. at 3. 
12 Id. at 6. 
13 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,897. 
14 Id.  

 
6 
 
in water.15 More than 61 million people were served by water systems that detected 
90th percentile lead levels that exceeded 5 ppb and 7 million people were served by 
systems that detected 90th percentile lead levels that exceeded 15 ppb.16  
While the data show that large areas of the country have a higher potential 
for lead exposure due to drinking water contamination, underserved communities17 
are affected at even greater rates due to lack of infrastructure and investment in 
their communities and cumulative impacts of environmental problems. Studies 
show that “income is associated with exposure to a wide variety of environmental 
quality indicators in the ambient environment, at home, in school, on the job, and in 
one’s neighborhood.”18 Relatedly, aging housing stock—often found in communities 
lacking sufficient investment—likewise correlates to increased lead exposure from a 
variety of sources.19 The Environmental Justice Coalition for Water found, in 
California, “the lack of access to quality water resources and exclusion from water 
decision making has resulted in the disproportionate exposure of people of color and 
 
15 Natural Resources Defense Council, “Millions Served by Water Systems Detecting 
Lead,” (May 13, 2021), https://www.nrdc.org/resources/millions-served-water-systems-
detecting-lead. Note, these results are the 90th percentile value of tap water samples, 
meaning that 90 percent of tap water samples for each water system did not exceed the       
1 ppb level and 10 percent of samples exceeded 1 ppb. 
16 Id.  
17 “Underserved communities” refers to populations sharing a particular 
characteristic, as well as geographic communities, that have been systematically denied a 
full opportunity to participate in aspects of economic, social, and civic life, such as Black, 
Latino, and Indigenous and Native American persons, Asian Americans and Pacific 
Islanders and other persons of color; members of religious minorities; lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) persons; persons with disabilities; persons who live in 
rural areas; and persons otherwise adversely affected by persistent poverty or inequality. 
See Executive Order 13,985, Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved 
Communities Through the Federal Government, 86 Fed. Reg. 7,009 (Jan. 25, 2021). In this 
comment letter, we use the terms “underserved communities” and “environmental justice 
communities” synonymously.  
18 Evans & Kantrowitz, “Socioeconomic Status and Health: The Potential Role of 
Environmental Risk Exposure,” 23 Annual Review of Public Health 303, 323 (May 2002), 
https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev.publhealth.23.112001.112349.   
19 EPA, Executive Summary of EPA 747-R-96-002, (May 1996), 
https://www.epa.gov/lead/executive-summary-epa-747-r-96-002 (lead in soil); Massachusetts 
Department of Public Health, 2021 Annual Childhood Lead Poisoning Surveillance Report, 
5-6 (Nov. 17, 2022), https://www.mass.gov/doc/2021-annual-childhood-lead-poisoning-
surveillance-report-0/download (lead in paint). 

 
7 
 
low-income communities to contaminated drinking water.”20 A lack of resources in 
these communities leads to an inability to “construct, operate, and maintain water 
infrastructure.”21 Similar disproportionate burdens have been found among migrant 
farmworkers in North Carolina and low-income Chicano populations living along 
the United States and Mexico border.22 In fact, EPA’s environmental justice 
analysis for the Proposed Rule found that Black, Indigenous, People of Color 
(BIPOC) and low-income populations are at higher risk of lead exposure and 
associated health risks.23 
Given the harm caused by ingesting lead-contaminated water and the 
disproportionate impacts of lead exposure on underserved communities, our states 
have a strong interest in replacing lead service lines with safer alternatives. To this 
end, several states have already enacted laws and regulations mandating lead 
service line replacement. For example, in 2018, Michigan revised its Safe Drinking 
Water Act regulations to require the replacement within 20 years of all lead service 
lines and galvanized service lines if the service line is or was connected to lead 
piping.24 In 2021, New Jersey enacted legislation declaring that the presence of lead 
in drinking water represents a threat to public health and requiring that all lead 
service lines and galvanized service lines be replaced within 10 years.25 In 2021, 
Illinois enacted the Lead Service Line Replacement and Notification Act, which 
declares that, for the general health, safety and welfare of its residents, all lead 
service lines in Illinois should be disconnected from the drinking water supply, and 
requires the replacement (in a timeframe ranging from 15 to 50 years) of all lead 
service lines and galvanized service lines that are or were connected to downstream 
 
20 Environmental Justice Coalition for Water, Thirsty for Justice: A People’s 
Blueprint for California Water, 72 (Aug. 5, 2005), 
https://www.issuelab.org/resources/2885/2885.pdf.   
21 Id. at 78, 80. 
22 Cieselski, et al., “The Microbiologic Quality of Drinking Water in North Carolina 
Migrant Labor Camps,” 81 American Journal of Public Health 762 (June 1991), 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1405149/; Calderon, et al., “Health Risks 
from Contaminated Water: Do Class and Race Matter?,” 9 Toxicology and Industrial Health 
879 (Sept. 1, 1993). 
23 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,927. 
24 Mich. Admin. Code R 325.10604f. 
25 N.J. Stat. Ann. §§ 58:12A-40 to 12A-47. 

 
8 
 
lead piping.26 In 2023, Rhode Island and Minnesota also enacted laws requiring the 
replacement of all lead service lines and galvanized service lines within 10 years.27 
B. Procedural History  
As further context for our comments on the Proposed Rule, this section 
highlights relevant points from our comments on the 2019 proposal and our opening 
brief in litigation over the 2021 rule. 
1. Comments on 2019 Proposal 
In November 2019, EPA issued proposed revisions to its lead and copper 
drinking water regulations.28 Our state coalition submitted comments,29 expressing 
concerns about the proposal in several areas: 
• Lead service line replacement rate. For water systems that exceed the 
lead action level, the 2019 proposal called for reducing the mandatory 
replacement rate of lead service lines from 7 percent annually to 3 percent. 
Although the agency contended that by not counting partial replacements or 
“test outs,” the actual number of replacements would not decrease, we argued 
that EPA could make those changes while keeping the same replacement rate 
in place.30 
• Stronger measures to address noncompliance with lead service line 
replacement rate. Under the proposal, a water system that failed to replace 
 
26 415 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 5/17.12. The Office of the Illinois Attorney General has 
also taken major steps to address the serious health hazards presented by lead in drinking 
water. For instance, it has brought legal action against a water utility in University Park in 
Will County, Illinois that failed to provide residents with safe drinking water 
uncontaminated by lead. Illinois Attorney General, Attorney General Raoul and Will 
County State’s Attorney Glasgow Announce Consent Order with Aqua Illinois Over Water 
Contamination, (Oct. 5, 2023), https://www.illinoisattorneygeneral.gov/news/story/attorney-
general-raoul-and-will-county-states-attorney-glasgow-announce-consent-order-with-aqua-
illinois-over-water-contamination. 
27 23 R.I. Gen. Laws Ann. § 23-24.6-28; Minn. Stat. Ann. §§ 446A.077-446A.078. 
28 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Revisions, 84 Fed. Reg. 61,684 (Nov. 13, 2019). 
29 Comments of the Attorneys General of California, Oregon, Minnesota, 
Connecticut, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Illinois, Maryland, New York, and New Jersey (Feb. 
12, 2020) (“2020 Multistate Comments”), https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-
OW-2017-0300-1468. These comments are attached as Attachment A.  
30 2020 Multistate Comments at 10-11. 

 
9 
 
lead service lines at the mandatory rate was not required to notify its 
customers and could instead choose other, less targeted communication 
methods such as to conduct a social media campaign. We recommended 
mandatory notification by certified mail to each customer in addition to 
holding public meetings and distributing education materials about the 
required replacement.31   
• Disparate impacts. Although EPA proposed not to allow partial lead service 
line replacements to count toward a system’s compliance obligation, the 
agency otherwise failed to address disparate impacts associated with 
replacements. To the contrary, the proposal incentivized water systems to 
prioritize replacement in communities where private homeowners had the 
resources to cover the out-of-pocket cost of replacing the private portion of the 
lead service line. We urged EPA to evaluate and adopt methods to help 
ensure full lead service line replacements in low-income communities to 
reduce disparate impacts.32  
• Small system compliance flexibility. Under the proposal, smaller water 
systems (which represent 91 percent of community water systems) that 
exceeded lead action levels could opt out of lead service line replacement and 
choose other compliance options, such as optimized corrosion control 
treatment. We advocated for EPA to eliminate this opt-out provision because 
these other compliance options are not as effective as lead service line 
replacement.33  
• Mandatory replacement after exceedance of lead action level. Under 
the proposal, water systems that experienced an exceedance of the lead 
action level could avoid having to replace lead service lines if subsequent 
sampling showed levels below the action level for four consecutive monitoring 
periods (i.e., two years). We advocated for EPA to discard this approach, 
arguing that it would create inefficiencies and could substantially delay the 
timeline for complete removal of lead service lines and that any existing lead 
service lines remain a threat to public health and safety, even if they 
temporarily do not cause lead exposures.34 
• Lead action level. EPA proposed to leave the lead action level—which 
activated systems’ obligation to undertake remedial measures—at                
 
31 Id. at 14. 
32 Id. at 11-13. 
33 Id. at 18-19. 
34 Id. at 13-14. 

 
10 
 
15 micrograms per liter (µg/L), but to create a “trigger level” of 10 µg/L, 
pursuant to which water systems would have to undertake additional testing. 
We urged EPA instead to lower the lead action level, which would provide a 
more protective and simpler approach.35 
• Making lead service line inventories available online. In the proposal,  
water systems serving over 100,000 customers would have to make their lead 
service line inventories available online. Although we supported this 
provision, we urged EPA to broaden its scope to cover at least water systems 
that served more than 500 customers.36 
• More protective requirements for schools and daycare facilities. The 
proposal included new lead education and testing provisions for K-12 schools 
and childcare facilities built prior to January 1, 2014. We supported these 
provisions but advocated for more protective measures, including: rejecting 
the “upon request” option in the proposal that would make lead testing a 
voluntary program; requiring systems to post all lead test results online as 
soon as practicable after testing occurs; including a health-protective lead 
action level and requiring water systems to send schools and childcare 
facilities with lead test results above that action level specific information on 
how to respond to high lead levels; and mandating testing of as many 
drinking water outlets in schools and childcare facilities as feasible.37   
2. Litigation Over 2021 Rule 
After EPA issued its final rule,38 which failed to remedy many of the 
deficiencies discussed in our comments, many of our states—along with several 
public health and environmental organizations—filed a lawsuit in the D.C. Circuit 
challenging the rule (Newburgh Clean Water Project v. EPA, D.C. Cir. No. 21-1019 
and consolidated cases). In our opening brief, the state petitioners discussed how 
several aspects of the 2021 rule were unlawful. 
First, we argued that the rule’s lead service line replacement provision 
impermissibly allowed “backsliding” from the previous rule, contrary to the Safe 
 
35 Id. at 9. 
36 Id. at 15-16. 
37 Id. at 16-18. 
38 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 
86 Fed. Reg. 4198 (Jan. 15, 2021). 

 
11 
 
Drinking Water Act’s anti-backsliding provision, 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(9).39 We cited 
both the rule’s elimination of the previous rule’s mandate that small water systems 
replace their lead service lines when the water in their systems exceeds the lead 
action level and the reduction in the annual mandatory minimum rate of lead 
service line replacement for large systems from 7 percent to 3 percent of the 
system’s total lead service lines. 
Second, we argued that EPA failed to reasonably explain its conclusion that 
the rule would not disproportionately harm minority and low-income populations 
within the meaning of Executive Order 12,898.40 We explained that replacement of 
privately-owned portions of lead service lines under the rule generally would be 
available only where the homeowner paid thousands of dollars to replace that 
portion of the line. And that minority and low-income populations, who face greater 
lead exposure, would be less likely to be able to pay for the replacement of privately-
owned service lines and more likely to live in rental housing where a landlord 
refuses to pay for replacement of privately-owned service lines. Under those 
circumstances, EPA failed to explain how the rule’s lead service line replacement 
provision would not exacerbate these disparate impacts. 
After the petitioners’ opening briefs were filed, EPA filed a motion for a 
voluntary remand. EPA stated that although it believed that the 2021 rule 
improved on the prior rule in several respects, it nonetheless had commenced a new 
rulemaking “to revise and strengthen the rule” and “[g]iven that EPA’s new rule 
could address all of Petitioners’ concerns about the Rule,” EPA requested remand 
without vacatur.41 Although the D.C. Circuit denied the motion, it placed the case in 
abeyance pending the completion of EPA’s rulemaking.  
II. 
COMMENTS ON PROPOSED RULE 
In Section II, our comments on the Proposed Rule are set forth in the 
following subsections: (A) lead service line replacement; (B) lead action level and 
corrosion control treatment; (C) compliance flexibilities for small systems; (D) public 
education; and (E) lead sampling at schools and childcare facilities.  
 
39 Initial Opening Brief of State Petitioners in Newburgh Clean Water Project v. 
EPA, D.C. Cir. No. 21-1019 (Aug. 8, 2022), Doc. # 1958332, at 19-20. 
40 Id. at 20-21. 
41 Respondents’ Consent Motion for Voluntary Remand in Newburgh Clean Water 
Project v. EPA, D.C. Cir. No. 21-1019 (Dec. 9, 2022), Doc. # 1977031 at 1-2. 

 
12 
 
A. Lead Service Line Replacement  
Our comments on the proposed lead service line provisions include seven 
aspects: (1) mandatory replacement; (2) deferred deadlines; (3) “under control” 
provision and cost sharing; (4) “reasonable attempt” to access; (5) mitigation 
activities; (6) service line replacement plans; and (7) environmental justice. 
1. Mandatory Replacement 
The Proposed Rule would require full service line replacement of all lead 
service lines and galvanized requiring replacement (GRR) service lines42 under a 
water system’s control within 10 years.43 This requirement is a much-needed 
improvement over the 2021 rule, which did not mandate full replacement, and that 
EPA projected would, over 35 years, result in replacing only 854,000 to 1.3 million 
of the estimated 9.2 million lead service lines in the United States.44 Under the 
2021 rule, lead service lines accounting for 50 to 75 percent of lead contamination in 
drinking water would have remained in active use.45 In contrast, the Proposed Rule 
would require 96 percent of systems nationwide to replace all lead service lines 
under their control on a 10-year timeline, with only four percent of systems being 
potentially eligible for additional time to complete replacement.46 
Given the danger that lead-contaminated water poses to the health of our 
states’ residents, the Attorneys General strongly support EPA’s proposal to 
mandate the full replacement of all lead service lines because: (1) lead service lines 
are a major source of lead-contamination in tap water; (2) prior EPA rules that did 
 
42 The Proposed Rule applies both to lead service lines and galvanized requiring 
replacement (GRR) lines. Galvanized service lines are iron or steel pipes that have been 
dipped in a protective zinc coating to prevent corrosion and rust. As EPA explains, 
“[g]alvanized service lines that are or ever were downstream of an [lead service line] can 
adsorb upstream lead particulates and contribute to lead in drinking water even after the 
original lead source has been removed.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,918. Where systems are unable 
to demonstrate that a galvanized service line was never downstream of a lead service line, 
it would be categorized as a GRR service line and be subject to the Proposed Rule’s 
mandatory replacement requirement. For ease of reference, we use the term “lead service 
lines” as referring to both types of lines. 
43 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,910. As will be discussed below, there are limited exceptions 
from the 10-year timeframe for very large water systems and for systems with a high 
proportion of LSLs and GRR service lines. 
44 Id. 
45 Id. 
46 Id. at 84,912. 

 
13 
 
not mandate replacement proved insufficient to protect public health; and (3) not all 
systems are proactive in replacing lead service lines, especially in underserved 
communities.  
First, it is critical to mandate the removal of lead service lines because, when 
present, they are the main contributor of lead contamination in water, contributing 
an average of approximately 50 to 75 percent of the total lead mass measured at the 
tap.47 In comparison, premise piping (i.e., piping within the home or other building) 
contributes about 20 to 35 percent of total lead mass, while faucets contribute about 
1 to 3 percent.48   
Second, as EPA acknowledges based on its over 30 years of implementing the 
1991 Lead and Copper Rule, prior measures such as requiring lead service line 
replacements based on 90th percentile lead levels49 have proved insufficient at 
protecting public health.50 One major problem with the prior approach is that the 
rule structure—which the 2021 rule kept—only compelled protective actions after 
public health threats were identified—that is, after periodic tap sampling results 
showed an exceedance of the action level for lead.51 Moreover, EPA found that “the 
sampling and process steps of that rule created implementation uncertainties, 
difficulties, and errors that, in some cases, resulted in significant lead exposures.”52 
Although actions such as corrosion control treatment and risk mitigation measures 
can provide some protection from lead contamination, the former can be prone to 
error and the latter are not always applied. EPA notes that improper 
implementation of corrosion control treatment has been one of the primary causes of 
significant lead exposures in multiple water systems.53 And although water systems 
must take risk mitigation measures to prevent disturbances of lead service lines 
 
47 Id. at 84,880 (citing a 2008 study by Sandvig et al.). 
48 Id.  
49 In 1991, the Lead and Copper rule established action levels of 0.015 mg/L for lead 
and 1.3 mg/L for copper. If more than 10 percent of tap sample results (i.e., the 90th 
percentile value of tap sample concentrations), collected during any monitoring period, 
exceed the action level, water systems had to take actions including corrosion control 
treatment and replacing lead service lines if the system continued to exceed the action level 
after completing corrosion control treatment. Id. at 84,898. 
50 Id. at 84,880. 
51 Id. at 84,899. 
52 Id. at 84,911. 
53 Id. 

 
14 
 
that can cause lead particulates to be released to drinking water, other utilities, 
heavy traffic, or even cold weather can also disturb lead service lines, in which case 
there would be no risk mitigation measures taken.54 As long as lead service lines 
remain in place, they pose a threat to public health. 
Third, while some states and water systems have been proactive in replacing 
all lead service lines without a federal mandate, EPA cannot assume that all 
systems will take such initiative on their own, even when funding is available. A 
nationwide mandate ensures that all water users—including those in states that do 
not require replacement or where systems are not proactively replacing lead service 
lines—will be free of the major source of lead contamination in tap water.55 This is 
particularly significant for underserved communities, as discussed more specifically 
below, which tend to bear the impacts of lead infrastructure disproportionately in 
every state. 
The Attorneys General also agree with EPA’s conclusion that most water 
systems nationwide can feasibly replace all lead service lines within 10 years.56 
Three states—New Jersey, Rhode Island, and Minnesota—recently enacted laws 
requiring the replacement of all their lead service lines within 10 years.57 New 
Jersey and Rhode Island are among the states with the most lead service lines, with 
14 and 25 percent, respectively, of all their service lines requiring replacement.58 
The fact that these states found it feasible to replace all lead service lines in 10 
years shows that this timeline is possible for most states, which likely have many 
fewer lead service lines, by comparison.  
In addition, the experience of several cities supports EPA’s conclusion that—
with adequate funding—full lead service line replacement is possible for most 
systems within 10 years and, for some systems, even sooner. The cities of 
Stoughton, Wisconsin; Mayville, Wisconsin; Tucson, Arizona; and Spokane, 
Washington each had less than 1,000 lead service lines and completed their 
replacement programs in one to two years. Most water systems in the country (96.5 
 
54 Id.  
55 Id. 
56 Id. at 84,912. 
57 N.J. Stat. Ann. §§ 58:12A-40-12A-47; Minn. Stat. Ann. §§ 446A.077-446A.078; 23 
R.I. Gen. Laws Ann. § 23-24.6-28. 
58 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,911. 

 
15 
 
percent) also have less than 1,000 lead service lines.59 For this reason, the Attorneys 
General agree with EPA’s decision to retain the proposed requirement that states 
set a faster replacement rate where feasible for systems.60 Many small systems will 
not need 10 years to complete replacement and, as states are better positioned than 
EPA to assess the conditions facing local water systems, states should make such 
feasibility determinations. To that end, guidance from EPA would assist states in 
making these determinations in a consistent manner. 
Even large systems with greater numbers of lead service lines have 
completed replacement in less than ten years. Newark, New Jersey replaced its 
approximately 23,000 lead service lines in four years.61 Flint, Michigan replaced 
approximately 12,000 lead service lines in seven years.62 Furthermore, the Proposed 
Rule does not require that systems start their replacement programs until three 
years after promulgation of the final rule, effectively giving them 13 years to 
complete replacement from the effective date of the rule. Madison, Wisconsin and 
Lansing, Michigan replaced their lead service lines in 11 years and 12 years, 
respectively, providing further evidence of the feasibility of EPA’s proposed 
replacement timeline for most water systems.63 
The Attorneys General also agree with EPA’s conclusion that it will be 
feasible for service line replacement to be conducted by all systems 
simultaneously.64 Five stated—Illinois, Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, and 
Rhode Island—all enacted state-wide mandatory, accelerated lead service line 
replacement programs between 2018 and 2023. These states have more than one-
fifth of the lead service lines in the country.65 In these states’ experience, it is 
possible to have a broad service line replacement mandate in effect across a large 
geographic region without running into workforce or materials shortages. 
 
59 Id. at 84,912. 
60 Id. 
61 EPA notes that a 2019 ordinance that allowed entry to private property to 
evaluate service line materials and replace lead service lines likely contributed to Newark’s 
fast replacement rate. Id. 
62 EPA notes that Flint’s replacement program was slowed by the paper format and 
unreliable accuracy of its service line material records. Id. 
63 Id. 
64 Id. at 84,913. 
65 Id. at 84,911. 

 
16 
 
2. Deferred Deadlines 
Under the Proposed Rule, water systems are eligible for deferral of the 10-
year deadline for mandatory full service line replacement if they meet one of two 
eligibility criteria. The first eligibility criterion applies to systems with a high 
proportion of lead service lines in their distribution systems relative to the total 
number of households served. EPA determined that the fastest feasible replacement 
rate for systems is 0.039 replacements per household per year (equivalent to 39 
service line replacements for every 1000 households).66 Therefore, under the first 
criterion, a system qualifies for a deferred deadline if it would need to achieve a 
replacement rate of more than 0.039 replacements per household per year to meet 
the 10-year deadline. EPA estimates that 1.1 to 4.4 percent of water systems (716 to 
2,174 systems) would meet this criterion.67 Of those systems that qualify for 
deferred deadlines under this criterion, 74 percent would receive between one and 
five additional years to complete replacement.68 
The second eligibility criterion applies to the largest water systems 
nationally. EPA determined that the maximum feasible annual replacement 
threshold is 10,000 service lines per system. Therefore, under the second criterion, a 
system is eligible for a deferred deadline if it would be required to replace more 
than 10,000 service lines per year to meet the 10-year replacement deadline. EPA 
identified four cities that would meet this criterion and noted the total time each 
city would require for full lead service line replacement under this threshold: 
Chicago (44.6 years), Houston (33.1 years), Cleveland (18.5 years), and New York 
(13.8 years).69 Alternatively, EPA proposes an 8,000 service line maximum 
threshold, which would allow three additional systems to qualify for deferred 
deadlines: North Texas MWD (11.9 years), Detroit (10.6 years), and Wichita (10.1 
 
66 Id. at 84,913. 
67 EPA, Technical Support Document for the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, 
at 11 (Nov. 2023).  
68 Id. at 12. 
69 Id. at 15. EPA estimated New York City’s replacement timeline based on 137,542 
known lead service lines, but recent data show over 227,000 service lines of unknown 
composition. See Anne E. Nigra et al., “Geospatial Assessment of Racial/Ethnic 
Composition, Social Vulnerability, and Lead Water Service Lines in New York City,” 131(8) 
Envtl. Health Perspectives 087015-1, 087015-4 (Aug. 2023). Depending on the number of 
these unknown service lines that turn out to be lead, New York City’s compliance timeline 
could be significantly extended under the Proposed Rule’s deferred deadlines approach. 

 
17 
 
years).70 Utilizing an 8,000 service line replacement threshold would also increase 
the deferred deadlines for Chicago (55.8 years), Houston (41.5 years), Cleveland 
(23.2 years), and New York (17.2 years).71 Also, EPA requests comment on whether 
the maximum feasible replacement threshold should increase from 10,000 to 20,000 
service lines after the first 10 years. 
The Attorneys General support deferred deadlines that are no less stringent 
than what EPA has proposed (0.039 replacements per household or 10,000 
replacements total per year). Systems with a high proportion of lead service lines or 
with a high number of lead service lines may need additional time to complete 
replacement. However, the Attorneys General believe there should be limits placed 
on these provisions. First, as EPA proposes, systems should be permitted to count 
only known lead service lines reported in their baseline inventory for their 
replacement rates and/or thresholds. This condition would prevent systems from 
qualifying for deferred deadlines by overestimating the number of lines that need 
replacement. Second, a state, as a condition of primacy, should be required to 
approve the use of the deferred deadline provision where a water system qualifies 
for it. As part of this approval process, the state should determine whether it is 
feasible for a system to replace all of its lead service lines by the 10-year deadline 
and only if it finds that it is not feasible should the deferred deadline be approved.  
Third, EPA should not lower the proposed 10,000 service line minimum 
feasibility threshold to 8,000 service lines. There is support for the 10,000 service 
line threshold from large cities that are currently or have previously replaced their 
lead service lines: Detroit plans to replace 10,000 service lines per year and Newark 
achieved replacement rates equivalent to 12,000 lines per year.72 Fourth, after 10 
years, the maximum replacement threshold for large cities should be increased to 
20,000 lines per year. After 10 years, 96 percent of systems will have completed 
their replacements, freeing up contractors to perform replacements and making 
materials more readily available, which should allow the remaining systems to 
speed up their replacement rates. Moreover, as EPA notes, after 10 years, supply 
chains will have expanded to meet demand, replacement efficiency will have 
 
70 Technical Support Document, supra note 67, at 15. 
71 Id.  
72 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,914. 

 
18 
 
increased following a decade of experience, and there could be new technology or 
procedures to expedite replacement.73 
3. “Under Control” Provision and Cost Sharing 
In this subsection, we discuss the proposed regulations that trigger the 
obligation of water systems to replace lead service lines and the related issue of who 
should pay the costs of full replacement (including the line sections that are located 
on private property). Although we appreciate EPA’s consideration of how its 
regulatory approach could address longstanding inequities associated with lead 
service line replacement, we are concerned that the proposed regulations fall 
significantly short in that respect. After outlining those proposed regulations, we 
provide information on relevant state laws, and then offer some proposed changes to 
the regulations to better address inequity in lead service line replacements.  
Proposed Rule Provisions Regarding Control/Access and Cost Sharing 
EPA proposes to condition mandatory replacements on “service lines under 
the control of the water system.”74 The question of “control” turns on whether a 
water system has access to the service line. Specifically, “[w]here a water system 
has access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full service line 
replacement, the service line is under its control, and the water system must 
replace the service line.”75 If a water system does not have “access to conduct full 
service line replacement,” it is not required to replace the line, but must document 
the reason(s) it lacks access and provide that documentation to the relevant state 
agency.76 EPA further states that it is not establishing criteria for determining 
whether a system has access to conduct full service line replacement “because of the 
wide variation of relevant state and local laws and water tariff agreements as well 
as the potential for these to change over time.”77 Relatedly, “where a water system 
has legal access to conduct full service line replacement only if property owner 
consent is obtained, the water system must make a ‘reasonable effort’ to obtain 
property owner consent.”78  
 
73 Id. 
74 40 C.F.R. Proposed § 141.84(d)(1). 
75 Id., Proposed § 141.84(d)(2). 
76 Id. 
77 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920; see also 40 C.F.R. Proposed § 141.84(d)(2)(i). 
78 Id., Proposed § 141.84(d)(3). 

 
19 
 
Regarding whether a water system should bear the full cost of lead service 
line replacement or can share the cost of replacing the section on private property 
with the landowner, EPA states that it has considered—but rejected—the idea 
advanced by certain advocates that the agency has the authority under the Safe 
Drinking Water Act to ban cost sharing. Although acknowledging that the practice 
of cost sharing can disproportionately impact low-income populations, EPA states 
that it “is not aware of a factual basis to support” the assertion that water systems 
control all portions of service lines and concludes that banning cost sharing “would 
be met with a protracted legal challenge that would delay implementation of the 
rule.”79 Instead, EPA proposes to “remain[] neutral on this matter of state and local 
law.”80 At the same time, the agency states that it “strongly encourages customer-
side service line replacement to be offered at no direct cost to the customer wherever 
possible to achieve higher customer participation rates and reduce potential 
environmental justice impacts.”81  
 Based on our experience, the Attorneys General are concerned that the 
proposed regulations will perpetuate the pattern of fewer lead service line 
replacements occurring in low-income communities and on rental properties. Prior 
to recommending suggested changes to attempt to remedy this problem, we provide 
some information below on relevant state laws and experiences. 
Relevant State and Local Laws and Experience 
In this section, we discuss state and local funding laws that proactively seek 
to address inequities associated with lead service line replacements as well as the 
status of laws that may be relevant to whether water system ratepayer funds or 
municipal bonds can be used to fund full lead service line replacements. In 
discussing these types of state and local laws in the preamble to the proposal, EPA 
referred to a 2019 study by Harvard Law School and the Environmental Defense 
Fund, which evaluated the laws of thirteen states (Florida, Illinois, Indiana, 
Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, 
Pennsylvania, Texas, and Wisconsin) that have the most lead service lines in the 
U.S. As EPA notes, the authors concluded that six states (Indiana, Michigan, 
Missouri, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin) have expressly authorized the 
 
79 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,923. 
80 Id. 
81 Id. 

 
20 
 
use of ratepayer funds for lead service line replacement on private property.82 The 
study further found “no explicit barriers” to using water rates to fund replacements 
on private property in the state laws and policies of these thirteen states.83 The 
undersigned Attorneys General are not aware of any flaws in this finding as to their 
respective states, with the exception of those corrections, clarifications, and updates 
summarized below.  
• Massachusetts. Massachusetts is proposing to increase the availability of 
loan forgiveness on its loans to its community water systems for the purposes 
of full (public and private) lead service line replacements.84 
• Michigan. Michigan updated its regulations in 2018 to effectively make full 
lead service line replacements available to all customers, regardless of their 
income.85 The Harvard study noted that these rules were the subject of 
ongoing litigation. That litigation has now been resolved, with state courts 
upholding the rules. Those courts rejected, among other arguments, that the 
rules ran afoul of the state constitution’s prohibition of requiring 
municipalities to give something away for free. Because the rules conferred a 
benefit on municipalities by reducing lead contamination systemwide, the 
prohibition did not apply. Furthermore, the rules had a public purpose in 
that they required removal of lead service lines and promoted of public 
health.86 
• Minnesota. Minnesota passed a law last year that establishes a goal of 
replacing all lead service lines within ten years and allocates $240 million for 
replacements.87 The statute was amended to allow for public funds to be used 
for the specific purpose of replacing private lead service lines.88  
 
82 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,926. 
83 Id. at 84,926-27. 
84 Mass. Dept. of Envtl. Protection, 2024 Draft Intended Use Plan For the Drinking 
Water State Revolving Fund, at 10-11 (Dec. 2023). 
85 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,926. 
86 Shaw v City of Dearborn, 329 Mich App 640 (2019); Oakland Cty Water Resources 
Comm et al v Dep’t of Environmental Quality, Court of Claims No. 18-000259-MZ, Oct. 9, 
2019, Opinion and Order; Oakland Cty Water Resources Comm et al v Dep’t of 
Environmental Quality, Court of Claims No. 18-000259-MZ, Jul. 26, 2019, Opinion and 
Order. 
87 Minn. Session Laws, Ch. 39—H.F. No. 24 (2023) 
88 See id. 

 
21 
 
• New Jersey. New Jersey passed additional legislation related to lead service 
lines in 2021. In July 2021, Governor Murphy signed into law P.L.2021, Ch. 
183, which requires community water systems to identify all lead service 
lines, provide public notification regarding the presence of all lead service 
lines, and replace all lead service lines by 2031. Additionally, a section of the 
statute addresses who bears the cost of the project, and explicitly states that, 
“100 percent of the costs associated with undertaking and funding the 
replacement of lead service lines pursuant to this act, excluding any portion 
funded by grants or other subsidies, shall be borne by all of the customers, in 
the State, of an investor-owned public community water system and shall be 
included in the investor-owned public community water system’s rate base or 
otherwise be recoverable from the system’s customers.”89  
• New York. In addition to the legal authority cited in the Harvard study, the 
New York Attorney General is aware of both municipal water systems and 
privately owned utilities in New York that have funded lead service line 
replacement on customer property. New York’s Public Service Commission 
(which regulates privately owned water utilities) has specifically authorized 
the use of rate revenue for this purpose, stating: “Water safety, particularly 
related to the dangers of potential lead poisoning, is of utmost importance. No 
customer should suffer the risk associated with lead service lines because 
they lack the resources to have the line replaced.”90 
Regarding states that were not included in the Harvard report, we provide 
the following information: Rhode Island, which EPA discusses in the Proposed Rule 
in the context of the state’s mandatory lead service line replacement law,91 requires 
all water systems in the state to create a lead water supply replacement program 
for both public and private service lines.92 The District of Columbia prohibits the 
use of ratepayer funds for water utility work on private property.93 
 
 
89 N.J.S.A. § 58:12A-45. 
90 In re SUEZ Water New York Inc. et al., Cases 19-W-0168, 19-W-0269, Order 
Adopting Terms of Joint Proposal, Approving Merger, and Establishing Rate Plan, at 54 
(N.Y. Pub. Serv. Comm’n July 16, 2020). 
91 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,911. 
92 See R.I. Gen. Laws § 23-24.6-28. 
93 D.C. Code §§ 8-205(b), 34-2158(c). 

 
22 
 
Proposed Approaches to Address or Mitigate Inequities  
The most effective way to address the longstanding inequities in lead service 
line replacement would be to prohibit cost sharing. As EPA notes in the preamble, 
advocates argue that EPA has the authority under the statute to take this action 
because water systems exert control over the entire service line and full service line 
replacement is the best available technology to address lead contamination in 
drinking water.94  
If EPA adheres to its position in the Proposed Rule rejecting the idea of 
prohibiting cost sharing, it could revise the Proposed Rule in other ways to better 
address inequity than the “neutral” stance toward cost sharing set forth in the 
proposal. First, EPA could make changes to the proposal’s interpretations of control 
and access. Second, the agency could include in the final rule one or more 
alternatives to incentivize full replacements where cost sharing would otherwise 
pose an obstacle. 
First, EPA could consider reverting to the presumption in the 1991 Lead and 
Copper Rule that a water system controls the full length of a lead service line, 
including any portion on private property.95 The original rule provided that “control” 
for the purpose of lead service line replacement came in the forms of “authority to 
set standards for construction, repair, or maintenance of the line, authority to 
replace, repair, or maintain the service line, or ownership of the service line.”96 
These forms of control continue to hold true as a factual matter. Under various 
applicable sources of authority—state law, local law, easement rights, or water 
tariffs or other service agreements—utilities can generally exercise control over 
customer service lines through one or more of the following rights, among others:  
 
94 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,923. 
95 See Maximum Contaminant Level Goals and National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper, 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460, 26,504-05 (June 7, 1991) (preamble); 
id. at 26,553 (rule text). 
96 Id. at 26,553. As EPA explained in the preamble to the rule: 
Water systems generally retain authority to specify standards for construction, maintenance, 
and composition of service lines to be able to safeguard the integrity of the distribution system 
and, thereby to ensure the delivery of safe water to the consumer. . . . The Agency believes, 
moreover, that it is reasonable to interpret “control” as being present in cases where a system 
has authority to replace or repair or maintain the line since lead service line replacement 
under the final rule is a form of “repair” or “maintenance” which is necessary to prevent further 
exposures to elevated levels of lead. 
Id. at 26,504. 

 
23 
 
(1) dictating the specifications of service lines on customer property;97 (2) requiring 
customers to provide access for maintenance purposes;98 (3) shutting off water to a 
service line for failure to maintain the line or provide the utility access;99 or           
(4) unilaterally entering customer property for purposes that may include service 
line maintenance or replacement.100 These types of rights provide utilities with 
control over the full length of a lead service line to the extent necessary to effectuate 
line replacement. 
With respect to access, the Proposed Rule leaves it solely to state and local 
law to determine what constitutes legal and physical access. Alternatively, EPA 
could specify that for purposes of lead service line replacement, the only permissible 
basis to excuse a water system from performing full replacement would be a lack of 
owner or resident consent to physical access if such consent is required by state or 
local law. Under this approach, EPA would strike the language in proposed (d)(2)(i) 
that states “[t]his rule does not establish the criteria for determining whether a 
system has access to conduct full service replacement” and add language to the 
effect that access may only depend on “receipt of consent, if required by state or 
local law, from (a) the owner of any property to which the system requires physical 
access to complete full lead service line replacement, or (b) any other person who 
 
97 See, e.g., 15 Rules of the City of N.Y. §§ 20-02, 20-03 (regulations promulgated by 
city-run water system governing the specifications, connection, and installation of service 
lines). 
98 See, e.g., Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority, Rates, Rule, and Regulations 
Governing the Provision of Water Service to the Public in the Territory Described Herein 
Part III § B(12)(e) (“Should the condition of a customer service line be such that there is a 
risk to public health or safety or of damage to public property, and the property Owner fails 
to take prompt action to cure the problem following notice to do so, the Authority shall have 
the right . . . to make the necessary repair or replacement[.]”). 
99 See, e.g., West Valley Crystal Water Co., Inc., Schedule for Water Service 
Applicable in Village of West Valley, County of Cattaraugus § 12(A)(2) (allowing utility to 
discontinue service “for failure to protect and maintain the service pipe or fixtures on the 
property of the customer in a condition satisfactory to the company” or “[f]or failure to 
provide the company’s employees reasonable access to the premises supplied”); see also Erie 
Cty. Water Authority Tariff § 2.31(F) (allowing utility to discontinue water service “[f]or 
refusal of reasonable access to the property for the purpose of . . . replacing service lines 
containing lead or galvanized requiring replacement”). 
100 See, e.g., Wis. Stat. Ann. § 196.171(1) (“Any officer or agent of any public utility 
furnishing or transmitting water . . . to the public or for public purposes may enter, at any 
reasonable time, any place supplied with . . . water by the public utility, for the purpose of 
inspecting, examining, repairing, installing or removing . . . pipes . . . for supplying or 
regulating the supply of . . . water[.]”). 

 
24 
 
may be authorized by state or local law to provide such consent.” The rule could also 
provide that a request for access consent cannot be conditioned upon the owner or 
resident’s agreement to bear costs associated with the service line replacement. 
Such an approach would prevent utilities from using an owner’s inability to share 
costs as a purported reason for lack of access and provide direct benefits to 
communities least able to afford lead service line replacement.  
Second, we present some alternatives that are logical extensions of concepts 
included in the Proposed Rule. These alternatives are not mutually exclusive, so 
EPA could choose to adopt one or some combination of the three.  
Funding exhaustion approach. Under this approach, a water system 
would not be relieved of its mandatory lead service line replacement obligation 
unless it first exhausted federal and state funding opportunities. EPA recognizes in 
the Proposed Rule that there is significant funding available to pay for replacement 
of lead service lines (some of it directed to disadvantaged communities least likely 
to afford full service line replacement) and that using such funding for full 
replacements “would mitigate or eliminate any barrier to full service line 
replacement as a result of customer cost-sharing.”101 The agency spends several 
pages in the preamble listing the numerous funding sources available and notes 
that it has developed a guidance document describing strategies to achieve full 
service line replacement and discussing available funding sources.102 In light of 
these resources, EPA could add a condition that, before a water system could be 
relieved of its obligation to do mandatory replacement, it would have to 
demonstrate that it has sought—and failed to secure—funding under the Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law and other relevant sources identified by the agency. Such a 
requirement would need to include specific criteria that would demonstrate any 
claimed funding exhaustion.   
Incentive approach. EPA should evaluate a mechanism that would 
incentivize water systems to fund full service line replacements by giving them 
“extra credit” for not pursuing cost sharing. Specifically, systems could receive extra 
credit (e.g., 1.5 times) toward their annual replacement rate target for any full lines 
they replace at no cost to the property owner. This approach (which could be used in 
conjunction with the funding exhaustion approach described above) would apply 
where a system uses sources of funding such as municipal bonds, rate revenue, or 
federal or state grants to replace both the public and private portion of a given lead 
 
101 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,924, 84,926. 
102 Id. at 84,903-05. 

 
25 
 
service line. In such instance, the system would be able to count that replacement 
as greater than one (e.g., 1.5:1) for the purpose of calculating the annual lead 
service line replacement rate. This would create an incentive for systems to 
proactively secure funding to complete line replacement at properties with low-
income residents—rather than concluding they lack access to such lead service 
lines—because it would make it easier to hit the system’s annual replacement 
targets. The system would still need to achieve 100 percent replacement, but may 
be given additional time beyond the 10-year baseline as a result of the extra 
credit. EPA could also cap this additional time for such systems at a certain point 
(e.g., 13 years total). If it decides to pursue this approach, EPA should carefully 
evaluate whether it would, on net, result in more replacements in underserved 
communities relative to a cost-sharing approach, and would not inequitably delay 
replacement in such communities.  
Additional testing and filtration approach. Under this approach, EPA 
would require water systems to do testing and, as warranted, filtration, where cost 
sharing poses the obstacle to full lead service line replacement. If a water system is 
excused from mandatory replacement because the landowner refuses or is unable to 
pay for the necessary costs of private service line replacement, the water system 
would be required to attempt to gain access to that property for the purpose of lead 
testing on some set interval (e.g., twice a year). If the system either fails to gain 
access for testing, or the testing indicates lead in drinking water above the action 
level (or some other threshold), then the system would be required to provide 
pitcher filters or point-of-use filtration equipment to the property—and, if given 
access, to install and maintain that equipment—and to conduct repeated testing 
and supply of filtration equipment on a periodic basis. This would reduce the risk of 
lead exposure at properties where lead service lines remain in place. 
4. Reasonable Attempts to Access 
A s discussed immediately above, we recommend changes to the proposed 
regulations related to the issues of control, access, and cost sharing. Depending on 
whether EPA adopts any of those approaches, the concept of water systems needing 
to attempt reasonable access to obtain property owner consent to replace the portion 
of lead service lines on private property could be obviated or changed. Under the 
assumption that the reasonable access concept continues to be used, we offer the 
following comments. 
EPA proposes that water systems would make a “reasonable attempt” to 
engage property owners about lead service line replacement, which would entail at 

 
26 
 
least four attempts using at least two different communication methods (e.g., in-
person conversation, phone call, text message, email, letter).103 EPA also proposes 
that states “may require systems to conduct additional attempts and may require 
specific outreach methods to be used.”104 Systems would have to comply with these 
requirements again within six months of a change in ownership of a property.105  
We generally support the proposed reasonable attempt provisions. As EPA 
notes, there are numerous examples of municipal water systems successfully using 
multiple methods of outreach (e.g., brochures, community meetings, social media, 
in-person follow ups) to achieve high levels of customer participation in lead service 
line replacements.106 We also support the approach that states may require 
additional attempt measures beyond the four attempts using two different methods 
that EPA has proposed. 
We further suggest that EPA consider requiring that water systems renew 
some form of access attempts annually, even in the absence of a change in 
ownership of the property on which access is being sought.  
5. Mitigation Activities 
For situations in which a lead service line has been disturbed, such as due to 
partial replacement or replacement of a lead connector, EPA proposes that water 
systems undertake several mitigation actions before returning the line to service. 
As the agency has previously found, these types of disturbances can result in short-
term spikes in lead levels, posing harms to human health. We support these 
mitigation requirements, which build on measures EPA put in place in its 2021 
rule. 
First, EPA proposes to maintain the requirement from the 2021 rule that 
water systems provide pitcher filters or point-of-use devices certified to reduce lead 
levels.107 This requirement would apply following full and partial replacement of 
lead service lines, lead connectors, inline water meters, and water meter setters.108 
As EPA explains, filtering is necessary to protect public health in light of studies 
 
103 40 C.F.R. Proposed § 141.84(d)(3)(i).   
104 Id. 
105 Id., Proposed § 141.84(d)(3)(ii). 
106 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,921 (discussing experiences in Lansing (MI), Quincy (MA), 
Green Bay (WI), Denver, Chicago, Philadelphia, and Pittsburgh). 
107 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,924. 
108 Id. 

 
27 
 
that found that flushing the line is insufficient to adequately reduce lead levels 
following these types of disturbances.109  
Second, EPA is proposing to change the 2021 rule by requiring that water 
systems provide filters and replacement cartridges to every occupancy, rather than 
to every residence.110 As EPA notes, this change should ensure that tenants and 
businesses also receive filters following replacement or disturbances.111 Filter 
replacement cartridges would need to be provided for six months, which would allow 
consumers to continue drinking filtered water while waiting for the results of a 
follow up tap sample, which EPA proposes be taken between three and six months 
following the replacement.112  
Third, EPA proposes a new mitigation requirement that, following partial 
service line replacement, water systems would have to install a dielectric coupling 
separating the remaining lead service line and replacement service line unless the 
replaced service line is made of plastic.113 This requirement would address the risk 
of lead being released as a result of galvanic corrosion between lead and other 
metallic pipes.114 As EPA explains, multiple studies have shown that if the electric 
connection between the pipes is broken or a dielectric coupling is inserted, this 
results in a reduction in lead levels in drinking water.115 Although we support this 
provision, we note that EPA could instead require that systems use the best 
available technology, which would serve the same purpose but allow for alternatives 
as the technology develops.  
In sum, we support these proposed mitigation requirements, which should 
improve existing protections to public health in the scenario in which a lead service 
line is partially replaced or disturbed. 
 
 
109 Id. 
110 Id. 
111 Id. 
112 Id. 
113 Id. As noted in the following subsection, we have concerns about the use of plastic 
materials in replacement piping and urge EPA to issue guidance on appropriate 
replacement materials that do not pose public health concerns. See Section II.A.6, infra. 
114 Id. 
115 Id. 

 
28 
 
6. Service Line Replacement Plan 
Under the Proposed Rule, water systems would have to prepare lead service 
line replacement plans, a concept EPA introduced in the 2021 rule. EPA explains 
that a well-developed plan can facilitate timely compliance with mandatory lead 
service line replacement, therefore providing greater public health protection and 
replacement program efficiency.116 In addition to maintaining plan elements from 
the 2021 rule that remain relevant (e.g., a procedure for conducting full lead service 
line replacement, a strategy for determining the composition of lead status of 
unknown lines in the system’s inventory), EPA proposes to add additional elements 
requiring (i) the identification of state and local laws relevant to a water system’s 
ability to gain access to complete full service line replacement, and (ii) a 
communication strategy to inform both customers and consumers.117  
Regarding the first additional element, by requiring water systems to identify 
any state and local laws and water tariff agreements relevant to the system’s ability 
to gain access to conduct full service line replacement, EPA seeks to accomplish two 
objectives: First, to facilitate water systems’ compliance by making sure that they 
know the actual law and do not make decisions on whether they have “control” to do 
full lead service line replacement based on perceived barriers.118 Second, to facilitate 
public engagement on the effect that existing state or local laws or water tariff 
agreements have on a system’s access to full service line replacement and how any 
barriers to full replacement can be overcome.119  
With respect to the second element, EPA explains that broadening the scope 
of the communication strategy for lead service line replacements to encompass 
consumers (in addition to customers) would ensure that renters and tenants, as well 
as landowners and landlords, would be made aware of the water system’s 
replacement program.120  
Subject to our comments in subsection 3, above, suggesting different 
alternatives or approaches to better promote full lead service line replacements, we 
support the lead service line replacement plan requirement, including the two 
additional elements EPA has proposed. The additional requirements should result 
 
116 Id. at 84,925. 
117 Id. 
118 Id. at 84,920. 
119 Id. at 84,921. 
120 Id. at 84,925. 

 
29 
 
in better communications between water systems and their customers and 
consumers, including identifying any actual barriers to full replacements that could 
then be addressed. 
Finally, we note that EPA proposes that the replacement plans include “plans 
for procurement of materials” as part of identifying a standard operating procedure 
for conducting full service line replacement.121 Given that replacement piping will 
be in the ground for many years, we ask that EPA thoroughly evaluate and provide 
guidance to water systems on recommended material to use or to avoid in the 
replacement service lines. We have specific concerns, for example, with replacement 
piping comprised of plastic materials, such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and 
chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC), given the potential health concerns 
associated with using such piping to supply drinking water.122 
7. Environmental Justice 
As EPA has recognized and as discussed in the introduction to these 
comments, underserved communities, including low income, people of color, rural, 
and Tribal communities, have historically shouldered a disproportionate burden of 
harm caused by exposure to lead in water.123 The Proposed Rule includes several 
important provisions that aim to achieve more equitable outcomes in service line 
replacements that are essential to protect the communities most affected by lead 
contamination. These efforts are improvements over the current regulations and 
should be adopted and strengthened to better protect to underserved communities 
from lead. 
a. Prioritizing lead service line replacement in underserved 
communities 
 
Given the detrimental effects of lead contamination on underserved 
communities and the historical underinvestment in improvements, it is imperative 
that EPA include provisions that will compel water systems to prioritize 
replacement of lead service lines in these communities. Numerous studies of lead 
exposure across the country have demonstrated that children with high levels of 
lead in their blood tend to live in neighborhoods with high rates of poverty, high 
 
121 40 C.F.R. Proposed § 141.84(c)(1)(ii). 
122 See Meg Wilcox, et al., “The Perils of PVC Plastic Pipes,” (Apr. 2023), 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5eda91260bbb7e7a4bf528d8/t/6491ce414930f2385aed
b80c/1687277125680/The_Perils_of_PVC_Plastic_Pipes-April_2023_Digital.pdf.  
123 EPA, EPA Strategic Plan FY 2022-2026, at 59 (March 2022).  

 
30 
 
concentrations of racial minorities, and low rates of homeownership and 
education.124 While lead exposure can come from multiple sources, these studies are 
consistent with EPA’s findings in its seven-city case study that areas with lead 
service lines often have higher percentages of low-income residents, renters, and 
people of color.125 Furthermore, EPA has previously recognized that communities of 
color and low-income communities are more likely to live in older homes with lead 
service lines,126 while also less likely to be able to bear the cost of replacing them. 
Without intervention from EPA specifically designed to eliminate these disparities, 
water systems may decide not to prioritize replacements in underserved 
communities. Therefore, the Attorneys General strongly support the retention of the 
requirement in the 2021 rule that water systems identify a replacement strategy 
that includes prioritizing disadvantaged consumers and the populations most 
sensitive to the effects of lead.  
We are concerned, however, that the Proposed Rule does not effectively direct 
water systems on how to prioritize underserved communities, or create enforceable 
requirements for that prioritization. The Proposed Rule provides that water 
systems must develop a “strategy to prioritize service line replacement” based on 
several factors, including communities “disproportionately impacted by lead, and 
populations most sensitive to the effects of lead.”127 No further guidance on how to 
identify these communities or what actions constitute prioritization are specified.128 
 
124 See, e.g., Carmen M. Dickinson-Copeland et al., “Increased Risk of Sub-Clinical 
Blood Lead Levels in the 20-County Metro Atlanta, Georgia Area – A Laboratory 
Surveillance-Based Study,” 18 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 5163 (2021) (finding that 
children in metro Atlanta who lived in geographical areas with higher proportions of 
renters and lower proportions of people with a GED/high school diploma were at a higher 
risk for having lead in their blood); Emily E. Lynch & Helen C. S. Meier, “The 
Intersectional Effect of Poverty, Home Ownership, and Racial/Ethnic Composition on Mean 
Childhood Blood Lead Levels in Milwaukee County Neighborhoods,” 15 PloS One e0234995 
(2020) (analyzing average level of blood in children by area and finding that the census 
tracts with the highest average childhood blood levels were areas with low home ownership, 
high poverty, and majority non-white); Jessie A. Gleason et al., “Drinking Water Lead and 
Socioeconomic Factors as Predictors of Blood Lead Levels in New Jersey’s Children 
Between Two Time Periods,” 169 Environ. Res. 409 (2019) (finding that race, older housing, 
and poverty were predictors of children’s blood lead levels).  
125 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,927. 
126 Review of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR), 86 Fed. Reg. 71,574, 71,575 (Dec. 17, 2021).  
127 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064. 
128 Id. 

 
31 
 
Without more specific, enforceable language directing water systems on how to 
identify underserved communities and to replace lead service lines in these 
communities before addressing other areas, we are concerned that these 
communities may continue to be overlooked.129 
b. Disconnections at vacant buildings 
We do not support EPA’s proposal to permit water systems to count 
disconnections at vacant buildings toward their annual replacement 
requirements.130 Disconnecting pipes that are not in use does not contribute to the 
overall goal of reducing lead exposure now, since out-of-use pipes are not currently 
contributing to lead exposure. Counting these disconnections would allow water 
systems to artificially meet their requirements and discourage or delay conducting 
replacements in the communities that need them most, while generating no public 
health benefits. Furthermore, because the Proposed Rule does not prohibit 
reconnection to these lines in the future, this runs the risk of potentially increasing 
exposure to lead if state law later allows these buildings to become occupied and the 
water service to be turned back on. The priority should be on replacing lead service 
lines that are causing risk of lead exposure as soon as possible, and allowing 
disconnection of lines at vacant buildings detracts from this goal. 
c. Banning of partial replacements 
The Attorneys General strongly support the proposed ban on partial service 
line replacements, unless conducted in response to emergency repairs or planned 
infrastructure work.131 Partial replacements only remove the portion of the lead 
service line owned by the water system and leave in place the portion used to 
deliver water to homeowners and renters, which leaves them vulnerable to lead 
exposure. As EPA has recognized, partial replacements can cause elevated levels of 
lead in drinking water in the period after the replacement, and do not reduce long-
term levels of lead in drinking water.132 Therefore, a ban on partial replacements 
furthers the goal of reducing lead exposure.  
 
129 EPA’s EJScreen mapping tool is one method available to identify overburdened 
communities. Available at https://www.epa.gov/ejscreen. 
130 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,917. 
131 See id. at 84,917-18. 
132 Id. at 84,917.  

 
32 
 
We recognize that emergency situations may arise that would require water 
systems to conduct partial service line replacements. In these situations, water 
systems should be required to make every effort to do full service line replacements. 
For this reason, we support the Proposed Rule’s additional requirements for water 
systems to provide advance notice to customers (where possible) when an 
emergency partial replacement will occur as well as an offer to replace the 
customer-owned portion of the lead service lines.133 After an emergency partial 
replacement, we agree that water systems must be required to take mitigation 
actions to avoid the consequences of partial line replacements, such as providing 
public education and water filters. This is especially important in underserved 
communities, where there is a higher risk of partial service line replacements 
occurring. 
d. Funding strategy for full service line replacement 
The Attorneys General also strongly support the requirement that water 
systems identify a funding strategy for achieving full service line replacement that 
accommodates customers who are unable to pay for the replacement of private 
services lines. As we highlighted in previous comments, typically the water system 
owns the portion of a service line that connects to the main water line, but the 
landowner owns the portion of the line that connects to the premise piping.134 Under 
the Proposed Rule, water systems are not required to fund the cost of replacing the 
landowner-owned portion, potentially placing the burden of this cost instead on the 
landowner. As discussed above, lower-income homeowners may be unable to afford 
to pay the thousands of dollars it may cost to replace these lines, and landlords of 
rental buildings may be unwilling to pay that cost.135 As a recent study in 
Washington, D.C. demonstrated, when homeowners bear the cost of replacing 
private service lines, low income neighborhoods are significantly less likely than 
wealthier neighborhoods to pay for replacements.136 It is therefore critical that 
water systems be required to have a complete and detailed strategy for funding full 
lead service line replacement, including privately owned portions, to avoid further 
disparities in lead exposure.  
 
 
133 Id. at 84,929 
134 See 2020 Multistate Comments at 7-8.  
135 Id. 
136 Karen J. Baehler et al., “Full Lead Service Line Replacement: A Case Study of 
Equity in Environmental Remediation,” 14 Sustainability 352 (2022). 

 
33 
 
We note with concern that the Proposed Rule would allow water systems to 
pass the cost of replacing the private portion of service lines on to homeowners, 
merely requiring that the funding strategy “include a description of whether and 
how the water system intends to assist customers who are unable to pay to replace 
the portion of the service line they own.”137 Without a requirement that water 
systems provide funding or create a funding strategy for when homeowners are 
unable to pay for their portion of the replacement, there is a very serious risk—as 
discussed at length above—that lead service lines will remain in place in low-
income and other at-risk communities. With the availability of federal and state 
funding for lead service line replacement,138 water systems should be required at a 
minimum to seek such funding for full service line replacement before being allowed 
to forgo replacement in cases where a homeowner is unable to provide funding.139 
e. Strategy for full service line replacements on rental properties 
As discussed in Section II.A.3 above, EPA proposes that water systems 
replace lead service lines that are under the “control” of water systems.140 In some 
situations, this will require obtaining consent from homeowners to conduct 
replacement of private service lines. Renters living in these homes do not have 
ownership rights and may be unable to provide “control” to water systems under the 
Proposed Rule’s definition to enable replacement of private lead service lines. 
Landlords, who may own the home but not live in it, have the ability to deny 
consent to water systems and tenants have little recourse to stop them, while 
bearing the risk of lead exposure. This increases the risk of lead exposure to renters, 
who may be living in homes affected by lead service lines but lack the power to 
consent to replacement of those lines. 
This is a significant environmental justice issue, as a higher proportion of 
low-income households rent rather than own their homes.141 Furthermore, the 
number of households that rent rather than own their homes has been increasing in 
the United States in recent years, with lower-income households renting nearly 
 
137 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064. 
138 Id. at 84,903-04. 
139 See Section II.A.3, supra. 
140 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920. 
141 Peter J. Mateyka & Jayne Yoo, U.S. Census Bureau, “Low-Income Renters Spent 
Larger Share of Income on Rent in 2021” (Mar. 2, 2023).  

 
34 
 
two-thirds of units with substantial quality issues.142 Given that the responsibility 
for water infrastructure typically falls on the landlord in a rental situation, tenants 
may not be aware of the potential risks associated with lead pipes. Therefore, EPA 
should adopt measures that not only require water systems to ensure that private 
lead lines are replaced in rental properties, but also to ensure that renters are 
informed about the quality of the water in their homes.  
Although the preamble to the Proposed Rule states that EPA is adding a 
requirement that would “require systems to create a strategy to achieve full [lead 
service line replacement] at rental properties,”143 the proposal falls short of this 
goal. Under the Proposed Rule, water systems are required to develop a 
communication strategy to inform renters of the water service line replacement 
plan,144 but there are no further requirements related to renters. The Attorneys 
General strongly support EPA’s adoption of additional alternatives, such as those 
discussed in Section II.A.3, above, that could increase the likelihood that full lead 
service line replacements occur even if a landlord refuses to pay for service line 
replacement. EPA could require that water systems build these approaches into 
their replacement plans and communicate that information to tenants.  
f. Online publishing of lead service line replacement plans 
We support the Proposed Rule’s requirement that water systems make their 
service line replacement plans publicly available.145 Online publication would allow 
community members to be aware of the water system’s plan for replacement and 
provide them with the opportunity to take action if they disagree with the design or 
implementation of the plan. This requirement is especially important for renters, 
who may otherwise not have any information about service line replacement offered 
to their landlords, and gives them the opportunity to advocate for full service line 
replacement when landlords refuse to pay for private-side piping replacement.  
We disagree, however, with the proposed requirement that only water 
systems serving 50,000 people or more be required to publish service line 
replacement plans online. All water systems, or at least those serving a lower 
threshold number of customers, should be required to post service line replacement 
 
142 U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Rental Housing: As More Households 
Rent, the Poorest Face Affordability and Housing Quality Challenges” (May 27, 2020).  
143 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,928. 
144 Id. at 85,064.  
145 See id. at 84,928. 

 
35 
 
plans online. Accessing plans online is the easiest way for the public to gain quick 
access to the plan, rather than requiring customers to physically obtain the plan 
directly from the water system. Online availability would greatly increase the 
public’s access to the plan while placing a very small burden on water systems. 
g. Identification of potential barriers to full replacement 
Water systems should also be required to identify potential barriers to access 
for full replacement in local ordinances and make this information available to the 
public in the service line replacement plan, as EPA proposes.146 Water systems must 
make every effort to achieve full service line replacement, and in order to do so, they 
need to be aware of local ordinances affecting replacement. Furthermore, if water 
systems are going to rely on local ordinances as a justification for failing to conduct 
full service line replacement, they should be required to explain this to the state. 
Relatedly, the Attorneys General generally support the proposed requirement 
that in order for states to have primacy enforcement of public water systems, they 
must identify any state laws creating a barrier to full service line replacement.147 In 
order to achieve the goal of full service line replacement, barriers must be identified 
so that they can be addressed. States that are taking on the responsibility of 
enforcement must also be fully aware of these barriers, or the lack thereof, in order 
to ensure water systems are complying with all requirements. However, rather than 
being required to identify all state laws “that pertain to a water system’s access to 
conduct full service line replacement,” states should only be required to identify 
known barriers.148 
B. Revised Lead Action Level and Corrosion Control Treatment 
1. Revision of Lead Action Level 
The Attorneys General strongly support EPA’s proposal to reduce the lead 
action level to 0.010 milligrams per liter (mg/L), and encourage EPA to consider 
methods to feasibly achieve a lower lead action level of 0.005 mg/L in the near 
future. In general, corrosion control treatment connotes steps that a water system 
can take to reduce the amount of lead and copper that is leached into drinking 
water from service lines and other drinking water equipment. The 2021 rule defined 
“optimal corrosion control treatment” as corrosion control treatment that minimizes 
 
146 See id. 
147 See id. 
148 See 40 C.F.R. Proposed § 142.16(d)(8) (emphasis added). 

 
36 
 
lead and copper in drinking water while complying with national primary drinking 
water standards.149 Under existing rules, water systems are generally required to 
implement these treatment methods when an exceedance of the lead action level or 
lead trigger level occurs—exact requirements vary based on the size of the water 
system, previous steps already taken, and other factors. 
EPA established the current lead action level of 0.015 mg/L in 1991 to 
generally represent “effective corrosion control treatment” and to “simplify 
implementation.”150 In other words, EPA set the lead action level at 0.015 mg/L 
because it could be feasibly implemented, rather than basing this level on the 
impact to public health.151 EPA proposes to reduce the lead action level to 0.010 
mg/L because it found that water systems have made great improvements to 
corrosion control treatments and can feasibly achieve lower levels of lead.152 These 
improvements are reflected in data EPA collected from systems that have used 
corrosion control treatment.153  
Given these findings, EPA must lower the lead action level, which has 
remained at the same level as when it was established decades ago. The Safe 
Drinking Water Act requires continuous review and revision of the lead action level 
and other standards to ensure it is the most health protective, feasible standard.154 
As EPA recognizes, there have been significant advances in corrosion control 
treatment options, as well as overwhelming evidence showing the serious health 
impacts caused by exposure to lead in even small quantities.  
The Attorneys General also suggest that EPA consider methods to feasibly 
achieve a lower lead action level of 0.005 mg/L in the near future. EPA requested 
comment on setting the lead action level to 0.005 mg/L,155 the level at which lead 
can be reliably detected.156 EPA’s analysis predicts that 31.4 percent of systems 
would exceed this lower action level, mostly consisting of small and medium 
 
149 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,936. 
150 Maximum Contaminant Level Goals and National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper, 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460, 26,490 (June 7, 1991). 
151 See 84 Fed. Reg. at 61,691. 
152 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,939-940. 
153 Id. at 84,940. 
154 See 42 U.S.C. §§ 300g-1(b)(7)(A), 300g-1(b)(9). 
155 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,036. 
156 Id. at 84,943. 

 
37 
 
systems.157 Because no level of lead is safe, EPA should explore methods to feasibly 
achieve the more protective lead action level of 0.005 mg/L as soon as practicable.158 
2. Elimination of Lead Trigger Level 
While the 2021 rule maintained the original 1991 lead action level of 0.015 
mg/L, it introduced a new regulatory value called the “lead trigger level” at 0.010 
mg/L.159 Under that scheme, systems would have to take different sets of actions 
based on whether they exceeded the action level or trigger level. Citing 
administrative complexity, implementation issues, and communication challenges, 
the Proposed Rule would eliminate the trigger level and establish the lower action 
level instead.160 
The Attorneys General support eliminating the trigger level in conjunction 
with reducing the action level to 0.010 mg/L (if not lower). Focusing on a single, 
health-protective number for systems to reach will be simpler to implement and 
reduce the risk of confusion about the necessary regulatory requirements. 
3. Deferring Requirement to Optimize Corrosion Control Treatment 
Although EPA’s proposal generally requires water systems with an 
exceedance of the lead action level to install or re-optimize corrosion control 
treatment, EPA would allow a water system to defer implementation until after all 
lead service lines are replaced, if such replacement is completed within five years 
and at a rate of at least 20 percent per year.161 Other requirements that a water 
system must comply with in the case of an exceedance, such as public education and 
making filters available, would continue to apply while lead service line 
replacement proceeds. The Attorneys General urge EPA to address several major 
shortcomings of these provisions, which could allow water systems to significantly 
defer optimal corrosion control treatment requirements even while doing little or 
nothing to replace lead service lines. 
EPA explains that the process of installing optimal corrosion control 
treatment generally takes five years to complete, and the public health benefits of 
 
157 Id. at 84,941-942. 
158 The Attorneys General urge EPA to set the action level for childcare facilities and 
schools at 0.005 mg/L in the LCRI, as described infra, Section II.E. 
159 86 Fed. Reg. at 4207-08. 
160 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,939. 
161 Id. at 84,937-38. 

 
38 
 
complete lead service line replacement exceed those from installing this 
treatment.162 Because the exact methods of implementing optimal corrosion control 
treatment depend on the types of pipes in a water system, the proper treatment 
may change after replacing lead or galvanized pipes in a system. Systems that are 
allowed to defer the treatment requirement and ultimately fail to meet their lead 
service line obligations would then be subject to the treatment requirements.163  
The lack of any verification or enforcement method at the beginning of this 
process is a major concern that EPA must address. For instance, a water system 
could opt-in to the proposal’s treatment deferral and do nothing to replace any lead 
service lines for a full year before the Proposed Rule would impose any 
requirements. In other words, these provisions offer water systems an automatic 
one-year deferral of installing optimal corrosion control treatment. We recommend 
that EPA require water systems that seek to defer treatment installation to 
demonstrate that they have the necessary funding available and access to service 
lines in order to remove all their lead service lines within five years at a rate no 
slower than 20 percent per year.  
The Proposed Rule also allows small water systems or water systems with 
relatively few lead service lines to defer optimal corrosion control treatment for five 
years without making significant progress toward lead service line removal. For 
example, a water system with 50 lead service lines would only need to replace 10 
per year to take advantage of the proposed treatment deferral. To avoid this 
situation where a water system would be incentivized to conduct lead service line 
replacement more slowly, EPA should only allow deferral for water systems that 
remove some minimum specific number of lead service lines per year, or 20 percent 
of the entire system—whichever number is higher. 
Because removal of all lead service lines is the best method of reducing the 
public health impacts of lead exposure, the Attorneys General support EPA’s 
proposal to defer optimal corrosion control treatment when water systems commit 
to rapid lead service line replacement. Importantly, the 2021 rule continues to 
impose all other requirements on the water system in response to an action level 
exceedance. This provision will allow systems to focus their resources and reduce 
the public health threat in an effective manner. 
 
162 Id. at 84,938. 
163 Id. 

 
39 
 
C. Compliance Flexibilities for Small Water Systems 
The Attorneys General support EPA’s proposal mandating service line 
replacements for all systems, including small systems. By including small systems 
in this replacement mandate, drinking water consumers in these systems would be 
protected from lead- tainted waters caused by lead service lines. This would 
advance EPA’s goal of protecting human health by reducing the well-documented 
harms to children and adults caused by lead contamination.   
Until such time that water systems replace lead service lines, an exceedance 
of the lead action level (discussed in Section II.B, supra), will trigger the 
requirement that the water system optimize corrosion control treatment.164 The 
Safe Drinking Water Act requires EPA to identify affordable compliance 
technologies for all categories of small systems and, if none are available, identify 
variance technologies for compliance in accordance with section 1412(b)(15).165 EPA 
has determined that corrosion control treatment is an affordable compliance 
technology for all categories of small systems in accordance with the Act, but the 
agency has also found that it is often difficult for small systems to find and retain 
operators that have the skills to implement and maintain corrosion control 
treatment.166 Therefore, in the 2021 rule, EPA proposed several compliance options 
for small systems, as discussed above in Section I.B, supra. 
In the Proposed Rule, EPA made two significant changes to the small system 
compliance flexibility provisions. First, EPA changed the eligibility requirements. 
Compared to the small system flexibility provision in the 2021 rule, EPA proposes 
to reduce the eligibility threshold from water systems serving 10,000 people to 
systems serving 3,300 or fewer people.167 We support this revised approach, which 
would result in more lead service lines being replaced, thereby better protecting 
public health.   
Second, the agency revised the compliance alternatives by eliminating lead 
service line replacement as an option (as discussed above, under the Proposed Rule, 
those replacements are mandatory for all water systems, regardless of size). The 
agency proposes to retain two compliance options it included in the 2021 rule: point-
 
164 40 C.F.R. § 141.81(a). 
165 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(4)(E)(ii). 
166 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,942. 
167 40 C.F.R. Proposed § 141.93. 

 
40 
 
of-use filtration and replacement of lead-bearing plumbing.168 Eligible systems—
those small water systems serving 3,300 or fewer customers and all non-transient, 
non-community water systems169—could choose to use these alternatives instead of 
optimizing corrosion control treatment.170 EPA justifies this flexibility on the 
grounds that “these alternatives to the [optimizing corrosion control treatment] 
requirements are as effective at preventing known or anticipated health effects as 
[optimizing corrosion control treatment].”171  
The point-of-use device installation option would require that filtration 
devices be installed and maintained in every household, at every tap used for 
cooking and/or drinking.172 Although research shows that point-of-use devices can 
effectively eliminate lead from drinking water,173 such devices still require regular 
maintenance, including monitoring water use patterns, testing for lead, and 
conducting filter replacements, in order to maintain maximum efficiency. EPA 
estimates that point-of-use device maintenance would require water systems to 
conduct filter cartridge replacements in up to 1,000 homes three-to-four times per 
year, and sample over 300 devices per year to monitor for action levels exceeding 
.010 mg/L.174  
We generally support the installation of point-of-use devices (properly 
installed and maintained) and removal of lead-bearing plumbing alternatives, so 
long as the devices remain safe and effectively eliminate lead from drinking water, 
and as long as the states have the ability to decide which small water systems 
should have this alternative compliance option. We have concerns about the 
inherent complications involved with obtaining access to private premises in order 
to conduct such installation and maintenance. Obstacles to gaining access, like 
 
168 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,945. 
169 As compared to community water systems, which supply water to the same 
population year round, “non-transient, non-community water systems” are public water 
systems that regularly supplies water to at least 25 of the same people at least six months 
annually. See EPA, “Information About Public Water Systems,” (last visited Jan. 23, 2024), 
https://www.epa.gov/dwreginfo/information-about-public-water-systems   
170 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,945; 40 C.F.R. Proposed § 141.93(c).  
171 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,945. 
172 Id. 
173 Valerie Bosscher, et al., POU Filters Effectively Reduce Lead in Drinking Water: 
A Demonstration Field Study in Flint, Michigan, 54 J. Env’t Sci. & Health 484 (2019) 
174 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,945. 

 
41 
 
unreachable or uncooperative homeowners or landlords, could impede water system 
operators’ ability to perform the work that is necessary to satisfy the Proposed 
Rule’s compliance requirements. Even small systems with 3,300 or fewer people 
have a large number of outlets for point-of-use installation and maintenance, which 
could potentially overburden small system operators. 
To address concerns about access to private property, we recommend that 
EPA issue robust public education requirements and guidance that will aid small 
water system operators in property access, as well as to inform the public of the 
significant benefits that point-of-use devices and lead fixture replacements can 
yield. We also recommend that EPA issue guidance to small water systems to 
inform operators about how to conduct regular maintenance on point-of-use devices, 
and guidance to states concerning how to ensure small systems are in compliance. 
On the latter point, EPA might also consider revising the Proposed Rule to add 
criteria that states can rely on to determine whether to adopt either of the proposed 
alternatives in lieu of optimized corrosion control treatment, depending on the 
circumstances of the communities that water systems are serving. These criteria 
might include population density, population demographics, levels of water 
consumption, compliance history, and other factors that might help elucidate 
whether point-of-use devices or removal of lead-bearing plumbing, or both, is an 
appropriate alternative. 
Either of the alternatives, if adopted by non-transient, non-community water 
systems, such as childcare centers, large schools and commercial office spaces, 
would presumably not result in the same access issues as private residential 
properties since these systems are more likely to have control over the premise 
plumbing and more likely to be able to implement the point-of-use filtration and 
plumbing replacement options. For this reason, we agree that the Proposed Rule’s 
compliance alternatives would be an appropriate means of reducing lead 
contamination for these water systems, provided the devices are properly 
maintained. However, point-of-use devices are still temporary fixes; total 
replacement of lead service lines (or replacement of lead plumbing fixtures) is the 
only permanent solution to lead-contaminated drinking water.  
Finally, EPA should consider requiring that small water systems and non-
transient, non-community water systems that choose the filtration compliance 
option to adopt approaches to ensure that filters are regularly replaced as they 
reach the end of their effective lifespan. Two such approaches would be to require 
the use of filters equipped with signal lights to show when replacement is necessary 
or the installation of water meters in premises with point-of-use devices where 

 
42 
 
water consumption may be higher than what is otherwise typical. This could ensure 
that filters are checked in a more frequent basis in areas of high volume water use.  
D. Public Education 
1. Testing Notification Requirements 
The Attorneys General support EPA’s proposal to broaden the requirement 
that water systems provide notice of lead tap sampling testing results to persons 
served by that tap. Under the existing regulations, there are different notice 
requirements based on whether the testing results exceed the lead action level 
(currently 0.015 mg/L). Where there is an exceedance, the water system must 
provide notice within three days; where there is no exceedance, notice must be 
provided as soon as practicable but no later than 30 days.175 
The Proposed Rule would instead require notice within three calendar days of 
any lead tap sampling, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead action level 
or not.176 Strengthening this requirement is sensible because, as EPA 
acknowledges, when lead is found at any level, including levels below the action 
level, it presents a risk to public health. Increased communication of this kind will 
keep the public informed and in turn provide a health benefit. That being said, we 
believe it would be reasonable to afford water systems a bit more time (e.g., seven 
calendar days) to notify customers of testing results when there is no exceedance of 
the action level. EPA also proposes to require written follow-up when a water 
system provides initial notification by phone.177 The Attorneys General support this 
aspect of the proposal. 
2. Language on Lead Hazard Communications 
Under existing regulations, water suppliers must provide public education in 
certain circumstances, such as when the lead action level is exceeded.178 Among 
other requirements, this public education material must include specific language 
describing the health effects of lead. The Proposed Rule would modify this required 
language in several ways to better inform the public about the health effects from 
lead in drinking water—especially to specifically and unequivocally state that there 
 
175 40 C.F.R. § 141.85(d)(2). 
176 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,949. 
177 Id. 
178 88 Fed. Reg. at 94,953. 

 
43 
 
is no safe level of lead in drinking water. We support the proposed revision for that 
reason. 
3. Language Translation Requirements 
Existing regulations impose language translation requirements for public 
education materials provided by water systems serving “a large proportion” (a 
quantity determined by an individual state) of non-English speakers.179 The public 
education materials must include either a translated statement about their 
importance or, in the alternative, contact information for obtaining a translated 
copy of the materials or translation assistance. EPA’s proposal strengthens these 
requirements, to help inform and protect people who have limited English language 
capabilities. Because expanding public education among non-English speaking 
communities will improve public health, the Attorneys General support EPA’s 
proposed provisions. 
Under the Proposed Rule, water systems would be required to provide both a 
translated statement about the importance of the public education materials, as 
well as contact information for obtaining a translated copy or translation assistance, 
rather than one or the other.180 The number of states that already assemble 
templates and otherwise assist water systems in providing translated education 
materials, as noted by EPA, show that this requirement is achievable.181 EPA also 
is seeking comment on whether to require states to provide translation support to 
water systems, as a condition of primacy.182 The Attorneys General support adding 
this requirement to the regulations because it would help further ensure that non-
English speaking communities are being informed about the health risks presented 
by lead in drinking water. 
E. Lead Sampling at Schools and Childcare Facilities 
Additional Background on Lead-Contaminated Drinking Water in Schools 
As discussed in the introduction, exposure to lead is hazardous to everyone’s 
health, and it is particularly harmful to young children. Children under the age of   
6 years are at the greatest risk for developing health problems related to lead 
 
179 40 C.F.R. § 141.85(b)(1). 
180 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,953. 
181 Id. at 84,953-54. 
182 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,037. 

 
44 
 
exposure.183 This is due to the physiological vulnerabilities present in young 
children, such as not-yet fully developed blood-brain barriers, increased 
gastrointestinal absorption, and frequent hand-to-mouth behaviors, each of which 
contributes greatly to increased levels of lead exposure.184 As EPA is already aware, 
even minimal levels of lead exposure in children can result in significant adverse 
health effects, including slowed growth, reduced IQ, difficulties with hearing and 
speech, anemia, and behavior and learning problems.185 Indeed, lead toxicity 
accounts for an estimated total loss of 23 million IQ points among children in the 
U.S.186 Many of the devastating effects of lead that develop in early childhood 
persist well into the second decade of life.187 Furthermore, pregnant and 
breastfeeding school administrators and faculty experience heightened risks of lead 
exposure, since lead consumption can lead to adverse effects on maternal health 
and infant outcomes, including gestational hypertension, spontaneous abortion, low 
birth weight, and impaired neurodevelopment.188 Given these serious health 
complications that lead exposure poses to children and mothers, it is crucial that 
the final rule meaningfully addresses lead exposure in schools and childcare 
facilities. 
Most schools in the United States were built prior to 1986, before the federal 
requirement that public water systems use “lead free” pipes and plumbing.189 A 
 
183 CDC, Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention, 
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/children.htm (last visited Jan. 10, 2024). 
184 Mary Jean Brown & Stephen Margolis, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, “Lead in Drinking Water and Human Blood Lead Levels in the United States,” 
61 Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Rpt. 1, 2 (2012). 
185 EPA, Basic Information about Drinking Water, https://www.epa.gov/ground-
water-and-drinking-water/basic-information-about-lead-drinking-water#health (last visited 
Jan. 10, 2024). 
186 American Academy of Pediatrics Council on Environmental Health, “Prevention 
of Childhood Lead Toxicity,” (July 2016) at 4, available at 
https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/138/1/e20161493/52600/Prevention-of-
Childhood-Lead-Toxicity. 
187 Brown & Margolis, supra n. 184, at 2. 
188 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, “Committee Opinion: Lead 
Screening During Pregnancy and Lactation,” (Aug. 2012) at 2, https://www.acog.org/-
/media/project/acog/acogorg/clinical/files/committee-opinion/articles/2012/08/lead-screening-
during-pregnancy-and-lactation.pdf. 
189 Caroline Pakenham & Bethany Olson, “How States Are Handling Lead in School 
Drinking Water,” National Association of State Boards of Education, Education Leaders 
 

 
45 
 
recent study found that, in a dozen states, 44 percent of schools that tested their 
water sources for lead discovered one or more taps with a lead concentration level 
above the state’s lead action level.190 In Pennsylvania, for example, a survey of 65 
public school districts found that 91 percent of schools testing drinking water found 
lead contamination.191 In Philadelphia, 61 percent of school district water outlets 
tested showed lead levels exceeding 1 ppb, with one school in particular showing a 
level of 8,768 ppb.192 The issue of lead contamination in the drinking water at 
American schools has been well known, yet there was no federal requirement until 
2021 that water systems test any schools for lead levels in drinking water except for 
those schools and childcare facilities that own and/or operate their own public water 
system. In sum, lead in the drinking water of our nation’s schools and childcare 
centers presents a significant and immediate public health threat to students and 
staff that needs to be addressed. 
EPA’s Regulatory Approach 
To specifically address the problem of lead-contaminated drinking water at 
schools and childcare facilities, EPA proposes to retain some of the 2021 rule’s 
provisions and to add others. As a general matter, EPA takes the position that it 
lacks statutory authority to directly require schools or childcare facilities to sample 
or treat drinking water for lead contamination unless those facilities constitute 
public water systems.193 Therefore, requirements related to lead sampling at schools 
 
Report (Nov. 2021) at 4, https://nasbe.nyc3.digitaloceanspaces.com/2021/12/Pakenham-et-
al_School-Lead-Testing-Report.pdf. 
190 Angie Cradock, et al., “Early Adopters: State Approaches to Testing School 
Drinking Water for Lead in the United States,” Prevention Research Center on Nutrition 
and Physical Activity at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health (2019), available at 
https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/prc/projects/early-adopters/. 
191 Kara Rubio, “The State of Environmental Health in Pennsylvania Schools,” 
Women for a Healthy Environment, (June 2021), at 3, 
https://womenforahealthyenvironment.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/08/SOSexecsummaryREV-002.pdf.  
192 Emma Horst-Martz, et al., “Lead in the Water: Data reveals elevated levels of 
lead in Philadelphia school drinking water,” Penn Environment Research & Pol’y Ctr., 1 
(Feb. 2022), https://publicinterestnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/Lead-in-the-
Water.Feb2022.pdf. The school district response to this study points out that outlets testing 
positive for lead have been taken out of service.  
193 See, e.g., 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,956 (“EPA is authorized under SDWA to establish . . . 
legally enforceable standards that apply to public water systems . . . [the agency] does not 
have the authority under SDWA section 1412 to require schools and child care facilities 
that are not regulated as public water systems to act” under the statute).  

 
46 
 
and childcare facilities under the Proposed Rule would be imposed upon water 
systems. As part of this general framework, EPA recognizes that some states and 
municipalities have laws that require sampling and filtration at schools and 
childcare facilities, and therefore allows water systems to obtain waivers of EPA 
regulations in certain circumstances if those facilities are regulated under state or 
local law.194 Although the Proposed Rule would improve on the 2021 rule’s 
provisions concerning lead sampling at schools and childcare facilities, there are 
several areas in which we urge EPA to strengthen its requirements to better protect 
our children.  
Below, we provide specific comments on improving the Proposed Rule in the 
following areas: (1) lead action level; (2) sampling; and (3) filtration. 
1. Lead Action Level 
In the Proposed Rule, EPA considered, but decided not to propose, a school-
specific action level and/or remediation requirements for community water 
systems.195 We urge EPA to reconsider that approach, and to adopt a lead action 
level for schools and childcare facilities of 0.005 mg/L. Because there is no safe level 
of lead and children are more vulnerable to lead exposure, a lower action level for 
the facilities that serve our nation’s children is warranted.  
In the context of rejecting a 0.005 mg/L (or 5 parts per billion (ppb)) action 
level for all water systems, EPA expressed concern that lowering the action level 
below 0.010 mg/L may pose an additional administrative burden on states’ ability to 
provide meaningful input to individual systems and adequately oversee optimal 
corrosion control implementation.196 EPA also asserts that larger buildings such as 
schools have a higher potential for elevated lead levels due to conditions such as 
complex plumbing arrangement that may not be improved by further changes to 
optimal corrosion control treatment.197 However, many states have already 
implemented the equivalent of a 0.005 mg/L action level or lower for schools and 
childcare facilities, demonstrating the feasibility of such an approach.198 
 
194 See id. at 84,958. 
195 See id. at 84,957. 
196 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,942. 
197 Id. at 84,957. 
198 See e.g., Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1597.16 (requiring drinking water testing in 
licensed childcare facilities constructed before 2010); Cal. Dept. of Social Services, Written 
 

 
47 
 
Furthermore, the American Academy for Pediatrics suggests that state and local 
governments take steps to ensure that school hydration locations do not exceed 
water lead concentrations of 0.001 mg/L, given the significant adverse health effects 
children encounter from lead exposure.199 And the Food and Drug Administration 
requires that bottled water not exceed 0.005 mg/L.200 Because EPA’s ultimate goal is 
to achieve a lead concentration level of 0 mg/L in our schools and childcare facilities 
(and elsewhere), and because many states have already demonstrated their ability 
to accommodate the administrative responsibility of maintaining lead levels below 
0.005 mg/L in schools, we urge EPA to consider instituting a lead action level of 
0.005 mg/L for schools and childcare centers. 
2. Sampling 
Under the Proposed Rule, at least once a year, systems would have to contact 
all schools and childcare facilities they serve to provide information about the 
health risks of lead in drinking water. And within five years, systems would have to 
notify schools and childcare facilities that they are eligible to be sampled for lead by 
the water system.201 Water systems would be required to sample for lead at 
elementary schools and childcare facilities at a certain frequency (typically             
20 percent annually) so that sampling of all of these facilities generally would be 
 
Directives for Lead Testing of Water in Licensed Child Care Centers, Provider Information 
Notice 21-21.1-CCP (notifying providers of lead action level of 5 ppb), 
www.cdss.ca.gov/Portals/9/CCLD/PINs/2021/CCP/PIN-21-21_1-CCP.pdf; see also Colo. Rev. 
Stat. § 25-8-903(2) (instituting a lead action level of 5 ppb in childcare centers and schools); 
Mo. Rev. Stat. § 160.077(3) (requiring schools to provide drinking water with lead 
concentration that is less than 5 ppb); Mich. Comp. Laws Serv. § 722.113i (instituting a 
lead action level of 5 ppb in childcare centers); D.C. Code § 38-825.01a (instituting a lead 
action level of 5 ppb in public schools); Md. Code Ann., Envir. § 6-1501 (instituting a lead 
action level of 5 ppb in schools); Wash. Rev. Code Ann. § 28A.210.410 (defining “elevated 
lead level” as exceeding 5 ppb); N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 485:17-a (requiring water lead 
concentrations at less than 5 ppb in schools and childcare facilities); Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 18, § 
1242(1) (defining lead action level at 4 ppb). 
199 American Academy of Pediatrics Council on Environmental Health, Prevention of 
Childhood Lead Toxicity (May 5, 2018) at 11, https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-
pdf/138/1/e20161493/929122/peds_20161493.pdf. 
200 Food and Drug Administration, Bottled Water Everywhere: Keeping it Safe, 
https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/bottled-water-everywhere-keeping-it-safe 
(current as of Apr. 22, 2022). 
201 Id., Proposed § 141.92(c)(1), (2). 

 
48 
 
completed within five years.202 EPA is not proposing a specified frequency of 
sampling at secondary schools, which water systems would only need to sample if 
requested by the school.203 Sampling at schools and childcare facilities would have 
to be conducted pursuant to certain protocols, including collection of five samples 
per school and two samples per childcare facility at outlets typically used to provide 
water for human consumption.204 The results of sampling would have to be provided 
within 30 days to the school or childcare facility, along with information about 
potential options to remediate lead in drinking water.205 
The Attorneys General are concerned that the Proposed Rule’s sampling 
requirements are too limited to address lead exposure in schools. As described in 
detail below, we recommend that EPA institute a more robust school and childcare 
facility sampling program by making the sampling program mandatory in all 
schools, including secondary schools. We urge EPA to increase sampling frequency 
requirements and increase sampling location requirements. Further, following 
EPA’s “whole of government” approach of its 2023 Strategy to Reduce Lead 
Exposures and Disparities in U.S. Communities,206 we advocate for EPA to work 
together with the U.S. Department of Education and any other relevant federal 
agency to develop and implement these testing requirements. In the rest of this 
subsection, we set forth more specific comments on several aspects of the Proposed 
Rule.    
• Mandatory sampling in secondary schools. We encourage EPA to treat 
secondary schools the same as elementary schools and childcare facilities. 
Rather than merely allowing secondary schools the option to request that 
their water systems sample for lead, sampling should be mandatory for water 
systems. Although not as at risk as younger children, older children continue 
to be vulnerable to exposure to elevated levels of lead.207 In addition, school 
 
202 Id., Proposed § 141.92(d). 
203 Id., Proposed § 141.92(e). 
204 Id., Proposed § 141.92(f)(1). 
205 Id., Proposed § 141.92(g). 
206 EPA, Final Strategy to Reduce Lead Exposures and Disparities in U.S. 
Communities,” (Oct. 2022), https://www.epa.gov/lead/final-strategy-reduce-lead-exposures-
and-disparities-us-communities.  
207 See American Academy of Pediatrics Council on Environmental Health, supra 
note 199, at 4 (noting that national study of 8- to 15-year old children found that having a 
blood lead concentration of >13 ppb was associated with an elevated risk of attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)).   

 
49 
 
buildings, regardless of grade level, are often utilized for community 
gatherings where children of all ages, parents, and staff congregate for 
extracurricular events. The efforts to address lead exposure in communities 
should be equally administered across all K-12 schools, to protect the 
secondary school students, and to account for community use of schools.  
• Improved outreach. The Proposed Rule retains the requirement from the 
2021 rule that community water systems conduct educational outreach once 
per year to schools and childcare facilities, while only requiring sampling 
outreach to schools and childcare facilities once every five years.208 We 
suggest that EPA require increased sampling outreach such that all schools 
and childcare facilities are contacted every three years. EPA also should 
consider increasing the number of required outreach attempts to schools and 
childcare facilities to greater than two before the water system can classify a 
school or childcare facility as non-responsive. 
• Sampling frequency and number. EPA proposes to retain the 2021 rule’s 
requirements for frequency and number of samples for schools and childcare 
facilities,209 but those provisions are insufficiently protective. There are three 
ways in which the agency should strengthen those provisions.  
o First, EPA should require increased sampling frequency. Under the 
existing regulations, water systems have to sample only 20 percent of 
elementary schools and childcare facilities they serve annually, 
translating into sampling at each once every five years. Testing once 
every five years is inadequate, particularly in larger schools where the 
potential for lead exposure is greater given the higher number of water 
outlets and that water use patterns at each outlet vary substantially. 
Instead, EPA should mandate that water systems sample all schools 
and childcare centers—with the exception of those that do not respond 
or refuse testing—over the course of a three-year period (i.e., a 
minimum of 33.33 percent per year).  
o Second, EPA should compel water systems to sample more locations. 
The current rules require that at least five samples be taken at each 
school and at least two samples from each childcare center.210 EPA  
recognizes that “larger buildings, such as schools and childcare 
facilities, can have a higher potential for elevated lead levels due to 
 
208 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,957. 
209 Id. 
210 40 C.F.R. 141.92(f)(1). 

 
50 
 
complex plumbing arrangements.”211 This alone supports requiring 
sampling at more locations given that water stagnation times will vary 
depending on a water outlet’s frequency of use, particularly in a 
building that is intermittently used, like a school. EPA should consider 
requiring sampling at all outlets used for drinking water or at least 
adding a percentage requirement (e.g., 75-85 percent of drinking water 
outlets). More water quality data collected from a representative group 
of sample locations would provide the information needed to determine 
if children are being exposed to lead through the ingestion of drinking 
water at schools and childcare centers. 
o Third, should EPA tighten the regulatory language that allows water 
systems to treat schools and childcare centers as “non-responsive” and 
thereby not covered by sampling requirements. At present, water 
systems are permitted to include toward their minimum annual 
percentage sampling total those schools and childcare facilities that 
did not respond to outreach to conduct sampling.212 We suggest that 
EPA not permit systems to include lack of responses (or refusals) in the 
annual minimum sampling requirement (which we suggest, as noted 
above, EPA should increase from 20 percent per year to 33.33 percent 
annually). 
• Reporting of sampling results. Finally, EPA should require water systems 
to promptly make available the results of any sampling so that the results 
are communicated to parents, guardians, teachers, and school staff. Some 
water systems may already be required to report sample results to their 
respective states.  However, parents, guardians, teachers, and staff may not 
learn of the results after lead sampling. Publicizing results annually is not 
sufficient given the health hazards of lead contamination. As such, we 
suggest that EPA require that consumers—including parents, guardians, 
teachers, and other school staff—receive notices of lead tap sampling results 
within three calendar days of when the water system receives of the results, 
regardless of whether those results exceed lead action levels. 
3. Filtration 
As an alternative to imposing the suggested changes we discuss above with 
respect to increased sampling frequency and number at schools and childcare 
 
211 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,957. 
212 40 C.F.R. § 142.92(d)(i)(B). 

 
51 
 
centers, EPA could consider allowing community water systems the option of 
installing and maintaining point-of-use water filters. The State of Michigan, for 
example, enacted a law in 2023 that adopts this type of “filter first” approach at 
schools and childcare centers.213 The bipartisan law, signed by Governor Whitmer 
into law last October, requires schools and childcare facilities to install filtered 
water faucets within 15 months of the law’s enactment.214 The “filter first” method 
is expected to save the state more than $300 million over ten years compared to the 
“test and tell” approach embodied in the Proposed Rule.215  
Allowing such an approach as a compliance option would be within EPA’s 
authority under the Safe Drinking Water Act. The statute allows, for example, 
small water systems to use point-of-use filters in complying with maximum 
contaminant levels or treatment techniques.216 Furthermore, the 2021 rule 
specifically listed point-of-use filters as a compliance option for small water systems 
that exceed the lead action level and specifies procedures the water system must 
follow, among other things, to maintain the filter.217 And given that the Proposed 
Rule already includes requirements for outreach to schools and childcare facilities 
regarding education about lead hazards and obtaining access to sample for lead, 
water systems could convey information to these consumers about water systems 
accessing schools and childcare facilities to install and maintain filters.218  
EPA acknowledges, as noted above, that it has authority to apply 
requirements directly to schools and childcare facilities that are regulated public 
water systems and to impose these obligations on public water systems that have 
 
213 Gov. Whitmer Press Release (Oct. 19, 2023), 
https://www.michigan.gov/whitmer/news/press-releases/2023/10/19/whitmer-signs-
bipartisan-legislation-to-ensure-clean-drinking-water-in-schools  
214 See House Bill No. 4341, https://www.legislature.mi.gov/documents/2023-
2024/publicact/pdf/2023-PA-0154.pdf, and House Bill No. 4342, 
http://www.legislature.mi.gov/documents/2023-2024/publicact/pdf/2023-PA-0155.pdf. 
215 See Natural Resources Defense Council, Michigan Filter First Cost Estimate 
(2020), https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/media-uploads/michigan-filter-first-cost-
estimate-202001.pdf. 
216 See 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(4)(E)(ii).  
217 See 40 C.F.R. § 141.93(a)(3). 
218 As noted further below in this subsection, EPA has proposed that states may 
waive EPA sampling requirements for community water systems at schools and childcare 
facilities if point-of-use filters have been installed pursuant to state or local law and the 
system or the school or facility is maintaining the filters.  

 
52 
 
schools and childcare facilities as customers. Although the latter would require a 
water system to take actions at facilities that it does not own or operate, the 
Proposed Rule, as discussed above, similarly authorizes small water systems to 
install and maintain point-of-use devices at customers’ homes – requiring repeated 
access to private property.219 Moreover, such requirements would be easier to 
implement as schools and childcare facilities have normal hours of operation and 
thus would be easier for an operator to access. 
Although installing filter point-of-use devices would result in upfront costs 
for the water system, a recent analysis conducted by the Natural Resources Defense 
Council concerning Michigan’s “filter first” approach showed that, over time, 
installing filters and conducting maintenance twice a year is more cost effective 
than testing and follow up remediation,220 with the added public health benefits of 
an immediate reduction in lead contamination, and thus less costs incurred by 
health insurance and social welfare programs addressing the adverse effects of lead.  
Despite these benefits, point-of-use filters may not be appropriate in all 
circumstances, and can also cause problems if improperly maintained. Therefore, if 
EPA were to allow this compliance option, the agency should require safeguards 
similar to those it already requires for small water systems that choose point-of-use 
filters as a compliance option.221 First, EPA should require that point-of-use filters 
be certified. For example, filter devices that are certified by NSF International to 
meet NSF/ANSI Standard 53 for lead removal and NSF/ANSI Standard 42 for 
particulate lead reduction could be used to prevent child lead consumption.222 
Second, EPA should require that water systems sample filtered water right after 
installation to make sure that filters are effectively eliminating lead to below the 
lead action level (as noted above, we recommend a level of 0.005 mg/L for schools 
and childcare facilities). Third, EPA should require regular sampling and 
maintenance (e.g., filter replacement) to ensure that the filters are operating 
efficiently. As discussed above, the use of filters equipped with signal lights 
indicating the need for replacement can help make sure that filters are replaced in 
 
219 See Section II.C, supra. 
220 See Michigan Filter First Cost Estimate, supra note 215. 
221 See 40 C.F.R. § 141.93(a)(3). 
222 See NSF, Drinking Water Treatment Units Must Now Meet Stricter 
Requirements for Lead Reduction Certification (last visited Feb. 3, 2024), 
https://www.nsf.org/news/drinking-water-treatment-units-stricter-requirements-lead-
reduction-cert. 

 
53 
 
timely fashion.223 Fourth, EPA should require that in the event that filtration fails 
to reduce lead to below the lead action level, the water system promptly takes the 
necessary corrective actions. 
Relatedly, we support EPA’s proposal that where a school or childcare facility 
is being sampled for lead under a state or local law, states could waive EPA’s 
sampling requirements under certain conditions, such as where the school or 
childcare facility maintains point-of-use filters on all outlets used to provide water 
for human consumption.224 EPA should consider modifying the testing waiver option 
related to point-of-use devices to require that schools and childcare facilities that 
meet the criteria for the waiver adhere to appropriate periodic maintenance and 
sampling to measure point-of-use device efficacy. We further urge EPA to issue 
guidance for states and water systems to assist with implementation and 
enforcement in schools and childcare centers where point-of-use devices are 
installed. 
Finally, it is important to recognize that a risk of requiring point-of-use filters 
is that these devices may be viewed as permanent solutions rather than temporary 
fixes until the source of lead is removed. Without proper maintenance and ongoing 
confirmatory sampling, consumers may falsely conclude that lead is being removed 
when, in fact, it is not. Therefore, removal of all lead-containing plumbing and 
fixtures in schools and childcare facilities must be the end goal.  
III. 
CONCLUSION 
We commend EPA’s efforts in the Proposed Rule to address many of the flaws 
in the 2021 rule. The agency’s decision to mandate the replacement of all lead 
service lines in the country within ten years could have critical and lasting health 
benefits, and should be coupled with measures to ensure effective and equitable 
implementation. We urge EPA to make revisions in the final rule to increase the 
likelihood that full lead service line replacements will in fact occur in all 
communities, regardless of income levels. These changes and the additional 
improvements to the Proposed Rule recommended above would go a long way 
toward eliminating the threat posed by lead-contaminated drinking water. 
 
 
 
 
223 See Section II.C, supra. 
224 Id., Proposed § 141.92(h)(iv). 

 
54 
 
Sincerely, 
 
LETITIA JAMES 
 
Attorney General of New York 
 
 
/s/ Michael J. Myers 
By: 
__________________________ 
 
MICHAEL J. MYERS 
 
Senior Counsel 
 
LAURA MIRMAN-HESLIN 
 
CHANNING WISTAR-JONES 
 
Assistant Attorneys General 
 
JODI FELD 
 
Chief Scientist 
 
AMELIA GRANT-ALFIERI 
 
Scientist 
 
Environmental Protection Bureau 
 
The Capitol 
 
Albany, NY 12224 
 
(518) 776-2400 
 
michael.myers@ag.ny.gov  
 
 
 
ROB BONTA   
Attorney General of California 
SARAH ERLICH   
Deputy Attorney General  
Abigail Blodgett  
Supervising Deputy Attorney 
General 
California Department of Justice 
300 S. Spring Street, Ste. 1702  
Los Angeles, CA 90013  
(213) 269-6305  
sarah.erlich@doj.ca.gov 
 
WILLIAM TONG 
Attorney General of Connecticut 
 
KAELAH M. SMITH 
Assistant Attorney General 
165 Capitol Avenue  
Hartford, CT 06106 
(860) 808-5250 
kaelah.smith@ct.gov  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
55 
 
KWAME RAOUL 
Attorney General of Illinois 
      
MATTHEW DUNN 
Chief, Environmental 
Enforcement/Asbestos  
  Litigation Division 
JASON E. JAMES 
CAITLIN KELLY 
Assistant Attorneys General 
Illinois Attorney General’s Office 
201 W. Pointe Drive, Suite 7 
Belleville, IL 62226 
(872) 276-3583 
jason.james@ilag.gov   
 
ANTHONY G. BROWN 
Attorney General of Maryland 
 
STEVEN J. GOLDSTEIN 
Special Assistant Attorney General 
Office of the Attorney General 
200 Saint Paul Place 
Baltimore, MD 21202 
410-576-6414 
sgoldstein@oag.state.md.us 
 
ANDREA JOY CAMPBELL 
Attorney General of Massachusetts 
 
LOUIS DUNDIN 
Deputy Division Chief                   
BRIAN CLAPPIER  
Assistant Attorney General 
Environmental Protection Division 
Office of the Attorney General      
One Ashburton Place, 18th Floor 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
(617) 727-2200 
Louis.Dundin@mass.gov  
Brian.Clappier@mass.gov  
DANA NESSEL 
Attorney General of Michigan  
  
ELIZABETH MORRISSEAU 
Assistant Attorney General 
Environment, Natural Resources,       
and Agriculture Division 
6th Flr. G. Mennen Williams Bldg.  
525 W. Ottawa Street 
P.O. Box 30755  
Lansing, MI 48909  
(517) 335-7664  
MorrisseauE@michigan.gov 
 
KEITH ELLISON  
Attorney General of Minnesota 
JOSEPH T. HEEGAARD 
Special Assistant Attorney General 
Minnesota Attorney General’s Office 
445 Minnesota Street, Suite 900 
St. Paul, MN  55101 
(651) 583-6667  
joseph.heegaard@ag.state.mn.us 
 
MATTHEW J. PLATKIN 
Attorney General of New Jersey 
 
DANIEL A. NACHMAN 
Deputy Attorney General 
New Jersey Division of Law 
Environmental Enforcement & 
  Environmental Justice Section 
25 Market Street 
Trenton, NJ 08625 
(609) 376-2991 
daniel.nachman@law.njoag.gov 

 
56 
 
ELLEN F. ROSENBLUM  
Attorney General of Oregon 
  
PAUL GARRAHAN  
Attorney-in-Charge 
STEVE NOVICK  
Special Assistant Attorney General  
Natural Resources Section  
Oregon Department of Justice  
1162 Court Street NE  
Salem, Oregon 97301-4096  
(503) 947-4540  
Paul.Garrahan@doj.state.or.us  
Steve.Novick@doj.state.or.us 
 
MICHELLE A. HENRY 
Attorney General of Pennsylvania  
  
ANN R. JOHNSTON 
Assistant Chief Deputy Attorney 
General 
Civil Environmental Enforcement 
Unit 
Office of Attorney General 
Strawberry Square 
14th Floor 
Harrisburg, PA 17120 
717-497-3678 
ajohnston@attorneygeneral.gov 
 
 
PETER F. NERONHA 
Attorney General of Rhode Island 
  
By:  /s/ Alison Hoffman Carney 
ALISON HOFFMAN CARNEY 
Assistant Attorney General 
Chief, Environment and Energy 
Unit 
Rhode Island Office of the Attorney 
General 
150 South Main Street 
Providence, RI 02903 
(401) 274-4400 ext 2116 
acarney@riag.ri.gov 
 
JOSHUA L. KAUL 
Attorney General of Wisconsin  
 
JENNIFER S. LIMBACH 
Assistant Attorney General  
Office of the Attorney General  
17 West Main Street  
Madison, WI 53707 
BRIAN L. SCHWALB 
Attorney General for the District of 
Columbia  
  
LAUREN CULLUM 
Special Assistant Attorney General 
Office of the Attorney General 
for the District of Columbia 
400 6th Street, N.W., 10th Floor 
Washington, D.C. 20001 
lauren.cullum@dc.gov 
 
 
 

 
57

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0808 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
State Water Resources Control Board 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code: 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N. W.  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Via www.regulations.gov: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
COMMENTS ON THE PROPOSED LEAD AND COPPER RULE IMPROVEMENTS, 84 
FR 61684, DOCKET: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
The California State Water Resources Control Board (State Water Board) thanks the 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for continuing to address lead in 
drinking water issues and for providing the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
for public comment, as the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) needs 
additional revisions.  That being said, the State Water Board appreciates the effort and 
time spent on the LCRR, especially in light of the complexity of the 1991 Lead and 
Copper Rule (LCR). 
 
The State Water Board has worked with other state administrators, through the 
Association of State Drinking Water Administrators (ASDWA), commenting on the entire 
LCRI and to put together a comprehensive response from the states as one unified 
response.  The State Water Board supports the ASDWA comments and provides 
additional and supporting comments below:  
 
The State Water Board supports the following portions of the LCRI as listed below: 
 
• Removal of the trigger level and an action level of 10 ppb. 
• Mandatory full service line replacement of lead services lines independent of P90 
lead levels. 
• Lead Service Line Inventories. 
o A complete service line inventory (both public and private side) in the 
distribution system is essential to support lead service line replacements.  
The locations of the lead service lines are also critical information for 

DOCKET: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
- 2 - 
February 2, 2024 
determining appropriate sample locations and advising customers on how 
to reduce lead exposure. 
o The service line inventories need to be made publicly available to increase 
transparency and build customer confidence. 
o Including lead connectors in the inventory requirements is needed. 
• Strengthened corrosion control treatment and water quality parameter 
requirements.   
o Providing additional guidance for these sections of the proposed rule will 
be a critical and crucial element for the states’ and water utilities’ success 
of implementation. 
• Increased communication and education of homeowners regarding sources of 
lead and mitigation options.   
o Provides guidance for states and water utilities with example information 
for distribution to ensure successful implementation. 
 
Overall Framework 
 
In general, the proposed language in the LCRI unfortunately does not simplify the 1991 
LCR or the 2021 LCRR, which was an original stated goal of the revisions.  The 
proposed LCRI regulatory language and requirements are more extensive and more 
difficult to follow, track, and implement for states and water utilities.  Regulations that 
are simple to interpret and follow will ultimately be more successful in their ultimate goal 
of protecting public health.  To this end, we recommend that the LCRI should focus on 
the removal of lead from our drinking water infrastructure.  This is already a goal for 
California, and we believe other states are capable of this as well in the short-term with 
all states ultimately achieving removal of lead from the nations drinking water 
infrastructure.   
 
We recommend that EPA consider the creation of two tracks in the regulations that 
allow for a modified approach with less requirements for those states that are able to 
document the elimination of lead from their drinking water infrastructure. Regulations 
that recognize the condition of very limited lead in a system’s infrastructure will be 
needed for all systems at some point in the future, and should be available now for 
states that can achieve removal of lead from their infrastructure. Such an approach 
would also incentivize water systems to move quicker to remove their lead infrastructure 
so as to achieve the second track with less requirements. 
 
If the LCRI is adopted as proposed, the State Water Board requests that the EPA create 
the necessary guidance documents, training materials, templates, and data tracking 
systems necessary to support implementation of this complex rule for states and water 
utilities.  EPA is relying heavily on state decisions throughout this proposed rule and has 
made no commitment to train states and water systems on this complex issue.  Water 
systems will be without guidance and communication to the public will vary dramatically. 
 

DOCKET: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
- 3 - 
February 2, 2024 
 
Lead Testing in Schools and Childcare Facilities  
 
California has required lead testing in its public schools as a one-time testing event and 
currently requires testing at child care facilities every five years.  While the State Water 
Board agrees with the EPA that schools and childcare facilities should be included in 
the LCRI, the absence of an action level for schools and childcare facilities causes 
confusion when samples are received at the school, child care facility or a local health 
department.  Specifically, many states are currently sampling or have sampled schools 
and childcare facilities using various lead levels for action from 2 ppb to 20 ppb.  To 
rectify these discrepancies, EPA needs to develop a health-based action level for 
children under six (6) years old and children between the ages of six and 18.  Actions 
that can be taken, educational material for students and parents, and post-corrective 
action sampling guidance needs to be developed prior to the EPA finalizing the LCRI.   
 
Secondly, under the proposed LCRI, community water systems will be required to reach 
out to all public schools served by the water system and offer to collect a total of 5 lead 
samples, regardless of facility size or population of the school.  Only two of these 
samples will be collected from drinking water fountains at each school.  Instead, we 
propose developing a tiered sample structure to include sampling of additional drinking 
water outlets or fountains, based on the population of the school (i.e. 5 samples for 
small schools, 10 samples for medium sized schools, and 15 samples for large 
schools).  School sizes vary dramatically in California and 5 samples at a large school 
with a population of several thousand is inadequate.  Ideally, all drinking water fixtures 
used by children should be sampled for lead. 
 
Lastly, the State Water Board disagrees with the provision to waive sampling at schools 
and childcare facilities that install point-of-use (POU) devices.  Maintenance and 
oversight of POU devices will vary greatly, and sampling these locations will ensure that 
the POU devices are functioning properly.  
 
Lead Action Level Exceedance, 90th percentile (P90) – Tier 1 notice requirement 
 
The State Water Board does not support issuing Tier 1 notices for action level 
exceedances. First, it is problematic to message the appropriate level of concern for a 
Tier 1 notice for lead without a health-based standard. Second, since the sampling 
conducted is at locations most likely to yield lead results, this information may not apply 
to the entire community. These two points make it logically very difficult to require 24-
hour Tier 1 public notification for a water system with a P90 violation.  Tier 1 notices are 
typically reserved for acute public health issues, such as bacterial contamination, 
treatment failures for high-risk chemicals or surface water, nitrate exceedances, etc.  
Including lead exceedance in this high-risk, immediate acute health category seems 
inconsistent, especially since we are relying on a P90 value for compliance and so 
depending on the results upwards of 89 percent of the samples may be below the action 
level. Additionally, customers of the water system collect the water samples and it may 

DOCKET: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
- 4 - 
February 2, 2024 
take days or even weeks to collect all the samples, complete the laboratory analyses, 
and complete the calculations to determine a P90 result.  This timeline does not align 
with the immediacy that a Tier 1 public notification requires. 
 
In support of our suggestion above, EPA states in the proposed regulations preamble 
that, “[w]hile the lead action level is intended to be generally representative of effective 
OCCT, EPA recognizes that there may be some instances where systems would be 
unable to meet the proposed lowered lead action level of 0.010 mg/L because tap water 
lead levels can be influenced by other factors.”  This statement shows that EPA is 
relying on the action level to determine compliance with the effectiveness of the water 
system’s corrosion control efforts, and that it is not equivalent to a health-based 
standard or maximum contaminate level (MCL).  The drafted LCRI language uses 
sampling and action level as a treatment technique optimization tool, and not as a 
means of determining if the water is safe at each customer's home.  
 
The State Water Board also suggests development of notification templates for the 
different scenarios that will be encountered during lead action level testing.  The risk to 
the public varies greatly depending on the scenario.  For instance, a scenario with a low 
risk should have a different message to customers than one with a higher risk.  
Scenarios for the system types that need to be covered include: systems with known 
lead service lines, systems with known lead connectors, systems with confirmed 
galvanized requiring replacement (GRR), systems with unknown lead service lines and 
finally systems with a complete non-lead inventory.  Scenarios for the sampling result 
types include: tests with a large percentage of failed samples, tests just barely failing 
the P90, and test results with confirmed sampling errors that have returned invalid 
results and will require retesting.  Each scenario needs its own template to the 
customers and appropriate risk based timeline for distribution.   
 
Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) 
 
The addition of orthophosphate is an effective CCT that can inhibit lead leaching, 
however, as EPA has acknowledged, phosphate added to the domestic water supply 
ultimately flows to the wastewater treatment plants downstream.  The addition of 
orthophosphate to the water supply may contribute to increases in wastewater 
treatment costs and induce or compound ecological impacts.  The State Water Board 
provides regulatory oversight over public water systems providing corrosion control and 
wastewater treatment plants with specific effluent limits, which may conflict.  The LCRI 
does not consider the impacts of orthophosphate in communities that are managing 
phosphorus nutrient loading.  California currently manages nutrient loading in certain 
areas by imposing Total Maximum Daily Loads, numerical effluent limits, or Best 
Management Practices.  In California, evaluation and optimization of CCT will need to 
include consideration of impacts to watersheds and costs incurred by wastewater 
treatment facilities that discharge to surface waters. 
 

DOCKET: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
- 5 - 
February 2, 2024 
 
Public Water System Monitoring Plans  
 
The State Water Boards requests that samples collected have a maximum stagnation 
time of 18 hours, and that samples may be invalidated based on exceeding this 
stagnation time. This request is in line with EPA’s recommendations in the 3Ts 
guidance document that a maximum 18-hour stagnation period be used in sample 
collection. A stagnation time over 18 hours may potentially elevate levels of lead in 
monitoring samples. This potential increase would not represent the water used by 
consumers on a regular basis and would not allow for water systems to gather 
consistent monitoring data. Inaccurate and inconsistent data would additionally not 
allow for water systems to understand the effectiveness of any corrosion control 
treatment in place. This is also important with the proposed notification requirements in 
the LCRI. California, which has very little lead infrastructure, can average around 40 
failures of the P90 level. Our investigations into these failures has shown that they are 
extensively at small water systems that take a minimum number of samples and have a 
single bad sample that was taken inappropriately and not per instructions. Following 
through with the LCRI notification requirements in these instances will do more public 
health harm than good. 
 
In the LCRI preamble, EPA requested comments on whether a phased or alternate 
approach for initial tap sampling implementation should be considered. The State Water 
Board strongly urges EPA to consider a phased-in approach to begin implementation of 
the first round of monitoring. The State Water Board recommends that large systems 
begin conducting standard tap monitoring within two (2) years of the rule compliance 
date, medium systems within three (3) years of the rule compliance date, and small 
systems within four (4) years of the rule compliance date. System size would be based 
on definitions within the rule. Staggering the implementation would allow water systems 
time to identify sample sites, develop sample plans, correspond with State Water Board 
staff, and allow State Water Board staff adequate time to review the several thousand 
required site plans.  The State Water Board also recommends EPA require any water 
system with confirmed lead service lines in the initial or subsequent inventory to modify 
the existing monitoring plan within 6 months. 
 
Though the State Water Board agrees that lead connectors need to be included in the 
baseline inventory, it does not agree with the requirement to include an inventory of all 
connector and lead connectors that have been removed.  California water systems have 
conducted sampling on service lines, including galvanized service lines, where lead 
connectors are removed but the customer side service line is not replaced.  The post-
construction samples show that if proper flushing techniques are utilized, minimal 
spiking if any occurs.  In a limited number of homes, lead spiking will occur for 2 to 3 
months, and then no additional lead spikes are seen.  While pitcher and flushing 
requirements provided to the customers following a removal and replacement of a lead 
connector are necessary to protect public health, the inventory of lead connectors that 
are removed and continued sampling of sites with lead connectors that have been 
removed is not.  Furthermore, removed lead connectors should not be included in the 

DOCKET: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
- 6 - 
February 2, 2024 
Tier 3 monitoring requirements. California water systems have conducted sampling on 
galvanized service lines downstream of removed connectors and compared it to 
sampling of copper lines with lead solder.  Tier 4 sampling of copper service lines with 
lead solder produces consistently higher lead results.   
 
The LCRI Tier 3 sampling includes the need to determine interior/premise plumbing.  
The ability of a water system to obtain accurate information on premise plumbing is not 
available and is not needed to determine the best approach to protect public health on a 
system-wide basis.   
 
The LCRI requires water systems to remove service lines that are labeled galvanized 
requiring replacement (GGR) regardless of lead sampling results and regardless of how 
long ago the upstream lead service line was removed.  California water systems 
removed thousands of lead service lines in the 1980s and early 1990s using the 
recommendations of the EPA at the time.  Some California systems have sampled 
GRRs where lead service lines have been removed decades ago.  Again, the results of 
the GRR sampling results, using sequential tap sampling, 5 consecutive 1-liter samples, 
showed lead results (Tier 3) are lower than copper service lines with lead solder results 
(Tier 4).  The LCRI needs to allow water systems with older GRRs to conduct an 
evaluation and propose a risk level to the state (i.e. low-, medium-, or high-risk) of lead 
spiking from GRRs.   Such studies could include a review of current and historical 
corrosion control treatment, sequential tap sampling, measurement of particulate versus 
dissolved lead, analysis of scale in excavated pipes, or other tools that may become 
available. If the conclusion of the study is that the galvanized pipes are not a source of 
lead, then the water system should be permitted to remove the GRRs from the water 
system replacement plan, modify the water system monitoring plan and cease notifying 
their GRR customers. 
 
Additional Questions and Clarifications Requested  
 
The LCRI is a complex regulation, and it is crucial that states, systems, and consumers 
are clear on the requirements and their applicability. As written, the rule does not 
provide the clarity needed for consistent and appropriate implementation among states. 
The State Board requests clarification and additional guidance on the following sections.  
 
• Section 141.81(f) states that systems with lead or GRR service lines that plan to 
complete service lines replacement within 5 years of the first action level 
exceedance practical quantitation limit (PQL) exceedance (for larger systems) do 
not need to complete steps to install or re-optimize optimal corrosion control 
treatment. There are concerns that water systems may delay implementation of 
optimal corrosion control treatment steps by a year after not meeting the 
minimum annual replacement requirement of 20 percent. The State Board 
recommends systems that choose to replace all lead and GRR service lines 
within 5 years, in lieu of modifying their corrosion control treatment, notify the 
State in writing of this choice no later than the end of the tap sampling period in 
which the action level exceedance occurred.    

DOCKET: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
- 7 - 
February 2, 2024 
 
• Section 141.85(e)(3)(i)(H) requires water systems to provide instructions to 
customers served by a confirmed lead or GRR service line for contacting the 
water system if they disagree with the service line material classification. It is not 
clear how a customer may suspect a lead or GRR material determination is 
incorrect. The State Board requests EPA provide guidance on ways in which a 
customer may conclude as such. A customer may also suspect an incorrect 
categorization of a non-lead service line. For systems with no lead, GRR, or 
unknown service lines, the State Board suggests that these instructions be 
included in the Consumer Confidence Report, along with the instructions for 
accessing the service line inventory (141.84(a)(7)).  
 
• Section 141.84(b)(4) states that water systems must offer to inspect the service 
line within 60 days. The State Board suggests that water systems provide 
available documentation or previous field verification information (e.g., pot-holing 
photos) for the service line in question to the customer prior to conducting field 
work to determine if a re-inspection is necessary.  
 
• Section 141.85(j)(3) requires water systems with multiple action level 
exceedances to submit filter plans. According to the timelines presented in 
141.85(j), water systems would have 30 days to work on a filter plan and states 
would have 15 days to review and approve the plans. After state approval, 
systems have 30 days to acquire a 6-month supply of filters for all consumers 
(141.85(j)(2)). Current timelines may be infeasible, especially if a filter plan is 
rejected or if there are unforeseeable supply chain challenges. The State Board 
recommends requiring water systems to start working on filter plans earlier (e.g., 
after the second action level exceedance), so the system would have more than 
60 days to procure the necessary number of filters for all their customers. 
 
The State Board requests that EPA continue to invest time and resources to provide 
training and implementation guidance for all aspects of the LCRI.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment and the EPA’s continued work on the 
exposure of lead in drinking water.   
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
Darrin Polhemus, P.E. 
Deputy Director, Division of Drinking Water 
State Water Resources Control Board 
 
Digitally signed by Darrin 
Polhemus 
Date: 2024.02.02 15:35:50 -08'00'

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1121 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment in the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements 
Table of Contents for Federal Register 
SecƟon 
Page in Federal Register 
A. Regulatory Approach  
84906 
B. Service Line Replacement  
84910 
1. Mandatory Full Service Line Replacement and SDWA Requirements  
84910 
2. Feasibility of Proposed Service Line Replacement Requirement and Deferred Deadlines  
84912 
3. Service Line Replacement Rate  
84915 
4. Scope of Mandatory Service Line Replacement Requirement  
84917 
5. Water System Access to Full Service Line  
84920 
6. Risk MiƟgaƟon AcƟviƟes to Reduce Lead Exposures  
84924 
7. Service Line Replacement Plan  
84925 
8. Impact of State and Local Laws on Service Line Replacement  
84925 
9. Environmental JusƟce Concerns  
84927 
C. Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper  
84929 
1. Sample CollecƟon LocaƟons and Methods  
84929 
2. Sample CollecƟon Frequency  
84931 
3. 90th PercenƟle Lead CalculaƟon  
84932 
D. Service Line Inventory  
84933 
1. Timeline to IdenƟfy All Unknown Service Lines  
84933 
2. Inventory ValidaƟon Requirements  
84935 
3. Service Line Addresses  
84936 
4. Lead Connectors  
84936 
E. Corrosion Control Treatment  
84936 
1. LCRI Proposed CCT Changes  
84937 
2. Lead AcƟon Level and Trigger Level  
84939 
F. Water Quality Parameter Monitoring  
84943 
1. Systems Required to Monitor for Water Quality Parameters  
84943 
2. DistribuƟon System and Site Assessment  
84944 
G. Compliance AlternaƟves for a Lead AcƟon Level Exceedance for Small Community Water 
Systems and Non-Transient Non-Community Water Systems  
84944 
H. Public EducaƟon  
84946 
1. Feasibility of Public EducaƟon Requirements  
84946 
2. Service Line Related Outreach  
84947 
3. Individual NoƟﬁcaƟon of Tap Sample Results  
84949 
4. Other Public EducaƟon Materials  
84950 
5. Requirements for Language Updates and Accessibility  
84952 
I. AddiƟonal Requirements for Systems with MulƟple Lead AcƟon Level Exceedances  
84954 
J. Lead Sampling at Schools and Child Care FaciliƟes 
84956 
1. Proposed LCRI Requirements  
84956 
2. Proposed Waiver Requirements  
84958 
3. Public InformaƟon about Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care FaciliƟes  
84958 
K. ReporƟng and Recordkeeping  
84959 
1. System ReporƟng Requirements  
84959 
2. State Recordkeeping Requirements 
84960 
3. State ReporƟng Requirements 
84960 
L. Other Proposed Revisions to 40 CFR Part 141 
84960 
1. Consumer Conﬁdence Report (40 CFR Part 141, Subpart O) 
84960 
2. Public NoƟﬁcaƟon Rule (40 CFR Part 141, Subpart Q) 
84963 
3. DeﬁniƟons 
84965 
 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
2 
 
Requests for Comments 
LocaƟon in FR
Request for Comment 
LocaƟon in 
LCRI or FR 
IX. Request for Comment General MaƩers
Whether the proposed revisions to the LCRR treatment technique are eﬀecƟve to prevent known or 
anƟcipated adverse health eﬀects to the extent feasible in accordance with the SDWA. 
 
Louisville Water supports the agency’s decision to conƟnue with a treatment technique (TT) approach 
(cf. MCL) for addressing lead contaminaƟon. While no regulatory approach is ever perfect, by using a TT 
approach, EPA can provide a variety of risk reducƟon strategies that more holisƟcally address this 
complex issue. 
FR Preamble, 
General 
MaƩers 
 
Whether there are addiƟonal ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the regulatory approach used to 
address lead in drinking water consistent with the statutory standard for a treatment technique rule in 
secƟon 1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. Speciﬁcally, EPA requests comment on ways that the proposed LCRI 
could be simpliﬁed and ways that burden, including paperwork burden, could be reduced without 
aﬀecƟng the ability of the rule to prevent known or anƟcipated adverse health eﬀects. 
 
Whether the proposed requirements of the rule are enforceable and promote compliance without the 
need for State or Federal enforcement acƟon. EPA also solicits comments on ways the rule could be 
modiﬁed to beƩer promote compliance. 
 
1) Water systems need more than 10 years for replacements. Because Kentucky has had no state-level 
requirements that are more stringent than the NPDWRs, water systems have in many cases not 
aƩempted system-wide LSL replacements before now and will be challenged to maintain compliance 
with a 10-year replacement deadline. 
 
2) Eliminate the requirement to include premise plumbing material for sampling Ɵers. Louisville Water 
recognizes that the SDWA does not allow regulaƟon of private property outside of public water systems 
and maintains that “control” cannot be equated with “access.” EPA’s proposed deﬁniƟon is not 
supported by the statutory text. The SDWA regulates public water systems but does not provide EPA 
authority to regulate other enƟƟes, such as businesses, landlords, or private residences. Similarly, it 
does not give EPA authority over private property or other persons, and therefore cannot be used to 
compel removal of lead in private lines or plumbing ﬁxtures that are private property. By requiring 
public water systems to inventory and conduct LSR replacements on property that is not part of the 
public water system, the LCRI exceeds the scope of EPA’s authority under the SDWA and is therefore 
contrary to law. 
 
Furthermore, this requirement adds complexity that shiŌs focus and resources away from lead service 
line replacement eﬀorts. Since lead sampling is no longer a trigger for SL replacement, it is outside the 
scope of this rule to hold water systems accountable to acƟons related to lead detected in samples 
impacted by lead in premise plumbing. EPA should clarify expectaƟons for how water systems will 
obtain and verify these records, especially given that uƟliƟes already have access and control issues 
dealing with service line materials on private property. Access and control become much bigger 
challenges for water systems to manage if premise plumbing is included.  
 
Since premise plumbing materials are likely to be 100% unknown, at least iniƟally, EPA should clarify the 
impacts on sampling where the premise plumbing is previously unknown and found to be lead aŌer 
sampling eﬀorts have begun or completed (e.g., aŌer all compliance samples have been received, aŌer 
lower Ɵer sites have been used for compliance monitoring, etc.).  
FR Preamble, 
General 
MaƩers 
 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
3 
 
Including premise plumbing in sample Ɵering also creates incongruity between the number of sites in 
each Ɵered sampling pool and the number of service lines in the SL inventory, which further complicates 
overall program communicaƟon. For example, a system may have replaced all LSLs but sƟll have a 
number of Tier 1 sample sites and corresponding monitoring obligaƟons because of premise plumbing 
materials. This further complicates communicaƟon around LSLR plan progress and forces water systems 
to engage customer with support and diagnosƟc work around household plumbing.  
 
In any case, the provisions relaƟng to premise plumbing are clearly outside EPA’s authority under the 
SDWA and must be removed from the rule. 
3) Change the 3-day customer noƟﬁcaƟon of sample results requirement to 30 days for all samples, 
including those exceeding the new acƟon level. It’s inconceivable that water systems will be able to 
achieve a 3-calendar day turnaround for all sample result noƟﬁcaƟons. Further, it is not consistent with 
the Rule to prioriƟze noƟﬁcaƟon eﬀorts where there is no risk has been idenƟﬁed. This requirement, 
while aƩempƟng to simplify noƟﬁcaƟon requirements, actually further complicates the noƟﬁcaƟon 
process for water systems. Most samples are collected and sent to labs in batches, so mulƟple 
noƟﬁcaƟons will be due all at once and not staggered over the enƟre sampling period. Electronic 
delivery may be an opƟon for some customers who are also water account holders and who opt into 
electronic delivery. But electronic delivery will never ensure deliver to all customers (tenants and 
owners). Most systems will opt for mail delivery so they can document the postmark for all services 
sampled. Due to weekend and holidays, compleƟng the mailing in 3 calendar days will not always 
possible. The 3-day window does not respect the process water systems take to review and validate 
water quality reports from lab providers, nor the Ɵme it takes to draŌ batches of customer leƩers and 
get internal management review before mailing.  
 
4) Requiring numerous residenƟal compliance samples (and communicaƟons requirements) takes 
resources away from the priority of the rule and may lead to customer-parƟcipaƟon faƟgue. 
Expending resources on rouƟne compliance monitoring requirements will take resources away from the 
focus on the expedited replacement of lead and GRR service line. The proposed rule highlights that the 
agency needs, at least for the next several years, to forego the emphasis on residenƟal sampling and go 
all in on replacements and removing lead and GRR. Sampling resources should be prioriƟzed for 
customers with unknown service-line materials as the mechanism for changing customer behavior 
regarding idenƟﬁcaƟon and replacement, especially in tenant/owner scenarios, which are much more 
prevalent in older homes where the likelihood of ﬁnding lead is higher. The agency should consider 
suspending Tier sampling requirements during the mandatory replacement schedule. Suspending the 
Tier sampling requirements would provide for systems to prioriƟze replacements rather than focusing 
on the signiﬁcant eﬀort of compleƟng standard monitoring and locaƟng and registering suﬃcient 
sample sites. There is limited value in standard monitoring when the focus should be idenƟfying 
unknowns and replacing knowns. WQP monitoring will be suﬃcient for ensuring CCT.  
 
We need consideraƟon for the increasing likelihood of smaller and smaller pool sizes. How does a uƟlity 
move to the next Ɵer aŌer we document refusals? The ﬁnal rule needs a mechanism for documenƟng 
sampling refusal, especially with limited pools in sampling Ɵers. Need to be able to document “sampling 
refusal” aŌer one aƩempt (non-responsive). Need consideraƟon for the Ɵme constraints of geƫng 
customer parƟcipaƟon, registering sites, and maintaining standard monitoring pace. Also need 
consideraƟon for systems oﬀering free SL replacement. Systems should not have to sample from a site 
that refuses to replace. Replacement refusal should be equivalent to sampling refusal. 
 
If 90P is greater than the PQL, large systems will be forced into standard monitoring (200 samples/year) 
in perpetuity. Large systems should be able to request reduced monitoring if all lead/galvanized have 
been replaced or refusals have been documented. This could serve as an incenƟve to ﬁnish 
replacements early where there is no incenƟve in the proposed rule now. 
FR Preamble, 
General 
MaƩers 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
4 
 
5) EPA should consolidate reporƟng deadlines for cerƟﬁcaƟon documents, including: inventory 
submiƩals, replacement plans, sampling and customer noƟﬁcaƟons, public educaƟon and outreach, 
school and daycare communicaƟons.  
 
IX. Request for Comment
Service Line Replacement 
All aspects of the proposed scope of the replacement requirements, including the criteria used to deﬁne 
a full service line replacement (e.g., cuƫng the pipe at abandoned properƟes, replacing the enƟre 
service line) and which lead sources are subject to replacement under the mandatory program. EPA is 
seeking comments on whether to prohibit reconnecƟon of any disconnected LSL or GRR service line. 
EPA is requesƟng comment on whether the Agency should include lead connectors or galvanized service 
lines that are or were downstream of a lead connector as part of mandatory replacement. 
 
Louisville Water requests further consideraƟon and ﬂexibility for galvanized service line 
replacements. Replacing galvanized service lines that connect to older mains (especially cast iron) and 
older galvanized premise plumbing carries much more risk to the customer and is more diﬃcult to 
manage for the water system. Many systems have reported addiƟonal costs associated with main 
replacement when aƩempƟng targeted replacement of galvanized service lines. Louisville Water has 
had several cases where customers experienced water loss and failure of premise plumbing materials 
aŌer service line replacement. The agency should consider that most galvanized pipes will fail or be 
replaced over the next 20 years regardless of the requirements of this rule.  
 
EPA should focus the ﬁrst 10 year schedule exclusively on replacing lead service lines, not galvanized; 
and consider requiring replacement of galvanized service lines over the next 20 years in coordinaƟon 
with main-replacement projects where construcƟon crews are beƩer able to miƟgate upstream and 
downstream risks. Requiring both lead and galvanized replacement in 10 years does not properly 
account for the diﬀerent risk levels associated with the two diﬀerent types of plumbing materials. 
Louisville Water’s 90P for LSL is an order of magnitude higher than the 90P for galvanized SLs. In most 
cases, lead release from galvanized pipe can be eﬀecƟvely managed with opƟmized corrosion control. 
EPA recognizes the disƟncƟon between lead risk and galvanized risk in the sample Ɵering framework, 
but that same logic doesn’t carry forward to other areas of the rule, namely the 10-year replacement 
schedule and calculaƟon of replacement rates.  
 
Furthermore, EPA should consider the costs related to main replacement and post-replacement 
ﬂushing damage to premise galvanized pipe associated with targeted replacement of galvanized 
service lines. These costs may be compounded by the accelerated 10-year schedule and lead to 
addiƟonal ﬁnancial liabiliƟes for water systems. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
 
Whether a reasonable eﬀort to obtain property owner consent should be more than four Ɵmes (e.g., 
ﬁve, six, or seven Ɵmes). 
 
The requirement for four aƩempts does not add signiﬁcant value. Two aƩempts using two diﬀerent 
methods is suﬃcient. Louisville Water has experienced limited success (<20% parƟcipaƟon) using 
wriƩen methods (leƩers and postcards). Louisville Water supports the use of wriƩen communicaƟon 
methods that target both the premise address (tenant) and the property owner. Louisville Water has 
experienced greater return (30%) through leƩers/postcards followed by verbal communicaƟon, via 
phone calls with account holders or canvasing door-to-door to speak directly with customers. We 
support two aƩempts using two methods (wriƩen and verbal). EPA should take into consideraƟon the 
annual noƟﬁcaƟons to customers with LSL/GRR/Unknown lines as well as other targeted 
communicaƟon requirements (e.g., change of ownership, new accounts, compliance sampling, etc.) and 
broad communicaƟon requirements (e.g. CCR, web-published LSL Replacement Plans, Inventory, etc.) 
when making a ﬁnal determinaƟon. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
5. Water 
System Access 
to Full Service 
Line 
 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
5 
 
We are concerned that customers will experience communicaƟon faƟgue over Ɵme, resulƟng in a 
diminishing return on these requirements with respect to educaƟon, awareness and changing customer 
behavior on idenƟﬁcaƟon and replacement.   
 
Louisville Water suggests that EPA needs to clarify expectaƟons and perhaps provide some guidance 
to water uƟliƟes regarding tenant/owner consideraƟons.  For example, what does a uƟlity do when an 
owner agrees to replace the customer-owned LSL, but the tenant doesn’t allow access. Conversely, how 
does a uƟlity support/protect a tenant whose owner does not support or agree to SL replacement? 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
5. Water 
System Access 
to Full Service 
Line 
 
Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets “control” for the purposes of the mandatory 
replacement provision (i.e., require systems to conduct full service line replacement in situaƟons where 
the system has access to conduct the full replacement). 
 
In addiƟon to removing all known lead service lines in its distribuƟon system, Louisville Water has 
undertaken signiﬁcant eﬀorts to idenƟfy and replace lead and GRR private service lines and is 
subsidizing 100% of the costs via customer reimbursement or using our plumbing contractors to 
conduct the replacement. However, Louisville Water recognizes that the SDWA does not allow 
regulaƟon of private property outside of public water systems and maintains that “control” cannot be 
equated with “access.” EPA’s proposed deﬁniƟon is not supported by the statutory text. The SDWA 
regulates public water systems but does not provide EPA authority to regulate other enƟƟes, such as 
businesses, landlords, or private residences. Similarly, it does not give EPA authority over private 
property or other persons, and therefore cannot be used to compel removal of lead in private lines or 
plumbing ﬁxtures that are private property. By requiring public water systems to inventory and 
conduct LSR replacements on property that is not part of the public water system, the LCRI exceeds 
the scope of EPA’s authority under the SDWA and is therefore contrary to law. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
5. Water 
System Access 
to Full Service 
Line 
 
The proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement deadlines. EPA is seeking comment on 
whether it is feasible for systems across the naƟon to complete service line replacement in a shorter 
Ɵmeframe than ten years, such as in six, seven, or eight years.  
 
Louisville Water does not support shorter deadlines, and in fact thinks that some deadlines should be 
reconsidered altogether. The rule should provide ﬂexibility to replace mains and service lines at the 
same Ɵme. This may require more Ɵme and expense / capital planning. Replacing SLs without 
simultaneously replacing the main (when required) can add 40% to the overall project cost. It is 
ﬁnancially ineﬃcient to replace SLs alone but replacing all SLs (and mains when needed) within 10 years 
is not feasible Ɵme-wise or ﬁnancially. Furthermore, because Kentucky has had no state-level 
requirements that are more stringent than the NPDWRs, water systems have in many cases not 
aƩempted system-wide LSL replacements before now, and will be challenged to maintain compliance 
with a 10-year replacement deadline. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
3. Service Line 
Replacement 
Rate 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
6 
 
EPA is seeking comment on the rate construct approach, including how to calculate compliance with a 
given service line replacement deadline and average annual rate calculated across a rolling three-year 
period. 
 
Louisville Water requests more ﬂexibility in calculaƟng the replacement rate. We anƟcipate that some 
systems will need the ﬁrst three years to ﬁnish planning and gathering the needed materials, 
permissions, funding, staﬃng, and procedures. Flexibility should be given to states to work with water 
systems to develop a feasible rate and schedule. Assigning a rate without the understanding of the 
idiosyncrasies of each community (funding, rates, labor market, etc.) unintenƟonally creates a burden 
and an increased likelihood of non-compliance and negoƟated enforcement orders. Allow systems to 
work out rates with the state and ramp operaƟons based on real feedback from the ﬁeld operaƟons. 
 
AddiƟonal ﬂexibility should be given to water systems with large numbers of documented refusals. 
We anƟcipate that most lead systems will be leŌ with lead services in their inventories at the end of the 
replacement deadline and the majority of remaining LSLs will be those that have refused replacement. 
Given that this will be the most likely outcome for all systems, EPA should clarify the requirements for 
systems in this scenario and explain how compliance will be determined with this rule. Louisville Water 
requests that if a customer refuses to allow replacement aŌer all required aƩempts, water systems are 
allowed to remove that site from the replacement plan.  
EPA should clarify the following statement: “Where a water system has legal access to conduct full 
service line replacement only if property owner consent is obtained, the water system must make a 
“reasonable eﬀort” to obtain property owner consent. If such a water system does not obtain consent 
aŌer making a “reasonable eﬀort” to obtain it from any property owner, then the water system is not 
required by this rule to replace any porƟon of the service line at that address” (40 CFR 141.84(d)(3)). 
Does this mean the service line in quesƟon may be removed from the replacement rate calculaƟon, and 
removed from the replacement plan? 
 
Louisville Water requests that the rule have two separate calculaƟons for 1) the idenƟﬁcaƟon of 
Unknowns and 2) the replacement of LSLs. Decoupling unknown idenƟﬁcaƟon from the replacement 
rate allows ﬂexibility for water systems to more-pracƟcally manage diﬀerent program tasks and 
objecƟves. Water systems that have been proacƟve in replacing LSLs may have many unknowns and few 
known LSLs; the larger number of Unknowns will bias the replacement rate if it’s required that they are 
included in the calculaƟon. Consider also that there are oŌen two separate workﬂows for managing 
idenƟﬁcaƟon of unknowns vs. replacement of LSL/GRRs, so separaƟng idenƟﬁcaƟon from replacement 
would be easier for systems to manage. 
 
Louisville Water requests that EPA decouple GRR replacements from LSL replacements in the 
calculaƟon of replacement rate – i.e., have separate calculaƟons for GRR replacement rate than for LSL 
replacement rate. There is scant data demonstraƟng that a GRR service line poses the same risk as a 
LSL, and the new deﬁniƟon of GRR (which would categorize many more galvanized lines as GRR, even if 
there is no evidence they were ever downstream from lead) further reduces the likelihood that the 
“average” GRR will pose a high lead risk. If separated from LSLs, Louisville Water suggests allowing a 
longer Ɵmeframe to replace GRRs than to replace LSLs (e.g., 20 years)… see previous comments.  
AlternaƟvely, Louisville Water suggests that GRR replacements be treated completely diﬀerently from 
LSLs, so their replacement could be more easily coordinated with rouƟne work (see comments 
elsewhere in this response). 
 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
3. Service Line 
Replacement 
Rate 
 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
7 
 
EPA also seeks comment on whether systems should be required to meet a minimum replacement rate 
in the ﬁrst three years aŌer the compliance date to give States an opportunity to enforce replacement 
rate progress sooner than three years aŌer the compliance date. 
 
Louisville Water envisions the iniƟal 3-year period as being necessary to conƟnue idenƟfying Unknowns, 
build resources and planning capacity, and conƟnue replacement of known lead and GRR private 
services lines. Louisville Water does not support a minimum replacement rate during this Ɵme period 
that is more stringent than the 10%/year 3-year rolling average; in fact, a required replacement rate 
lower than that would be preferred, providing ﬂexibility that allows for a lower replacement rate in the 
beginning of the 10-year period. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
3. Service Line 
Replacement 
Rate 
EPA also seeks comment on the complexity of the rate construct.
 
See previous comments. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
3. Service Line 
Replacement 
Rate 
EPA is taking comment on whether States, as a condiƟon of primacy, or EPA when it is directly 
implemenƟng the program, should be required to set iniƟal shortened deadlines by a certain 
Ɵmeframe, such as no later than 60 days aŌer the compliance date. 
 
No comment. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
3. Service Line 
Replacement 
Rate 
The overall approach and basis to oﬀer deferred service line replacement to systems with a high 
proporƟon of LSLs and GRR service lines in their distribuƟon system relaƟve to their total number of 
households served. EPA is requesƟng comment on its proposed threshold of 0.039 average annual 
number of replacements per household served, which is used to calculate the number of years that 
systems can defer. 
 
Louisville Water believes that there are other circumstances that will or could occur that will cause 
systems to not meet the ten-year replacement schedule with regard to private lead and GRR services 
lines. Louisville Water suggests that the agency include a provision in the rule that provides for any 
system to request an extension within the context of speciﬁed requirements. Otherwise, we predict that 
the agency and primacy agencies will be providing the same via local enforcement orders or consent 
decrees, which is generally onerous and lengthy and may erode public conﬁdence. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
2. Feasibility of 
Proposed 
Service Line 
Replacement 
Requirement 
and Deferrals  
Whether to require the State, as a condiƟon of primacy, to approve the use of the deferred deadline 
provision where the water system qualiﬁes for it and/or whether to require the State, as a condiƟon of 
primacy, to assess whether it would be feasible for a system to meet the 10-year deadline or a shorter 
deadline even if the system meets the regulatory criteria for the deferred deadline. 
 
No comment. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
2. Feasibility of 
Proposed 
Service Line 
Replacement 
Requirement 
and Deferrals 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
8 
 
Whether there are addiƟonal data on service line replacement rates achieved by systems in proacƟve 
programs (i.e., excluding programs that only replace service lines in coordinaƟon with main 
replacement or emergency repair). 
 
Louisville Water had removed all known uƟlity-owned lead service lines by 2020. Louisville Water has 
since been implemenƟng a subsidized private lead and GRR replace program in which Louisville Water 
reimburses the customer for the cost of replacement or acquires work authorizaƟon from the customer 
to have our contractor replace the private service line. Louisville Water’s approach involves several 
noƟﬁcaƟons including leƩers, postcards, phone calls (if contact info available) and canvassing door-to-
door with educaƟonal materials to leave behind. The 2023 Private LSL replacement staƟsƟcs indicate 
that we replaced 272 of ~60,000 pre-1950 unknown private service lines (~0.5%/year); replaced 272 of 
790 known private lead service lines (34%/year) and had documented refusals (3 aƩempts/3 methods) 
of 332/790 known Private LSL (42%). 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
 
The proposed use of a maximum threshold of 10,000 annual service line replacements for systems with 
atypically high numbers of LSLs and GRR service lines as well as seeking comment on the alternate 
threshold of 8,000 annual service line replacements. EPA is also seeking feedback on other thresholds 
and supporƟng data.  
 
Louisville Water believes that there are other circumstances that will or could occur that will cause 
systems to not meet the ten-year replacement schedule with regard to private lead and GRR services 
lines. Louisville Water suggests that the agency include a provision in the rule that provides for any 
system to request an extension within the context of speciﬁed requirements. Otherwise, we predict that 
the agency and primacy agencies will be providing the same via local enforcement orders or consent 
decrees, which is generally onerous and lengthy and may erode public conﬁdence. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
2. Feasibility of 
Proposed 
Service Line 
Replacement 
Requirement 
and Deferred 
Deadlines 
 
EPA is also seeking feedback on if there’s data available that would inform if the maximum threshold for 
annual service line replacement could increase aŌer ten years, such as if replacement rates could 
double. 
 
No comment. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
2. Feasibility of 
Proposed 
Service Line 
Replacement 
Requirement 
and Deferred 
Deadlines 
 
Whether systems conducƟng deferred service line replacement should be subject to any addiƟonal 
requirements beyond those for systems that are not replacing service lines in accordance with a 
deferred deadline. 
 
No comment. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
2. Feasibility of 
Proposed 
Service Line 
Replacement 
Requirement 
and Deferred 
Deadlines 
 
The requirement for systems to install a dielectric coupling when conducƟng a parƟal replacement of an 
LSL or GRR to separate the remaining LSL or GRR service line and the replaced service line unless the 
replaced service line is made of plasƟc and other recommended risk miƟgaƟon acƟviƟes. 
 
Louisville Water supports this requirement. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
6. Risk 
MiƟgaƟon 
AcƟviƟes to 
Reduce Lead 
Exposures 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
9 
 
The proposed requirement to ban parƟal lead and GRR service line replacement unless it is conducted 
in accordance with emergency or planned infrastructure work (excluding planned infrastructure work 
solely for the purposes of replacing lead and GRR service lines as part of a service line replacement 
program). 
 
Louisville Water supports ﬂexibility to do parƟal replacements for planned infrastructure projects and 
emergency repairs. Louisville Water opposes prohibiƟons on parƟal SL replacement – water systems 
need ﬂexibility for parƟal replacements. UƟliƟes recognize that best pracƟce is to conduct full 
replacements, when possible, but need ﬂexibility to do parƟal replacements when full replacement is 
not feasible. CoordinaƟng SL replacements with main replacements is already challenging with the new 
10-year Ɵmeline. ProhibiƟng parƟal replacements will only reduce the ability for coordinaƟon to occur 
and increase costs. In addiƟon, there are other requirements that ensure the risk associated with 
parƟally-replaced SLs will be miƟgated, (e.g., dielectric couplings, ﬂushing and risk miƟgaƟon 
requirements; etc.) and will be replaced eventually.  
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
4. Scope of 
Mandatory 
Service Line 
Replacement 
Requirement 
EPA is seeking comment on whether parƟal service line replacement should be prohibited during 
“planned infrastructure work” or with certain types of planned infrastructure work. 
 
See previous comments. Louisville Water supports ﬂexibility to do parƟal replacements for planned 
infrastructure projects.  
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
4. Scope of 
Mandatory 
Service Line 
Replacement 
Requirement 
The ability of the market to correct for potenƟal shortages in workers and materials to conduct service 
line replacement, as well to provide suﬃcient quanƟƟes of ﬁlters to comply with the service line 
replacement and other relevant provisions in the proposal. 
 
Louisville Water has deﬁnite concerns with workforce and material availability, and parƟcularly the 
availability of pitcher ﬁlters. Louisville Water believes the market will correct but has concerns as to the 
Ɵming of the market correcƟon relaƟve to compliance obligaƟons. 
 
N.B. Louisville Water does not support the proposed requirement to provide pitcher ﬁlters to all 
customers in the event of three consecuƟve acƟon level exceedances. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
2. Feasibility of 
Proposed 
Service Line 
Replacement 
Requirement 
and Deferred 
Deadlines 
 
The extent to which property owner consent, if required by State or local law or water tariﬀ agreement, 
might complicate full service line replacement and whether there are addiƟonal measures EPA can take 
to facilitate access through the LCRI. 
 
Louisville Water believes EPA’s proposal that a PWS having “access” to private property is equivalent to 
having “control” does not comport with the SDWA (see above). Water systems as described in SDWA do 
not include piping not owned by the water system, even when actual owners use their “control” to 
grant “access” to water systems. Property owner consent is necessary and naturally delays and 
complicates full service-line replacement in most circumstances. Louisville Water recognizes that the 
SDWA does not allow regulaƟon of private property outside of public water systems and “control” 
cannot be equated with “access.” EPA’s proposed deﬁniƟon is not supported by the statutory text. --The 
SDWA regulates public water systems but does not provide EPA authority to regulate other enƟƟes, 
such as businesses, landlords, or private residences. Similarly, it does not give EPA authority over private 
property or other persons, and therefore cannot be used to compel removal of lead in private lines or 
plumbing ﬁxtures that are private property. By requiring public water systems to inventory and conduct 
LSR replacements on property that is not part of the public water system, the LCRI exceeds the scope of 
EPA’s authority under the SDWA and is therefore contrary to law. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
5. Water 
System Access 
to Full Service 
Line 
 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
10 
 
EPA should clarify expectaƟons and provide guidance to water uƟliƟes regarding tenant/owner 
consideraƟons.  For example, what does a uƟlity do when a property owner agrees to replace the 
customer-owned porƟon of the service line, but tenant does not allow access to the property to 
coordinate replacement. Conversely, how does a uƟlity support a tenant whose landlord/property 
owner does not agree to the replacement of privately-owned SL materials? 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
5. Water 
System Access 
to Full SL 
 
IX. Request for Comment Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan
EPA is proposing a threshold of systems serving greater than 50,000 persons to host the inventory and 
plan online, which is the required threshold under the LCRR. EPA is seeking comment on the size 
threshold at which systems must host their publicly accessible inventory, inventory summary data, 
replacement summary data, and service line replacement plan online, and whether it should be 
lowered relaƟve to the LCRR requirements. 
 
Louisville Water views the proposed requirement as reasonable. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
7. Service Line 
Replacement 
Plan 
 
D. Service Line 
Inventory 
EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of non-lead service lines in their 
inventory that were categorized using methods other than records review or visual inspecƟon of at least 
two points along the line. EPA is requesƟng comment on the number of validaƟons required, the 
proposed 95 percent conﬁdence level approach used to develop the number of validaƟons required, the 
criteria for which methods used to categorize non-lead service lines should be included in the validaƟon 
pool (including whether non-lead lines categorized based on records should be subject to validaƟon), 
and the seven-year Ɵmeline for systems on a 10-year replacement deadline to complete the validaƟon 
requirements. 
 
Louisville Water supports using this method to validate non-lead service lines, however we would not 
support validaƟng non-lead service lines that were idenƟﬁed as non-lead by records. 
D. Service Line 
Inventory 
2. Inventory 
ValidaƟon 
Requirements 
Comment on establishing a deadline for systems to idenƟfy all unknown service lines prior to their 
service line replacement deadlines. 
 
Louisville Water recognizes that it will take years to idenƟfy private unknowns SLs, making it less feasible 
to plan and conduct full LSL/GRR replacement within the same Ɵme period.  
Louisville Water supports decoupling idenƟﬁcaƟon of unknowns from the replacement of LSLs/GRRs. 
The agency should consider developing a separate Ɵmeline for Unknown idenƟﬁcaƟon with a reality-
based ﬁnd and ﬁx Ɵmeline requirement. Requiring a reality-based replacement rate based on known 
Lead Service Lines and GRR is appropriate. Unknowns and refusals should be removed from the 
replacement rate calculaƟon. EPA should also allow ﬂexibility for staƟsƟcal methods and predicƟve 
modeling. 
40 CFR 
141.84(c) 
FR Preamble 
p. 84934  
 
Comment on a requirement for systems to update their service line replacement plans if there are any 
changes, such as changes to laws and policies applicable to full service line replacement. 
 
Replacement Plan is already updated annually; Louisville Water does not support any addiƟonal 
requirements. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
7. Service Line 
Replacement 
Plan 
IX. Request for Comment
Public EducaƟon 
Whether the types and Ɵming of outreach acƟviƟes proposed for systems failing to meet the mandatory 
service line replacement rate are appropriate and whether other acƟviƟes should be considered. 
 
Louisville Water suggests that in lieu of including alternate educaƟon and outreach acƟviƟes, the agency 
could provide a general list of approved methods for public educaƟon that systems can easily refer back 
to that meets the requirements for all. 
H. Public 
EducaƟon 
2. Service Line 
Related 
Outreach 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
11 
 
Whether EPA should require systems to annually noƟfy consumers if they are served by a lead 
connector, in addiƟon to noƟﬁcaƟons for sites with lead, GRR, or lead status unknown service lines. 
 
Most water systems have few to no records of lead connectors. Given this lack of data and because 
connectors are already required to be replaced when encountered, Louisville Water does not see the 
added beneﬁt of including lead connectors in the inventory. The inventory may be misleading when 
informaƟon about lead connectors is absent (due to lack of records), in cases where lead connectors are 
actually in the distribuƟon system. Public communicaƟon of this informaƟon will be confusing and/or 
misleading. 
H. Public 
EducaƟon 
2. Service Line 
Related 
Outreach 
Whether EPA should require addiƟonal public educaƟon requirements to further encourage swiŌ 
service line replacement faster than the 10-year replacement deadline. For example, should water 
systems that have LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines ﬁve years aŌer the compliance date 
for the LCRI be required to increase the frequency of the noƟﬁcaƟon of service line materials from 
annual to once every six months? 
H. Public 
EducaƟon 
2. Service Line 
Related 
Outreach 
IX. Request for Comment
ReporƟng and Recordkeeping 
EPA is requesƟng comments on the expansion of the inventory reporƟng to include lead connectors and 
non-lead service lines. 
 
Most water systems have few to no records of lead connectors. Given this lack of data and because 
connectors are already required to be replaced when encountered, Louisville Water does not see the 
added beneﬁt of including lead connectors in the inventory. The inventory may be misleading when 
informaƟon about lead connectors is absent (due to lack of records), in cases where lead connectors are 
actually in the distribuƟon system. Public communicaƟon of this informaƟon will be confusing and/or 
misleading. 
K. ReporƟng 
and 
Recordkeeping
1. System 
ReporƟng 
Requirements 
EPA is requesƟng comment on whether States should be required to maintain records related to 
distribuƟon system and site assessments conducted by water systems. 
 
No comment. 
K. ReporƟng 
and 
Recordkeeping
2. State 
Recordkeeping 
Requirements 
IX. Request for Comment
Compliance Dates 
Whether it is pracƟcable for water systems to implement noƟﬁcaƟon and risk miƟgaƟon provisions aŌer 
full and parƟal service line replacement (§ 141.84(h)), noƟﬁcaƟon of a service line disturbance (§ 
141.85(g)), and associated reporƟng requirements (§141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) upon the eﬀecƟve date of 
the LCRI. 
 
Louisville Water believes this could be an area for early implementaƟon by uƟliƟes that have the 
capacity to do so but should not be required. 
Whether earlier alternaƟve compliance dates for LCRI are pracƟcable such that water systems transiƟon 
directly from LCR to LCRI in less than three years (i.e., one or two years) based on the assumpƟon that 
water systems would comply with the LCR unƟl the LCRI compliance date. 
 
No. While Louisville Water believes early implementaƟon is important for program development, we do 
not support early compliance dates.  

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
12 
 
Whether there are other LCRR provisions besides the iniƟal inventory and noƟﬁcaƟons of service line 
material for which the October 16, 2024, compliance date should be retained. 
 
Louisville Water supports the ﬂexibility for early tap sampling and school sampling but would not 
support making these a requirement. Louisville Water does not support requiring earlier 
implementaƟon in other parts of the rule. 
IX. Request for Comment
DeﬁniƟons 
EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed deﬁniƟons, and speciﬁcally the following: b. EPA 
is proposing to deﬁne a two-foot maximum length of connectors. EPA proposes that “connectors” that 
exceed two feet in length be treated as a service line. EPA is requesƟng comment on the deﬁned length 
of a connector. 
 
Louisville Water has no records of connector materials. Connector materials are generally deﬁned in our 
data systems by their locaƟon, not their length. Since connectors are required to be replaced when 
encountered, Louisville Water doesn’t see the value or the pracƟcality of documenƟng these materials. 
L. Other 
Proposed 
Revisions to 40 
CFR Part 141 
3. DeﬁniƟons  
QuesƟons from within Preamble
LocaƟon in 
Preamble 
A system’s exisƟng authority to access the service line and complete the full service line replacement 
might provide the system with the legal authority to conduct the service line replacement over the 
objecƟon of the property owner or resident. However, as some stakeholders noted, requiring service 
line replacement at properƟes where customers object to their replacement could create potenƟal 
safety concerns for uƟlity staﬀ. EPA is seeking comment on whether the proposed LCRI should either 
allow systems to treat those service lines as not under the control of the system and forego 
replacement of the lines or require systems to conduct full service line replacement in situaƟons where 
the system has legal access to conduct the full replacement, but property owners or residents deny 
physical access. 
 
Louisville Water recognizes that the SDWA does not allow regulaƟon of private property outside of 
public water systems and “control” cannot be equated with “access.” EPA’s proposed deﬁniƟon is not 
supported by the statutory text. --The SDWA regulates public water systems but does not provide EPA 
authority to regulate other enƟƟes, such as businesses, landlords, or private residences. Similarly, it 
does not give EPA authority over private property or other persons, and therefore cannot be used to 
compel removal of lead in private lines or plumbing ﬁxtures that are private property. By requiring 
public water systems to inventory and conduct LSR replacements on property that is not part of the 
public water system, the LCRI exceeds the scope of EPA’s authority under the SDWA and is therefore 
contrary to law. 
B. Service Line 
Replacement 
5. Water 
System Access 
to Full Service 
Line 
 
A deadline for inventory compleƟon that precedes the deadline for mandatory service line replacement 
could reduce the possibility of non-compliance with the replacement deadline, but it would not have 
the advantages of a consolidated deadline as described above. EPA seeks comment on its raƟonale for 
the consolidated deadline approach as compared to an earlier deadline for idenƟfying unknown service 
lines. 
 
See previous comments on replacement rates. Louisville Water supports a staggered Ɵmeframe for 
unknown idenƟﬁcaƟon and lead service-line replacement to reduce the possibility of non-compliance.  
D. Service Line 
Inventory 
1. Timeline to 
IdenƟfy All Unknown 
Service Lines 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
13 
 
While water systems are required to noƟfy consumers of disturbances resulƟng from water main 
replacement under these proposed requirements, EPA is also requesƟng comment on whether to 
require distribuƟon of ﬁlters for this type of disturbance. 
 
AƩempts to complete lead risk communicaƟon for main breaks or main replacement work, in 
conjuncƟon with other required noƟﬁcaƟons for main breaks and boil water advisories has resulted in 
customer confusion, especially criƟcal/sensiƟve customers (e.g., nursing homes, hospitals, medical 
faciliƟes, etc.) and commercial businesses (e.g., hotels, restaurants, etc.). We suggest that when 
communicaƟon emphasis needs to be on acute microbial risks that introducing other noƟﬁcaƟon 
requirements and pitcher ﬁlters is unnecessary and confusing to the customer.  
H. Public 
EducaƟon 
2. Service Line 
Related 
Outreach 
 
 
AddiƟonal Comments
LocaƟon in 
Preamble 
EPA should develop guidance on how to proceed strategically with next wave of voluntary monitoring, 
aŌer compleƟon of required monitoring. Monitoring plans should include samples from diﬀerent 
outlets, comprehensive sampling for faciliƟes with lead detecƟon or premise plumbing issues, as well as 
post-remediaƟon sampling.  
 
EPA should clarify requirements related to the Ɵming between sample collecƟon and communicaƟon to 
schools. With increased lab volume, there will be longer delays of turnaround Ɵmes for sample results. 
Following method hold Ɵmes, lab results may not be provided unƟl 6 months aŌer samples are 
collected. Water systems will likely stagger sampling and analysis throughout the year to ease the 
administraƟve burden and be able to meet a 30 day noƟﬁcaƟon cycle to customers upon receiving 
results from the laboratory (similar to Ɵer sampling). EPA should give consideraƟon to this lag when 
determining compliance reporƟng deadlines.  
 
EPA should make federal grants available directly to the EducaƟon and Health departments (not of 
water systems) as those departments will be working with the schools and childcare faciliƟes to conduct 
remediaƟon. 
 
Whether there are addiƟonal ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the regulatory approach used to
 
Louisville Water suggests seƫng a single compliance date by which water systems will report 
cerƟﬁcaƟon requirements to primacy agencies. The agency should consider creaƟng an EPA template 
for water systems that lists the cerƟﬁcaƟon requirements and all other annual monitoring, public 
communicaƟon, and reporƟng requirements. The agency should simplify data management 
requirements and provide a data management system that can be used by both states and uƟliƟes. 
Simplify customer educaƟon requirements so water systems can send fewer annual communicaƟons to 
customers.   
FR p. 85035
Whether it is pracƟcable for water systems to implement noƟﬁcaƟon and risk miƟgaƟon provisions aŌer 
full and parƟal service line replacement (§ 141.84(h)), noƟﬁcaƟon of a service line disturbance (§ 
141.85(g)), and associated reporƟng requirements (§141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) upon the eﬀecƟve date of 
the LCRI. 
 
Risk miƟgaƟon: feasibility of suﬃcient ﬁlters being available and storing them. DistribuƟon-only systems 
especially may be stretched to meet this requirement. The agency should consider providing alternaƟve 
methods to comply other than just providing ﬁlters. Louisville Water suggests that ﬁlters should be 
oﬀered to customers, but not provided unless customer wants it (opƟonal use). 
FiltraƟon aŌer 3 ALEs: Louisville Water recommends providing ﬁlters only to buildings with LSLs or 
GRRs, not to enƟre community. The service line inventory processes, new Ɵers, addiƟonal O  CCT 
requirements and assessments, and other requirements in LCRR/ proposed LCRI reduce many risks to 
FR p. 85038

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
14 
 
consumers related to lead in drinking water, making the requirement to provide ﬁlters to all consumers 
unnecessary and burdensome/expensive to water systems.  
Lab capacity to process samples – short Ɵme frames and higher sample numbers reduce the ability of 
water systems to do addiƟonal, opƟonal sampling such as follow-ups aŌer remediaƟon, addiƟonal 
school/childcare samples (beyond the 5 or 2 minimum), etc. Over-stressed resources may limit the 
ability to provide expected customer service. 
 
Louisville Water anƟcipates a sample boƩle shortage due to resin shortages. 
40 CFR 
141.85(j)(2) 
NoƟﬁcaƟon to consumers about standard or reduced monitoring results: It is, in many if not most 
scenarios to provide lab results to customers within the calendar days. (Frank opinion: this is one area 
where the agency clearly needs to gives itself a reality check.) Water systems need at least two weeks, 
because 1) Customers do not consistently provide email addresses or phone numbers and water 
systems need to rely on paper mail, and 2) water systems will be increasingly reliant on consultants and 
partners to fulﬁll the administraƟve requirements of this rule – these consultants must send the results 
for mulƟple systems each sampling period and would need more Ɵme. Importantly, as much as three to 
six months may pass between sample collecƟon and results noƟﬁcaƟon from the lab to the water 
system. To unnecessarily expedite communicaƟon of results to the customer has minimal risk-reducƟon 
beneﬁt. 
40 CFR 141.86
Regarding the requirement to contact homeowners within six months aŌer change in ownership, the 
agency should be aware that water systems do not have an easy way to idenƟfy or track changes of 
ownership. The Ɵmeframe should be stated that within six months of the system being aware of a 
change in ownership…. 
40 CFR 
141.85(d)(2) 
Louisville Water emphasizes that lead or galvanized premise plumbing cannot be used as to determine
sampling Ɵer level because systems have neither access or control of this infrastructure and this 
requirement does not comport with the text of the SDWA. In addiƟon, this informaƟon is not rouƟnely 
collected, and hasn’t been collected as part of the iniƟal SL inventory. Usually, only the customer or 
their plumber has access to this informaƟon. Louisville Water maintains that the agency must remove 
any provisions in the rule related to access to or control of premise plumbing.  
40 CFR 
141.86(d)(2)(ii)
Louisville Water suggests the agency provide ﬂexibility to use data from previous CCT studies. Give state 
discreƟon re: dates for grandfathered data. ConƟnue to allow opportuniƟes for uƟliƟes to uƟlize 
previous CCT study data. 
40 CFR 141.87 
preamble 
Whether the proposed requirements of the rule are enforceable and promote compliance without the 
need for State or Federal enforcement acƟon. EPA also solicits comments on ways the rule could be 
modiﬁed to beƩer promote compliance. 
Louisville Water suggests that water systems need more Ɵme for planning and preparaƟon, especially 
for those systems that have a large number of replacements. Systems and the State need Ɵme to 
develop administraƟve and data management systems. Labs need Ɵme to build capacity (The ﬁrst year 
alone will require at least 4-8x more samples, plus samples collected from schools and childcare 
systems. Kentucky has 731 public elementary schools and 1756 licensed childcare faciliƟes – sampling 
20% of those results in 731 samples from schools and 702 samples from childcare centers to be tested 
in the ﬁrst year).  Louisville Water suggests the agency provide a waiver or extended Ɵme when 
replacing mains at the same Ɵme. Replacing mains and SLs at the same Ɵme is much less expensive but 
is not feasible in a 10-year Ɵmeframe. The agency may consider incenƟvizing concurrent idenƟﬁcaƟon 
and replacement programs, so the programs can complement each other rather than compete for 
resources.  
 
40 CFR 141.82
There needs to be more ﬂexibility in choosing tap sampling locaƟons. As more and more LSLs are 
replaced, it will become diﬃcult for water systems to gain access to Tier 1 or Tier 2 tap sampling sites. 
Louisville Water requests ﬂexibility in choosing tap sampling sites so that water systems can sample at 
lower Ɵer sites when it is infeasible to sample at the higher Ɵer sites.  
FR Preamble; 
general 
maƩers; p. 
85035 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
15 
 
Louisville Water also requests that there be ﬂexibility in selecƟng sample sites within the same Ɵer, and 
moving a sample site when the original site’s homeowner refuses to collect the sample (or has not 
responded to sampling request). We suggest the agency provide ﬂexibility to use any sample sites 
within the pool (as long as they are of the same Ɵer, with excepƟons requested above). 
If there are three ALEs within a 5-year period, Louisville Water recommends allowing water systems that 
then have two consecuƟve monitoring periods with no ALEs to have a reducƟon in requirements, 
including the provision requiring the system to provide ﬁlters to customers. 
 
N.B. Louisville Water does not support the proposed requirement to provide pitcher ﬁlters to all 
customers in the event of three consecuƟve acƟon level exceedances. 
40 CFR 
141.86(b) 
Louisville Water suggests the agency consider phasing in / staggering the sampling protocol for iniƟal 
compliance based on water system populaƟon size. Large systems ﬁrst, then medium systems, then 
small systems.  
Corrosion Control Treatment 
When the CCT requirements of the LCRI are triggered, there is no pathway for compliance with the LCRI 
for consecutive systems.  The agency should be aware that a distribution system operator’s license 
does not provide for the operator to oversee chemical treatment in the distribution system. 
SecƟon of 
LCRI or 
Federal 
Register 
By only specifying a MINIMUM stagnaƟon period for compliance sampling, this leaves the possibility of 
customers pulling rouƟne samples from faucets that have not been used for months, possibly pushing a 
uƟlity into unnecessary CCT/OCCT.  Louisville Water proposes that EPA align the sampling stagnaƟon 
protocol for rouƟne monitoring with the 3Ts guidance: minimum 6 or 8 hour stagnaƟon with a 
maximum of 18 hours.  We have seen several examples of homeowners deliberately sampling from a 
seldom-used bathroom sink just to “see how bad it is” and would like for these samples to not 
negaƟvely aﬀect compliance for the enƟre system, especially given the expense and labor involved in 
OCCT/CCT.  A maximum stagnaƟon period would alleviate this as an issue. 
40 CFR 141.82 
(general) 
Louisville Water agrees with EPA’s determinaƟon that CCT is feasible, aﬀordable and prevents known or 
anƟcipated adverse health eﬀects to the extent feasible.  However, Louisville Water suggests that EPA 
acknowledge that there are other methods for CCT beyond those listed in the LCRI (alkalinity/pH 
adjustment and addiƟon of corrosion inhibitors) such as chloride-to-sulfate mass raƟo (CSMR) 
adjustment. It is well established that the CSMR has a signiﬁcant impact on lead corrosion. A higher 
CSMR under a certain range can dramaƟcally increase lead leaching especially under the condiƟons of 
galvanic corrosion, which is ubiquitous in premise plumbing systems.  Some water systems have used 
the reducƟon of CSMR (e.g., switching from a chloride-based coagulant to a sulfate-based coagulant) to 
successfully enhance their OCCT and reduce lead levels in their LCR samples.  Louisville Water believes 
that the inclusion of CSMR reducƟon as a CCT opƟon could provide water systems with more 
alternaƟves for cost-eﬀecƟve lead corrosion reducƟon with minimal impacts on exisƟng treatment and 
simultaneous compliance needs. 
 
Louisville Water also suggests that EPA acknowledge that all impacts and costs, speciﬁcally for 
phosphate-based corrosion inhibitors, are not borne by the water system.  There are documented 
impacts to wastewater treatment/water recovery faciliƟes as well, and deleterious impacts to the water 
quality in receiving streams and waters, speciﬁcally super-nutriﬁcaƟon. 
40 CFR 
141.86(b)(1)  
Louisville Water agrees with EPA’s approach to re-opƟmizaƟon in the proposed LCRI. There is no need to 
automaƟcally require re-opƟmizaƟon again when the results would likely be the same.  However, 
Louisville Water does suggest that EPA provide clariﬁcaƟon on when re-opƟmizaƟon will be required.  
40 CFR 
141.82(c),  
FR Preamble 
SecƟon E.1. 

This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
16 
 
The current proposal places a signiﬁcant burden on the States to make that determinaƟon, which in 
turn provides uncertainty to the water systems.   
 
Further, when water quality parameters are opƟmized, acƟon level exceedances are potenƟally due to 
sampling error by homeowners or other concerns including laboratory issues. This is especially 
important in small or medium sized systems where the diﬀerence in exceeding acƟon levels can be 
caused by a small number of homeowners or a minor exceedance. To re-emphasize a previous 
comment, consecuƟve systems in Kentucky are unable to re-opƟmize. 
p. 85036
Louisville Water agrees with giving systems the ﬂexibility to delay OCCT pending replacement of all LSLs 
and GRR service lines within the ﬁrst 5 years (20% per year) aŌer the compliance deadline.  
FR Preamble 
SecƟon E.1. 
The treatment recommendaƟon and CCT study process can take mulƟple years to complete. For 
systems with exisƟng corrosion control, the system may be able to alter the exisƟng treatment (e.g., 
increase pH and/or orthophosphate dose) without a new CCT study on a much faster Ɵmeframe rather 
than waiƟng for study results that may recommend that same change. EPA is requesƟng comment on 
whether there are situaƟons and/or condiƟons where exisƟng treatment modiﬁcaƟons may achieve 
similar lead reducƟons rather than delaying new treatment for two and-a-half years while a study is 
underway. 
 
Louisville Water agrees that there are situaƟons and/or condiƟons where exisƟng treatment 
modiﬁcaƟons may achieve similar lead reducƟons rather than delaying new treatment for two-and-a-
half years while a study is underway.  Treatment plant operators have been using their professional 
judgment and experience to make these decisions for years. 
FR Preamble 
SecƟon E.1. 
40 CFR 
141.82(f)

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0942 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
COMMENTS ON THE PROPOSED LEAD & COPPER RULE IMPROVEMENTS 
MAYOR DANENE SORACE | CITY OF LANCASTR, PENNSYLVANIA 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. The 
City of Lancaster PA submits the following comments.  
  
The City of Lancaster is comprised of approximately 58,000 people within 7.3 square miles. More than 
¾ of the city’s census tracks have been designated as overburdened and underserved according to the 
Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool.  
  
The City of Lancaster owns and operates two water treatment plants serving approximately 58,000 
people in the city and 62,000 outside its municipal boundaries. Additionally, the city operates a 
wastewater treatment facility that is currently under an EPA consent decree for combined sewer 
overflows. City rate payers pay the highest property taxes and pay the only stormwater fee in the 
county. Additionally, the largest exposure to lead in the city is paint.   
 
The City is among the top ten cities for the highest rates of childhood lead poisoning in Pennsylvania, 
primarily due to our aged housing stock (over 80% of the homes in Lancaster City were built before 
1978) and exposure to lead paint. On September 26, 2019, the City of was awarded a $9.1 million Lead 
Hazard Reduction Grant through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), plus 
an additional $600,000 of Healthy Homes supplemental funding. The Lead Hazard Reduction Grant will 
systematically make 710 housing units lead safe in Lancaster city. The Healthy Homes supplemental 
funding will enable the City to address other health hazards such as radon, mold and tripping hazards 
in 120 homes. Matching funds from the City and property owners bring the total funding to $11.1 
million. 
 
The focus area for the grant is four census tracts (9, 10, 14, and 147) south of King Street where 16,000 
residents live. The majority of houses in the area were built prior to 1940, many of which have lead-
based paint present. These census tracts are among the highest for children with elevated blood lead 
levels in the city. Data from the PA Department of Health indicates that between 2015-2018, 18.3% of 
children under the age of six who resided within those four census tracts and were tested for lead had 
elevated blood lead levels (over 5 μg/dL).  
 
In April 2022, City Council adopted an ordinance to enhance lead safety protections in rental housing 
and childcare facilities. This ordinance requires all rental properties and childcare facilities built before 
1978 to meet lead safety requirements every two to four years. The City has strengthened its support 
of children with elevated blood lead level (EBLL) cases by requiring homeowners and landlords to more 
quickly respond to potential exposure to lead in homes and giving City Health Officers more tools to 
address exposure. These changes went into effect in January 2023. The City is committed to improving 
the health of its youngest citizens.  
 
 
 
 

 
2 
 
On the water side, we have been methodically removing lead laterals throughout the city’s water 
distribution system – only 1% of City lead lines remain (519) and we are committed to removing these 
as expeditiously and cost effectively as possible while also maintaining our corrosion control program.  
Our comments focus on the practicality of the regulations, the affordability, and the fact that the lead 
that is poisoning our children is predominately found in paint.  
 
1. Timeline  
The reduced time period to replace all lead lines in ten years will place a financial burden on cities such 
as Lancaster. The timeline does not factor in existing corrosion control, historical efforts to eliminate 
lead lines, and water quality. The City has provided corrosion control since April 1, 1997, and has 
replaced at least 274 water laterals dating back to 2012, when we started tracking replacements in an 
electronic database. However, Lancaster’s replacement efforts started after the lead ban of 1991. We 
are extremely proud that our water quality has tested under the 15 ppb threshold and data indicates 
that we will be under the proposed 10 ppb limit. Water providers should be given more time if water 
quality is in compliance and providers have shown a strong track record of eliminating lead pipes.  
 
2. Affordability  
The City’s water distribution system is comprised of city customers and outside city customers with 
median incomes of 60,000 and 80,000 respectively. Within our Water Bureau, the City is in the midst of 
generational upgrades to our distribution system, namely a 42” main, circa 1956, that needs to be 
replaced at an estimated cost of $44 million in addition to replacement of approximately 1.5 miles of 
transite pipe annually, at an approximate cost of $2 million a year. Moreover, the City will be replacing 
plant assets such as pumps, membranes, and tanks as part of its capital plan over the next 20 years. 
Maintaining water infrastructure is extremely capital intensive, and providing water at an affordable 
rate to the community is harder to do each year, with increasing regulations and little grant funds.  
 
Our water fund current debt burden is now 34% of the operating budget and 15% of its inside city 
accounts are in delinquent status. Adding the unknowns into the replacement pool continues to add to 
that debt burden, even though the replacement pool can be updated annually. Targeting unknowns 
will reduce the number of lines to replace, but identifying the unknowns will take significant resources 
too.  
 
The Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission regulations already place an undue burden on the City 
requiring that the customer line also be replaced. These costs can be recovered in the rate setting 
process. Treating inside City customers different than outside suburban customers is not equitable, so 
the City will also be replacing the customer side within the City limits. However, most City rate payers 
cannot afford increased rates in the Justice 40 areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
3 
 
3. Inventory  
The City has deployed an online form for customers to self-identify and take a picture of their line. To 
date 7,365 customers have responded. Of these responses, 600 customers have asked for help and 
1,200 customers identified lead or galvanized on their side. These customers all must be verified too. 
The City does not believe that all of the customers who identified lead service lines are lead as data has 
shown customers taking pictures of lines that are not water service and have copper lines that they 
think are lead. But this will increase the costs of replacement too.  
 
For inside city customers, we have also deployed codes and housing inspectors to collect data from 
approximately 2,950 properties by October during their systematic inspections. In total, we expect 
these efforts to yield information for about 5.9% of customers in our water distribution service area. To 
gather data for the remainder of homes, we will have to hire staff or contract with a third party to 
collect data. Moreover, PA DEP also requires two forms of identification for the service line, including 
the customers’ side.   
 
The City has already contracted with Trinnix to use machine learning as a second form of identification. 
With 49,763 customers and about 9,706 lines installed after the January 6, 1991, lead ban, there still 
will be significant unknowns on the customer side. Homes will have to be entered or potholing 
conducted on both sides to identify the unknowns, and to correct the pictures of customers who 
identified the wrong line. Potholing costs about $750 per hole. If we have a 20% response rate for 
customer pictures, and remove the lines installed after the lead ban and homes from code and housing 
inspections, the City could still have 30,000 homes to pothole. That is an expense of $22.5 million with 
no lead lines replaced if potholing is used. The City is currently evaluating costs to hire consultants to 
enter homes, provided permission is granted. If a customer refuses entry, then potholing is a last 
resort.   
 
4. Inventory Validation  
The proposed requirement to validate non-lead lines by year seven is excessive. The City’s known lead 
lines are at 519 and we do not expect that number to climb exponentially when the inventory on the 
customer side is done. The City has been replacing lead lines for years. If the City ends up with 48,000 
to 49,000 non-lead lines, the inventory will require another 381 inspections by potholing. If the City has 
to pothole to identify unknowns, it should not have to do more to verify the inventory. This will 
provide no additional value.   
 
5. Financing Lead Line Replacements  
Lancaster has availed itself of state revolving funds via PENNVEST on several occasions and we have 
benefited from low interest rates for our water and sewer projects. At PENNVEST’s direction, the City 
applied to replace 27 known City lead lines as well as any lead service lines of the property owner and 
determine the material of unknown lines in a subset of 379 properties in the City’s Jewels 
neighborhood in an effort to maximize grant dollars focused on overburdened and underserved areas 
in the city.  
 
 

 
4 
 
As part of the application, we also asked for funds to include lead line inventory of 115 lines of 
unknown material on both the City and the property owner’s side as a pilot. The City also intended to 
complete an inventory of the 238 copper lines on the property owner’s side and to replace any that 
were incorrectly identified. The City was directed to revise the application as PENNVEST was not able 
to use its funds for inventory upfront. We were told that we could inventory and then make an 
application to request reimbursement.   
  
After we revised our application to exclude funds for inventory, we were awarded a loan of $430,934 
and a grant of $441,406 an approximate 50% grant/50% loan funding solution, with the expectation 
that we would continue to apply for small areas throughout the city. (We estimate that we would need 
to submit at least 17 separate applications to PENNVEST to cover ¾ of the city that is EJ designated.) 
The City reluctantly turned down the funding because of the costs it would incur for this small 
borrowing, multiplied by 17. The incurred financing costs do not replace lead lines.  
 
We are planning to submit another application for lead line replacement for the entirety of the City’s 
overburdened and underserved census tracks, in an attempt to get better grant funding. However, 
PENNVEST has not specifically allocated funding or prioritized high need census tracks statewide. 
PENNVEST informed us that the lead line replacement program was oversubscribed in PA so we could 
not get 100% grant funding. Regardless of the promises of federal funding to replace lead lines, it is not 
fully funded and ultimately will impact our low- and moderate -income households, at about the same 
time when we will be increasing rates to pay for a new distribution transmission main, transite 
replacement, as well as future mandates related to PFOA/PFAS.   
 
In June of 2023, the City also attempted to apply for a $9 million in CDBG grant funding through HUD 
to replace any lead lines in the City’s low-income census tracks. The City was not eligible for these 
funds because we were told that we had to verify the income level of each individual household in the 
tracks. We did not have this level of detail for each household, and we were advised that we would not 
be grant eligible. The City is estimating that it will spend $14 million on its 519 known lead lines 
($27,000 each for both the City and the customer portion of the line). This does not include the 
significant effort and cost that we are incurring now to complete the inventory, and the funds needed 
to verify lines that customers have identified as lead.  
 
6. Compliance Monitoring  
The new regulations will cause increased monitoring costs. Again, there is no flexibility in evaluating 
lead data to determine if monitoring needs to increase. Increased monitoring needs to be driven by 
data.  
 
The proposed sampling requirements and customer requests increase under the new proposed 
regulations. The City would have to offer lead sampling for all lead lines and galvanized lines, and 
unknowns. Consideration should be given to remove the unknowns. Moreover, if the new action level 
of 10 ppb is exceeded, compliance sampling would have to be offered to all customers. 
 
 

 
5 
 
Under the new regulations, in 2028, if the action level of 10 ppb is exceeded, additional sampling must 
be offered which will strain operating budgets. In 2028, all systems will have semi-annual system lead 
sampling for two years. If we are under the action level for all four rounds, only then could we 
potentially go back to reduced monitoring. These additional requirements would also have to be 
initiated while starting lead sampling for all elementary schools and daycares in our system that must 
be completed within five years. All these samples will also be under the new 1st and 5th Liter sampling, 
which essentially means two lead samples for one location. Consideration should be given to the 
efficacy of the additional cost to benefit.  
  
7. Notifications and Outreach  
The proposed regulations place an undue burden on staff to provide results to customers in three 
calendar days. We propose this be amended to 5 business days. Please note that if a child tests positive 
for lead in the bloodstream, a five-business day notification is allowed by HUD.   
 
The public notifications are burdensome and will result in no lead reductions. The multiple 
notifications for routine work and even emergency work also place an undue burden on staff. In 
addition, the regulations need to be clear on the notifications required for these specific maintenance 
activities.  We will have to hire another staff member just to keep track of all of the notifications, 
including the requirement of contacting at risk customers. Water providers will now have to act as a 
public health agency to make all the contacts. This is not the role of public water. Moreover, the tier 
one notification in 24 hours is not realistic. Water providers will not have the resources to notify and 
mail customers in such a short time period. Again, this serves to set up the water provider for non-
compliance.  
 
Thank you for this opportunity to comment.  
  
Sincerely,  
 
Danene Sorace, Mayor  
City of Lancaster, Pennsylvania

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0782 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
AMERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION  
ORAL COMMENT  
at 
NATIONAL DRINKING WATER ADVISORY COUNCIL  
on the  
NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATIONS FOR LEAD AND COPPER: IMPROVEMENTS 
PROPOSED RULE  
January 31, 2024 
Good morning.  Thank you for the opportunity to speak to the Council.  My name is Steve Via. I would 
like to offer the following comments on behalf of the American Water Works Association (AWWA).   
AWWA’s members have a continuing interest in the provision of safe drinking water and in building on 
our success to-date reducing exposure to lead through drinking water.  AWWA shares EPA’s 
commitment to both effective use of corrosion control and reducing the remaining sources of lead in 
contact with drinking water.  AWWA supports the continued regulation of lead in drinking water 
through a treatment technique and supports the proactive replacement of lead service lines as an 
element of the treatment technique. 
AWWA is preparing comments on the proposed rule reflecting the experience of our members, 
including those with lead service line replacement programs that operate without substantial federal 
subsidies. AWWA would like to draw several recommendations from our review to the Council’s 
attention as it prepares its own recommendations to EPA:  
1. Service Line Inventory and Replacement – EPA should better focus rule requirements to realize 
risk reduction and simplify implementation by 
• 
Not penalizing water systems when property owners do not collaborate in service line 
replacement  
• 
Eliminating the proposed annual replacement rate as unnecessary and unnecessarily 
complicated to implement 
• 
Prioritizing replacement rather than overemphasizing potential misclassification of 
service line materials and administrative oversight 
2. Public Education – EPA should revise customer / occupant notifications to reflect practical 
implementation considerations by 
• 
Allowing use of modern electronic communication tools in lieu of written notification 
when possible 
• 
Clarifying and focusing notification requirements so that target audiences are reached 
and expectations for timely notification are feasible 
3. Compliance Monitoring – EPA should phase in the transition to new lead and copper compliance 
monitoring requirements by system size 

• 
Assuring states will be able to adequately administer compliance requires reducing the 
number of systems that will have to immediately transition to the new tap sample 
monitoring requirements. Implementation can be crafted to assure a smooth transition 
to a revised monitoring framework 
4. Reassess Feasibility – EPA should review the available data and consider more carefully the 
feasibility and risk reduction advantage sought through proposed rule requirements including 
the pace of service line replacement, lowering the action level, and provision of filters in the 
wake of any recurring lead action level exceedance 
5. Involve Other Federal Offices – Engage other federal offices to assure that determinants of 
success for the proposed requirements are in place 
• 
Internal Revenue Service – Clarify that publicly funded service line replacements are not 
taxable income for individual households 
• 
White House – Determine the feasibility of obtaining funding support necessary to 
alleviate the financial pressure associated with full lead service line replacement on 
individual households and community water systems.  EPA cannot assume current 
drinking water revolving loan funds are more than an initial start on the federal funding 
required for the cost of service line replacement envisioned in the proposed rule. 
Thank you for your attention and consideration. 
 
Who is AWWA 
The American Water Works Association (AWWA) is an international, nonprofit, scientific and educational 
society dedicated to providing total water solutions assuring the effective management of water. Founded 
in 1881, the Association is the largest organization of water supply professionals in the world. Our 
membership includes more than 4,000 utilities that supply roughly 80 percent of the nation's drinking 
water and treat almost half of the nation’s wastewater. Our 50,000-plus total membership represents the 
full spectrum of the water community: public water and wastewater systems, environmental advocates, 
scientists, academicians, and others who hold a genuine interest in water, our most important resource. 
AWWA unites the diverse water community to advance public health, safety, the economy, and the 
environment.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0954 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
Michael Goldberg 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water (Mail Code 4607M) 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest 
Washington, DC  20460 
Email: LCRI@epa.gov   
 
RE: 
US EPA’S Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
[Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801]  
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg: 
The Texas Chemistry Council (TCC) submits the following comments on EPA’s proposed rule for National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) (88 FR 84878, December 6, 2023, EPA Docket ID No. EPA-
HQ-OW-2022-0801), hereafter “Proposed Rule.”   
 
TCC is a statewide trade association of chemical manufacturers representing more than 60 member companies who own 
and operate over 200 manufacturing and research facilities across Texas. The business of chemistry provides employment 
for approximately 500,000 Texans and its products are the state’s top non-energy export with more than $50 billion in 
state exports annually to customers around the world. TCC’s member companies have industrial facilities throughout the 
United States, of which some are also registered Non-Transient Non-Community Public Water Systems (NTNCWSs).  Our 
membership is committed to the safety of our employees, including the protection of their health when consuming 
drinking water in the workplace.   
 
When assessing the requirements of the Proposed Rule and considering the competing priorities of the proposed PFAS 
regulations for Drinking Water, TCC echoes the comments of the American Petroleum Institute (API) and American 
Chemistry Council (ACC) in identifying the following opportunities for EPA to provide additional flexibility and clarity to 
NTNCWSs.  Specifically, TCC requests EPA allow the option for NTNCWSs to install point-of-use devices in lieu of lead 
service line (LSL) replacement for NTNCWSs and to provide bottled water as an alternative to pitcher filters or POU devices 
following disturbances.  Additionally, TCC requests that EPA provide clear and timely guidance to all PWSs, including 
NTNCWSs on expectations associated with the final rule and the definition of Service Line.  Finally, TCC argues that EPA 
has underestimated the cost burden to NTNCWSs, and TCC formally requests that EPA consider feedback on assumptions 
that EPA has made on NTNCWSs when considering compliance alternatives. 
 
TCC offers the recommendations in these comments to inform EPA’s consideration in advance of any future regulatory 
action and support the separate comments submitted to this docket from API and ACC.  The following points highlight key 
elements of our detailed comments: 
• 
EPA should allow Point-of-Use Devices in lieu of LSL replacement for NTNCWS that do not supply water to 
sensitive populations, such as schools or child-care facilities. 
• 
EPA should add alternative options and sample validation as an option for risk mitigation after disturbances for 
NTNCWSs. 

Comments of TCC on EPA Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations  
for Lead and Copper Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
Page 2 
 
• 
EPA should provide clear and timely guidance for industrial facility NTNCWSs. 
• 
EPA should clarify the definition of Service Line. 
• 
EPA’s assumptions result in an underestimated Cost Burden to NTNCWSs. 
• 
Sample Tiering based on Premise Plumbing presents undue burden to Public Water Systems. 
 
TCC’s specific comments are included below.  
 
1. EPA should allow Point-of-Use Devices in lieu of LSL replacement for NTNCWS that do not supply water to 
sensitive populations, such as schools or child-care facilities – The Proposed Rule contains Small System Flexibility 
provisions that allow NTNCWSs to leverage Point-of-Use (POU) systems in lieu of the corrosion control treatment 
requirements as described in the Proposed Rule § 141.93.  TCC echoes API and ACC’s appreciation of EPA’s 
inclusion of Small System Flexibility and encourages EPA to consider additional applications for flexibility. TCC 
proposes that EPA allow any NTNCWSs regardless of sizes that do not supply water to sensitive populations (e.g., 
schools or child-care facilities) the option to use POU devices as an alternative to conducting Lead Service Line 
Inventories or Lead Service Line Replacements on the portion of the service line onto which the POU is installed.  
This arrangement would allow NTNCWSs to outfit specific segments of their service lines with POU systems while 
replacing other lines if identified as LSLs. TCC echoes the comments of API and ACC that this additional flexibility 
would further EPA’s objectives of the proposed rule by addressing both service lines and premise plumbing as 
potential lead sources. 
 
The Proposed Rule was issued in the same year as the proposed per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (PFAS NPDWR).  The proposed PFAS NPDWR identified Granular 
Activated Carbon (GAC) and Reverse Osmosis (RO) amongst the possible treatment technologies capable of 
removing PFAS from drinking water.  GAC and RO are also identified and certifiable via NSF / ANSI standards1 for 
the removal of lead from drinking water.  Where a single solution can achieve removal of both PFAS and Lead, 
EPA should allow NTNCWSs the flexibility to use a single solution instead of both removing LSLs and adding 
treatment for PFAS.  
 
Under the Proposed Rule, systems must make annual updates to service line inventories, tracking both changes 
in service lines and connector materials and systems would be required to identify service lines of unknown 
materials.  TCC proposes PWSs that use POU devices be exempt from the requirement to identify the material of 
connectors and unknown service lines.  A resulting LSL inventory would thus identify either the service line 
material or the presence of a POU system.  Expanding flexibility for NTNCWS compliance with the Proposed Rule 
will maintain alignment with EPA’s goals in the Proposed Rule of protection of human health and transparency to 
the NTNCWS water consumers. 
 
2. EPA should add alternative options and sample validation as an option for risk mitigation after disturbances for 
NTNCWSs – EPA is maintaining the Lead and Copper Rule Revision (LCRR) requirement that water systems provide 
pitcher filters or point-of-use devices for six months following partial and full LSL replacement, replacement of a 
lead connector, and other scenarios.  At NTNCWSs that serve at workplace, employers may find it feasible to 
supply employees with bottled water as an alternative to pitcher filters or POU devices.  Some workplace 
 
1 The Proposed Rule’s provisions for use of a POU device specify that the device must be independently certified by a third party to 
meet the American National Standards Institute standard applicable to the specific type of POU unit to reduce lead in drinking water.  
EPAs’ Consumer Tool for Identifying Point of Use (POU) Drinking Water Filters Certified to Reduce Lead specifies NSF/ANSI Standard 
53. 

Comments of TCC on EPA Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations  
for Lead and Copper Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
Page 3 
 
environments are staged with water coolers that contain large (e.g., 5 gallon) bottles of water, in which case 
allowing continued use of that water supply would prevent waste of pitcher filters that would not be used. API 
requests that the flexibility to use bottled water be added for NTNCWSs in addition to the options of providing 
pitcher filters or POU devices.   
 
EPA specified a six-month period of time to provide pitcher filters or POU devices on the basis of a 2008 study2, 
which referenced that one site in the study suggested the potential for lead accumulated in the system to be 
released for months following disturbance, while most detected releases in systems took place in the first several 
days following LSL replacement.  The reason why one system was impacted for a lengthy period was not specified 
in the preamble.  The source document summarized elevated lead concentrations following LSL replacement as 
occurring in many cases for the first three days after replacement.  NTNCWSs at industrial facilities have the ability 
to control flushing of service lines and premise plumbing within buildings as well as the ability to conduct their 
own sampling following disturbances.   As such, industrial facilities are capable of monitoring taps.  TCC agrees 
with API’s proposal that EPA allow NTNCWSs the option to sample taps after a minimum of 96 hours following a 
disturbance and eliminate the use of mitigations upon receipt of analytical results confirming that lead 
concentrations are below the lead action level.    
 
3. Clear and timely guidance for industrial facility NTNCWSs is requested – EPA has concluded “the overwhelming 
majority of NTNCWSs that do have LSLs and Galvanized Requiring Replacement (GRR) service lines are expected 
to have relatively few of these service lines requiring replacement over the proposed 10-year deadline” (88 FR 
84912).  EPA’s position is based upon several assumptions, namely: 
• 
That responses from just 147 NTNCWSs to the 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey 
Assessment3  indicating that lead service lines are rarely used are representative of all 17,418 NTNCWSs 
in the Safe Drinking Water Information System, 
• 
That responses from three states estimating the number of LSLs at NTNCWSs in 20174 are accurate and 
representative across the country, and 
• 
That NTNCWSs have no stand-alone lead connectors and no GRR service lines since NTNCWSs are unlikely 
to replace only the upstream portion of an LSL and leave a galvanized service line in place, because they 
own the entire service, and galvanized lines have a high failure rate given age and disturbance like that 
produced by removing a section of LSL.5  
 
The assumption that few NTNCWSs have lead service lines cannot be confirmed until the October 2024 deadline 
to submit Lead Service Lines inventories.  Furthermore, piping makeup and configuration of NTNCWSs at industrial 
facilities could be influenced by the specific sector in which the piping is used.      
 
Conducting Lead Service Line Inventories is a complex undertaking.  NTNCWSs at industrial sites that attempt to 
leverage guidance documents that are developed for Community Water Systems are left to interpret guidance 
 
2 Sandvig, A., Kwan, P., Kirmeyer, G., Maynard, B., Mast, D., Trussell, R.R., Trussel, S., Cantor, A., and Prescott, A. (2008). Contribution 
of service line and plumbing fixtures to lead and copper rule compliance issue. AWWA Research Foundation, 523. 
3 88 FR 84912: Regarding NTNCWSs, Needs Survey responses from 147 NTNCWSs showed LSLs are rarely used in these systems since 
132 of them did not report any lead, GRR, or unknown service lines. 
4 Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvement, 2023. In August 2017, EPA disseminated a questionnaire 
to nine states asking for the estimated number or percentage of NTNCWSs with one or more LSLs and the total number of LSLs in 
NTNCWSs.  EPA received responses from seven states.  Four states did not provide any estimate.  The remaining three states 
provided estimates ranging from five to zero percent.  Based upon this data, EPA assumed 2.5% of NTNCWSs would have LSLs. 
5 Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvement, 2023 

Comments of TCC on EPA Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations  
for Lead and Copper Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
Page 4 
 
written for systems that provide water to homes.   EPA Issued "Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service 
Line Inventory" in August 2022, and guidance tailored for small CWSs and NTNCWSs was not issued until June of 
2023.  TCC echoes the comments of API and ACC that, although EPA developed guidance tailored for smaller 
systems, the guidance was issued after LSL inventory development was underway.  Accordingly, TCC echoes the  
requests of API and ACC that EPA provide timely and clear guidance for NTNCWS with examples applicable to 
NTNCWSs at Industrial facilities. Furthermore, TCC would comment that eyewash stations should be included as 
active connections and therefore lines servicing them should be counted in the initial inventory. TCC comments 
that the “human consumption” definition does not list eyewash stations (skin absorbtion) and guidance 
documents should inform affected NTNC entities that they are to be included in the count.  
 
4. Clarity to the definition of Service Line is requested – EPA has added a definition of “Service Line” to the Proposed 
Rule, which states “Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe which 
connects the water main to the building inlet. Where a building is not present, the service line connects the water 
main to the outlet."  NTNCWSs at industrial facilities have service lines that do not enter buildings and are used 
for purposes other than drinking or cooking.  TCC comments that EPA has the opportunity to add clarity and reduce 
ambiguity by specifying whether outlet in the definition is intended to mean all possible water uses or is specific 
to uses associated with cooking and drinking. 
 
TCC joins API and ACC in requesting that EPA clarify the definition of "Service Line" as follows: “Service line, for 
the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe that connects the water main to the building 
inlet. Where a building is not present, the service line connects the water main to an outlet used for cooking or 
drinking."  
 
5. EPA’s assumptions for Cost Burden to NTNCWSs is an underestimate – EPA’s Economic Analysis of the Proposed 
Rule has assumed that NTNCWSs will not incur burdensome  costs to update their inventories since they own their 
own service lines and are not expected to have any unknowns.  This assumption is not accurate.  NTNCWSs at 
industrial facilities that have been developing their inventories have incurred costs to field-identify service lines 
in advance of the October 16, 2024 submission deadline.  Unknown service lines can occur through a variety of 
reasons including age of a facility and loss of drawings. Furthermore, NTNCWSs are unlikely to have customer 
meters, thus unlikely to have water meter readings or replacements as an opportunity to collect service line data.  
Further, EPA has assumed NTNCWSs are able to rely on drawings as a means to identify connectors and service 
line materials of construction; however, due to the age of some facilities, this is not consistently applicable to 
NTNCWSs. TCC proposes PWSs that use POU devices be exempt from the requirement to identify the material of 
connectors and unknown service lines and/or alternative options for connector identification if information is 
difficult to maintain in a system with no lead concerns. 
 
Cost will be a significant challenge in replacing all lead service lines, especially when considered alongside 
competing priorities such as PFAS removal. The average cost to fully replace a single lead service line is estimated 
to be between $6,507 and $8,519 per the Proposed Rule’s Economic Analysis; however, for NTNCWSs at Industrial 
facilities, these costs are likely higher due to line length maintenance and safety practices required within 
industrial facilities and the possibility that piping may run adjacent to or through process units. While the federal 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Act has allocated funding for lead service line replacement, this funding will not be 
available to industrial facilities.  Similarly, the NTNCWSs at commercial facilities are not eligible for other funding 
mechanisms described in Section IV.G of the Proposed Rule’s preamble.  EPA should consider these realities for 
NTNCWSs when considering the additional flexibilities proposed by TCC, API, and ACC.  
 

Comments of TCC on EPA Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations  
for Lead and Copper Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
Page 5 
 
6. Sample Tiering based on Premise Plumbing presents undue burden to Public Water Systems – The Proposed 
Rule maintains the tiering structure established by the original Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) and updated by the 
LCRR. In the Proposed Rule, EPA is proposing to adjust the definition for the highest priority tiers (Tier 1 and Tier 
2) to include sites with premise plumbing made of lead.  EPA specifies that by premise, plumbing made of lead, 
EPA means premise plumbing that consists of pure lead pipes, like the pipes used for LSLs, rather than pipes 
made from metal alloys which may contain lead content.  EPA further proposes galvanized premise plumbing to 
be an element of Tier 3. 
 
EPA has not requested that Lead Inventories include premise plumbing material construction.  TCC echoes the 
concern of API and ACC that identifying the premise plumbing material of construction includes additional time 
and cost that EPA has not considered in the Economic Analysis.  TCC joins API and ACC in commenting that EPA 
should not assume that NTNCWSs are likely to have previous knowledge of the premise plumbing present in 
buildings that are in their control.  
 
Conclusion:  
 
TCC appreciates the opportunity to file comments in this letter concerning the Proposed Rule.   EPA has requested 
feedback as to whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the regulatory approach used to 
address lead in drinking water consistent with the statutory standard for a treatment technique rule in section 
1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. TCC joins API and ACC in proposing that the LCRI could be simplified and burden could be 
reduced without affecting the ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects by allowing 
NTNCWSs additional flexibility as described within these comments. 
 
Please contact me at (512) 646-6403, pearson@texaschemistry.org, when you wish to discuss these comments or if you 
would like any additional information concerning the issues raised in these comments.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Shea Pearson 
General Counsel & Director of Regulatory Affairs 
Texas Chemistry Council

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2256 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From:
shamrock.magic@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/4/2024 9:44:12 AM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms Rachael Pappano
330 River Rd  Mattawamkeag, ME 04459-3229
shamrock.magic@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
dgxmn@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/4/2024 8:04:46 AM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. David Christman
506 Honey Creek Pl  Athens, GA 30605-4597
dgxmn@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
mbenrn@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/4/2024 5:25:35 AM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Marguerite Benoit
13 Fiddlehead Dr  New Milford, CT 06776-5534
mbenrn@aol.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
tokyosue@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/4/2024 3:28:00 AM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Sue Halligan
5350 Nolan Pkwy  Oak Park Heights, MN 55082-5594
tokyosue@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
joshdad@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 11:59:48 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Jim Spooner
1843 Quiet Brook Ct  Manteca, CA 95337-8248
joshdad@hotmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
nancystockdale@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 11:49:57 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Nancy Stockdale
306 W Market St  Silver City, NM 88061-4956
nancystockdale@gilanet.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
beani24329@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 11:32:40 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr Michael Brandes
1450 Palisade Ave  Fort Lee, NJ 07024-5212
beani24329@aol.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
guerillawordfare@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 11:25:59 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Miss Aleks Kosowicz
1745 Roberts Ln  Abrams, WI 54101-9422
guerillawordfare@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
lightining@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 11:03:21 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Ellen Walsh
404 Bear Dr  Gulf Breeze, FL 32561-4220
lightining@bellsouth.net
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
agirl1018@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 10:57:15 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Ashley Ouellette
311 Granite St  Biddeford, ME 04005-9785
agirl1018@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
misha.askren@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 10:54:44 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Dr. Misha Askren
1354 S Curson Ave  Los Angeles, CA 90019-6615
misha.askren@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
spacecadetnova_2000@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 10:24:54 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. lynn hoang
2307 Leggett Ln  Fullerton, CA 92833-1557
spacecadetnova_2000@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
walker34k@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 10:09:14 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Thank you.
Sincerely,
Ms. Kimberly Walker
1213 Radis Pl  Jacksonville, FL 32225-9081
walker34k@hotmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
Mjthiel1090@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 9:55:34 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Mary Thiel
6816 SE 86th Ave  Portland, OR 97266-5650
Mjthiel1090@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
dsbened@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 9:49:32 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
I'm so grateful that you are pushing as hard as you can to ensure the EPA can enforce the ESA and other laws.
And I thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water
systems by 2037 and strictly limit partial replacements!
Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt strong standards that help our nation address
one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show
my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Derek Benedict
709 212th Pl SW  Lynnwood, WA 98036-8606
dsbened@frontier.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
mprice@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 9:25:31 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Marilyn Price
138 Sunnyside Ave  Mill Valley, CA 94941-2074
mprice@the-acorn.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
hobo17pollie@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 8:54:49 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr Les Roberts
PO Box 199  Serafina, NM 87569-0199
hobo17pollie@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
mark.houdashelt@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 8:40:59 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Dr. Mark Houdashelt
429 Lyons St  Fort Collins, CO 80521-1645
mark.houdashelt@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
ritalink9@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 8:21:44 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Rita Glasscock
1200 Camino Consuelo Apt 25  Santa Fe, NM 87507-5060
ritalink9@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
cjomeara@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 7:45:48 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr Mrs Colleen Joe - CFBD OMeara
2322 Vincent Ave N  Minneapolis, MN 55411-2325
cjomeara@q.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
lag2121@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 7:36:15 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Wanda Graff
S IVY  Canby, OR 97013
lag2121@aol.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
aedorsey@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 7:14:39 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Ann Dorsey
18042 Schoenborn St  Northridge, CA 91325-3844
aedorsey@hotmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
jodyg8@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 7:06:39 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Jody Gibson
317 E Wall Ave  Des Moines, IA 50315-5259
jodyg8@msn.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
chaplainmamabear@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 6:33:11 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Edna Anderson
812 Moore St  Beloit, WI 53511-5038
chaplainmamabear@aol.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
joannspa@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 6:26:54 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Joann Ramos
64 Fiume St  Iselin, NJ 08830-1445
joannspa@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
rzz9@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 5:31:35 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Rena Zaman-Zade
2041 E Grand Ave  Escondido, CA 92027-3408
rzz9@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
kabsandy1@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 5:09:41 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. K Sandknop
1863 Dougherty Estates Dr  Ballwin, MO 63021-5850
kabsandy1@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
mtgrassman@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 4:58:17 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements.  Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes.  That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible.  I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Mark Grassman
726 Negley Ave  Evansville, IN 47711-3430
mtgrassman@att.net
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
foxber@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 4:53:35 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Mary Ann Tober
82 Old Post Rd  Lancaster, NY 14086-3263
foxber@hotmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
tonyaandandreas@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 4:44:42 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
PLEASE HELP-Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of
water systems by 2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead,
EPA must adopt strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our
time—exposure to toxic lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Antonia Chianis
PO Box 836  Blue Jay, CA 92317-0836
tonyaandandreas@charter.net
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
julieroedel@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 4:39:18 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms Julie Roedel
1041 N Clay Ave  Kirkwood, MO 63122-2615
julieroedel@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
bfowlerop@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 4:35:39 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Beverly Fowler
101 B Northlawn Dr  Cottage Grove, WI 53527-9441
bfowlerop@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
utvol61@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 4:30:03 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Cynthia Mastro
101 Hunters Trl W  Elizabeth City, NC 27909-3266
utvol61@inteliport.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
speirce@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 4:12:39 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Dr. SUSAN SILBERBERG PEIRCE
18 Paseo De Aguila  Santa Fe, NM 87506-7955
speirce@prodigy.net
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
kg4trees@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 4:10:15 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Ken Gigliello
32538 Estuary Blvd  Frankford, DE 19945-3733
kg4trees@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
mpardi@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 4:09:45 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Marco Pardi
2195 Sandown Ct  Lawrenceville, GA 30043-4095
mpardi@aol.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
bzakar30@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 3:40:28 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Barry Zakar
341 Stinson St  Vallejo, CA 94591-6415
bzakar30@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
truth58@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 3:24:47 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Kathryn Lemoine
106 Parkwest Dr Apt 3C  West Monroe, LA 71291-5373
truth58@outlook.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
ddtmagnolia@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 3:07:53 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. DeeDee Tostanoski
400 Madison St  Alexandria, VA 22314-1772
ddtmagnolia@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
addiesmock@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 2:23:17 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mx. Amanda Smock
176 Downs St  Kingston, NY 12401-3537
addiesmock@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
asphodeldenning@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 2:19:09 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Asphodel Denning
108 5th Ave S  Seattle, WA 98104-3709
asphodeldenning@hotmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
richan@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 2:12:53 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Richard Han
16 Eastbury Ct  Ann Arbor, MI 48105-1403
richan@umich.edu
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
bksnyder13@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 2:10:17 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
As a Science Teacher/Environmental Educator, Mechanical Engineer, and an extremely concerned citizen, I
wholeheartedly thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of
water systems by 2037 and strictly limit partial replacements!!
Recognizing that there is NO safe level of exposure to lead, EPA MUST adopt strong standards that help our nation
address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic lead pipes!!!  That is why I’m
writing to show my strong support!!
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction!!
PLEASE continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most
transparent, equitable, and expedited way possible!!
I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the most ambitious rule possible by October
2024!! Thanks!
Sincerely,
Mr. Brad Snyder
8887 Dallas Ln N  Maple Grove, MN 55369-9270
bksnyder13@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
eisenber@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:55:49 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Professor Paul Eisenberg
6 Upland Rd Apt C  Baltimore, MD 21210-2242
eisenber@indiana.edu
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
elainebecker@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:49:48 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Elaine Becker
2514 Sharmar Rd  Roanoke, VA 24018-2625
elainebecker@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
woodsyou@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:48:24 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Margaret Handley
6417 Vineland Rd  Orlando, FL 32819-7813
woodsyou@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
dunecitymike@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:42:22 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Michael Herbert
83558 Kiechle Arm Rd  Florence, OR 97439-8340
dunecitymike@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
weberjea@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:40:19 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Jeanine Weber
2650 Ridgecroft Dr SE  Grand Rapids, MI 49546-8047
weberjea@aquinas.edu
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
dborgeson@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:37:47 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Dean Borgeson
36030 Bonnie Lakes Rd  Crosslake, MN 56442-3081
dborgeson@crosslake.net
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
dita.skalic@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:37:07 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
ms Dita Škalič
Levstikova Ulica 4  Palm Desert, CA 92260
dita.skalic@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
rainasmama21@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:35:49 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Dana Willis-Jick
1690 Perlich Ave  Red Wing, MN 55066-3995
rainasmama21@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
sjfenster@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:32:29 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Steven Fenster
12 Davis St  Pemberton, NJ 08068-1231
sjfenster@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
sheilabearry@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:29:46 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Sheila Tran
1766 Serpentine Dr  Eagan, MN 55122-1634
sheilabearry@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
malyzack@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:28:23 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Mary Zack
393 Ridgedale Dr N  Worthington, OH 43085-3219
malyzack@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
brandtv@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:27:05 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Vicky Brandt
3318 Coachmans Way  Durham, NC 27705-6027
brandtv@mac.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
PRAIRIEROOTS@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:22:20 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Pamela Unger
5559 N Meadows Blvd  Columbus, OH 43229-4180
PRAIRIEROOTS@YAHOO.COM
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
teddsdead@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:18:43 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Tedd Ward Jr.
10520 Ogden St  Petersburg, IL 62675-6075
teddsdead@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
james-dawson@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 1:02:05 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. James Dawson
1055 Trinita Ter  Davis, CA 95618-6741
james-dawson@sbcglobal.net
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
lndominguez@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:55:58 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mx. Laura Dominguez
1624 Corcoran St NW  Washington, DC 20009-3031
lndominguez@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
ceperr@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:51:52 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Claire Perricelli
2259 16th St  Eureka, CA 95501-1312
ceperr@sbcglobal.net
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
aaalberts@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:33:51 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Dr. Allison Alberts
128 Bernies Dr  Kunkletown, PA 18058-7280
aaalberts@hotmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
kennethhyche@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:30:15 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Kenneth Hyche
2330 County Road 255  Cullman, AL 35057-4028
kennethhyche@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
jtfriestad@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:26:53 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. John Friestad
221 Greenwich Dr  Conway, SC 29526-3992
jtfriestad@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
dawnie_angel@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:24:13 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Dawn Albanese
156 Basswood Dr  Elk Grove Village, IL 60007-1718
dawnie_angel@hotmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
mreng5@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:21:01 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Marilyn Eng
348 San Leandro Dr  Diamond Bar, CA 91765-1747
mreng5@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
lprostko@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:18:07 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms Linda Prostko
7875 Marsh Hollow Dr  Middleville, MI 49333-9314
lprostko@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
jaredc1200@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:14:23 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Jared Cornelia
125 Denn Pl  Wilmington, DE 19804-3505
jaredc1200@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
mari471@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:12:45 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms Mari Mennel-Bell
1440 S Ocean Blvd  Pompano Beach, FL 33062-7346
mari471@aol.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
fred-cheryl@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:11:32 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Fred Lavy
524 E Wolfe St  Harrisonburg, VA 22802-4822
fred-cheryl@msn.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
dbkornrei@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:08:37 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. David Kornreich
103 Redwood Dr  Syracuse, NY 13212-2610
dbkornrei@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
dwaindepew@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:07:40 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Rev. Dwain DePew
1110 Marion St  Carlyle, IL 62231-1210
dwaindepew@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
countzero100@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:06:52 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Yves DeCargouet
6820 Virginia Dr  Lucerne, CA 95458-8502
countzero100@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
rmg13@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:04:46 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Miss Rochelle Gravance
PO Box 1205  Columbus, MT 59019-1205
rmg13@hotmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
tchmm@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:03:19 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Michael McCartin
6735 W Canal Pointe Ln  Fort Wayne, IN 46804-4771
tchmm@aol.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
annikavb1000@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:03:00 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Annika Vonbartheld
2886 W Plumb Ln  Reno, NV 89509-3030
annikavb1000@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
masewald@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
1/3/2024 12:02:28 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most transparent,
equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by finalizing the
most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Michelle Sewald
1401 Wewatta St  Denver, CO 80202-1257
masewald@yahoo.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
cecigreen65@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
12/13/2023 10:58:44 AM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with and protect our communities by adopting strong standards that address lead pipes. I
encourage you to act with urgency and finalize the most ambitious action levels possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Cecile Brown
3471 Summit Ct NE  Washington, DC 20018-1648
cecigreen65@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
sabreena365@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
12/13/2023 10:43:23 AM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with and protect our communities by adopting strong standards that address lead pipes. I
encourage you to act with urgency and finalize the most ambitious action levels possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Miss Sabreen Ahmed
1513 4th St NW  Washington, DC 20001-1905
sabreena365@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
lolaleeman@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
12/13/2023 10:06:02 AM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with and protect our communities by adopting strong standards that address lead pipes. I
encourage you to act with urgency and finalize the most ambitious action levels possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Ms. Lola Leeman
1400 Santa Fe Ave  Berkeley, CA 94702-1028
lolaleeman@students.berkeley.net
Page 1
2/6/2024

From:
wbrogerson@everyactioncustom.com
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET <A-AND-R-DOCKET@epa.gov>
Date:
12/12/2023 2:23:39 PM
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace
100% of lead service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.
Dear Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in
the right direction.
Please continue to engage with and protect our communities by adopting strong standards that address lead pipes. I
encourage you to act with urgency and finalize the most ambitious action levels possible by October 2024.
Sincerely,
Mr. Wesley Rogerson
1675 Bandit Loop Unit 107  Reston, VA 20190-4888
wbrogerson@gmail.com
Page 1
2/6/2024

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0843 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Water Treatment Plant    603-225-8696   
 
 
The Honorable Michael Regan  
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
 
For electronic delivery to the docket via https://www.regulations.gov/  
  
RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (Docket 
Id#: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801)  
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
On behalf of the City of Concord New Hampshire, I am pleased to provide the following 
comments to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI).  Our organizations represent drinking water professionals throughout the 
New England states.  
Our organization applauds the U.S. EPA for its efforts in developing a rule that will provide 
important, positive changes that will lead to further reduction of lead in the nation’s drinking 
water. Doing so will involve substantial, collaborative efforts between state and federal agencies, 
utilities, and the general public, where all will need to work together and conduct due diligence 
to minimize lead exposure. We recognize that while significant progress has been made over the 
past several decades in reducing children’s exposure to lead in their environment, that even small 
exposures may result in detrimental health effects. The Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
offer the opportunity to make further progress in reducing potential lead exposure from drinking 
water.   
Upon review, our organization offers the following comments to the below key items within the 
proposed rule, and endorse the much more detailed comments being offered by the American 
Water Works Association. In addition to our comments on the substance of the proposed rule, we 
wish to focus your initial attention on an important issue of rule scheduling and compliance that 
should be resolved immediately.  
EPA must immediately provide regulatory clarity and certainty about LCRR requirements 
and deadlines.  We support EPA’s approach of eliminating confusion and unnecessary 
expenditures of resources by deferring compliance with many aspects of the LCRR until the 
compliance date of LCRI.  However, until the LCRI is finalized, water systems have no 
assurance of what will be in it, and there is concern that even if we assume that the final rule will 
City of Concord, New Hampshire 
GENERAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT 
Water Supply Division 
53 Hutchins Street 
CONCORD, NH   03301 

contain the deferral of LCRR deadlines, any delay in issuance leaves systems vulnerable to non-
compliance. New England Water Works will be providing training and guidance on the LCRI in 
upcoming courses and at their spring and fall conferences. At present, we cannot in good faith 
provide specific advice on whether systems should continue to assume compliance with LCRR 
by October 2024.  
COMMENTS ON THE LCRI PROPOSAL:  
The following sections provide specific recommendations on the proposed rule provisions and 
responses to some of the related EPA requests for comments. Concord participated in the 
development of the American Water Works Association and Association of Metropolitan Water 
Agencies’ comments, and we urge you to carefully consider those as well. 
 
LCR AS A TREATMENT TECHNIQUE:  
CONCORD supports the continued use of the Safe Drinking Water Act’s (SDWA’s) 
Treatment Technique framework for reducing the risk of lead in drinking water.  
  
LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS:  
EPA has overstepped its authority in saying that access equals control: CONCORD 
supports the timely full removal of all lead service lines (LSLs1). However, we have serious 
concerns that EPA has overstepped its authority under the Safe Drinking Water Act.  EPA has 
presented contorted logic in attempting to demonstrate that having an owner allow access equals 
actual control. We do not agree that this is the case. Many of our water systems are actively 
working with their customers to voluntarily replace service lines on private property, often with 
substantial local funding, but the emphasis in those programs is that participation is voluntary. 
Water systems are not asserting that they have control, but rather are requesting access from the 
owner who has control over their property. Water systems do not control customer-owned 
portions of their plumbing and therefore cannot force customers to remove lead fixtures or 
plumbing materials without major changes to terms and condition agreements and methods to 
address legal liability implications.  
Federal Funding is Essential: EPA must make additional targeted funding available if 
communities across the nation are to succeed in eliminating LSLs within a decade. Concord has 
serious concerns that the federal government’s financial commitment falls far short of the funds 
needed to complete the job nationwide, and that much of EPA’s  public rhetoric on funding 
deliberately understates what a small fraction of the total cost will be covered by current federal 
commitments. Failure of the federal government to step up and provide adequate resources will 
either result in communities being unable to meet the deadlines in the LCRI, or will affect their 
ability to meet other regulatory requirements and system maintenance needs.  Proposed PFAS 
standards, suggested changes in the disinfection byproducts rules, and concerns about aged 
infrastructure will all require attention and funds at many of our member’s systems. Many 
systems are already challenged by existing state rules for PFAS, and will be further challenged if 
EPA finalizes its PFAS rule as proposed. New England has many of the oldest water systems in 
the U.S., and much of the oldest infrastructure in need of the most resources is in our poorest 
communities.  EPA’s own estimates2 of need for Drinking Water State Revolving Fund-eligible 
                                                 
1 Unless specifically stated, for simplicity we are referring to both lead service lines and galvanized requiring 
replacement as LSL.  
2DRINKING WATER INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT 7TH REPORT TO CONGRESS – September 
2023:  https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-09/Seventh%20DWINSA_September2023_Final.pdf 

infrastructure projects that are necessary over the 20-year period for water systems in New 
England to continue to provide safe drinking water to the public exceeds $28 billion. Unless the 
federal government increases its support, the burden of resolving the decades or centuries old 
issue of lead service lines will be borne by our most vulnerable ratepayers. 
Accelerated Replacement and CCT: CONCORD supports EPA’s use of incentives to 
accelerate LSL replacement, particularly the provision to defer construction or re-optimization of 
corrosion control treatment if a system can replace all its LSLs within 5 years of exceeding the 
proposed new lead Action Level. Both the LCRR and the LCRI recognize that lead service lines 
represent the most significant source of lead when they are present, and emphasize this by 
requiring that salvaged lead service lines be included in any evaluation of corrosion control.  
Requiring a focus on modifying carefully balanced treatment objectives, even as LSLs are 
beinging replaced, is inappropriate. CONCORD believes that EPA has struck an appropriate 
balance with this provision of encouraging that LSL replacement be conducted faster.  
Ten Year Deadlines: EPA should separate the metrics for replacing LSLs from those for 
resolving lead status unknown services. The current combined 3-year rolling average metrics 
for monitoring compliance with LSL replacement and resolution of unknowns are unworkable, 
and will almost inevitably result in unavoidable non-compliance for many if not most water 
systems. Systems with many more unknowns than confirmed LSLs, which appears to be the case 
for many systems in the preliminary inventories we have seen, will quickly exhaust the pool of 
LSLs to replace. And even if that were not an issue (for example, in a system with mostly 
confirmed LSLs and relatively few unknowns), the 3-year rolling average may discourage efforts 
to initially replace LSLs quickly. Replacing or resolving more than 10 percent for several early 
years will prevent compliance in later years with the proposed 3-year rolling average mechanism.  
CONCORD recommends that EPA revise this requirement by instead requiring a cumulative 
10 percent average beginning in year three for replacement of LSLs and a separate cumulative 10 
percent average for resolving unknowns.  
Counting Refusals: CONCORD also recommends that the final rule clarify how homes with 
LSLs where the owner has refused access to their private property and declined participation in 
the system’s LSL replacement program are accounted for in progress reporting. It is clear that 
some owners will simply refuse access, even at no cost, leaving some properties with a LSL in 
place. EPA’s proposal provides an appropriate provision that refusal after four attempts indicates 
that the property is not within the control of the water system. What is left unclear is whether a 
system can count that towards its annual 10 percent progress, and more importantly, whether the 
system would be in compliance at the end of 10 years (or five in the case where a system is 
availing itself of the incentivized deferral of corrosion control treatment provision). The final rule 
must make it clear that the replacement obligations are only applicable to those LSLs where the 
owner has allowed access.   
Partial Replacements: CONCORD supports the provision to allow partial replacements 
when they are conducted as part of an emergency repair or in coordination with planned 
infrastructure work. While the proposed exclusion of partial replacements during planned 
infrastructure work relative to LSL replacement projects is intended to prevent systems from 
intentionally conducting partial replacements, it does not account for customer refusal and further 
impedes lead removal. If a system is implementing a LSL replacement project in a neighborhood 
and a customer refuses to participate, prohibiting a partial replacement prevents the removal of 
the public-portion of the LSL and would require remobilization and additional costs to conduct 
the replacement in the future. EPA should remove this prohibition or at a minimum include 
language permitting partial replacements in these cases. 

SYSTEMS WITH MULTIPLE ACTION LEVEL EXCEEDANCES:  
Requiring filters: EPA should revisit the requirement to offer filters to all customers if a 
system has multiple Action Level (AL) exceedances.  With the lower proposed AL and the 
changes in sampling and reporting protocols, many systems will likely exceed the AL. Even in 
our older region, for many of the systems that have lead service lines, they account for less than 
one percent of the total number of service lines in the system.  If filters are needed at all, the 
focus should be on those buildings with LSLs.  Providing filters to buildings without a LSL will 
confuse the public and dilute the focus on replacing LSLs where they exist.  Providing them to 
buildings with LSLs could reduce the owner’s impetus to replace the LSL. EPA should 
eliminate this provision in its entirety, or at a minimum focus the offer on only those buildings 
with LSLs. 
Availability of certified filters:  There are likely to be substantial issues with availability of 
appropriately certified filters if this becomes a nationwide mandate. We have already heard from 
systems that are proactively making filters available as part of LSL investigations and 
replacements that they are having difficulty purchasing even lots of a few hundred filters, let 
alone the thousands that would be needed for larger systems if this requirement were to be 
implemented.  
If EPA chooses to retain any part of this requirement, it must clarify what the term “make 
filters available” means in practice, as the preamble states that the system must only make them 
available at “no direct cost” for low-income customers which implies that for all others, they 
could be offered to the customer at cost3.  EPA should consider the feasibility of creating a 
national program, similar to the COVID test kit program, where EPA would directly provide the 
certified filters to consumers.  This would simplify the requirement and make it nationally 
uniform. 
We also believe there will need to be an aggressive public outreach campaign conducted by EPA 
on the proper maintenance of POU filters.  Filters need to be regularly changed to ensure that 
water quality is maintained.  Our members are concerned that improperly maintained filters could 
lead to unintended negative public health impacts due to biological growth, etc.      
 
SAMPLING AND RESULTS REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:  
Rejecting inappropriate samples: EPA should further clarify when a system can reject an 
inappropriately collected sample. The rule preamble discusses ways a system can identify and 
avoid analyzing inappropriately collected samples, but there is no parallel rule. EPA should 
either provide additional language in the rule itself, or at a minimum develop explicit 
guidance that buildings that are not currently occupied or samples with stagnation times in 
excess of 12 hours should be discarded and new samples collected.  
Sample reporting requirements:  Requiring that sample results be provided to the sampler 
within three calendar days presents systems with the substantial risk of inadvertent and 
potentially unavoidable non-compliance.  Analysis and reporting of results typically takes several 
weeks from when the sample is collected - one or two additional days to provide the results is not 
a crisis. Monday holidays and shortened Friday work hours mean that when results are received 
on a Friday, there may well be no one to receive and respond to the data during that entire three-
calendar-day period.  Water system staff have many varied responsibilities to actively and safely 
manage their systems; there is not a dedicated staff person awaiting results, ready to jump into 
                                                 
3 This requirement is clearly distinguished for the language related to replacement of LSL or disturbances of LSL 
which requires that the system “provide filters and replacement cartridges”.  

action to immediately generate and distribute letters. EPA should change the rule to allow at a 
minimum, 5 business days and more ideally 7 business days, and limit rapid data 
transmittal to samples over the Action Level, retaining the current 30-day notification for all 
other samples.  Requiring as EPA proposes in the LCRI that all samples receive rush delivery 
notification defeats the purpose of quickly delivering elevated results.  When a result is over the 
AL, water system staff should be able to prioritize directly connecting with and educating those 
samplers (and beginning the process of working with the resident to begin the required 
Distribution System and Site Assessment).  
Sampling schedules: EPA should consider staggering implementation of standard monitoring. 
In prior rules, EPA has staggered certain requirements for monitoring with larger systems going 
first, and smaller systems staggered behind.  This allows for some lessons to be learned, and 
mitigates overload of laboratory capacity and primacy agency attention.  
Sample Collection Frequency: Systems with no LSLs with current sampling results below the 
AL that have qualified for reduced monitoring for many consecutive years should have a means 
to continue on reduced monitoring as deemed appropriate by the Primacy Agency. 
 
INVENTORY REQUIREMENTS:   
EPA should remove fire services and other non-potable service lines from inventory and 
replacement requirements if there are appropriate administrative safeguards to prevent potable 
uses. Similarly, there has been confusion about system obligations for piping downstream of the 
recognized service line.  A service line is clearly defined as connecting the system’s main with 
the building.  Additional piping connecting buildings, or connecting buildings with 
appurtenances on private property are not service lines. It should not be the responsibility of the 
water system to try to decipher materials beyond the service line, in facilities such as trailer parks 
or office or condo complexes.  
 
EPA should remove service lines serving abandoned properties from inventory and 
replacement requirements if there are appropriate administrative safeguards to assure 
construction of appropriate service line materials prior to the property receiving service. If the 
system has the appropriate administrative safeguards in place, this serves no useful propose and 
diverts resources from achieving LSL replacement at occupied locations.  
 
EPA should retain the LCRR requirement that systems must only replace lead connectors as 
they are encountered.  EPA should not include the replacement of connectors in the mandatory 
LSL replacement requirements because in many cases connector material records are not 
available, and field investigating all connector material in the absence of records would not be 
feasible or practical for most systems. Lead connectors should only be included in service line 
inventories for the purpose of identifying potential sampling locations, and only where existing 
records indicate their presence.  
Galvanized service lines: While CONCORD supports the inclusion of galvanized service lines 
downstream of a LSL in the inventory and replacement mandates of the proposed rule, we do not 
support the inclusion of those galvanized services that ever were downstream of a LSL or are 
currently downstream of unknown service lines in the inventory and replacement mandates. 
Including them in the mandate increases the total cost of replacement programs, with limited 
benefit. In addition, as EPA is requiring that all unknowns be resolved within 10 years, any 
galvanized service lines downstream of unknowns will be either identified as needing 
replacement because the upstream line was positively identified as lead, or the upstream service 

line will be positively identified as not lead. In the case of the latter, EPA should remove its 
requirement for systems to demonstrate that the upstream portion was never a LSL, as this is not 
possible given the previously unknown nature of the material, and instead reclassify the service 
line as non-lead and remove it from the replacement pool.  
Use of state laws or regulation prohibiting lead: EPA should be explicit that service lines 
without recorded material can  be classed as non-lead if state law or regulation extant at the time 
of construction prohibited the use of lead.  For example, the 1926 Maine State Law Lead Pipe 
ban should be allowed to qualify homes built in or after 1927 to be classified as Non-Lead.  
 
Simplifying Inventory Updates:  Systems with online inventories should be able to simply 
notify their state primacy agency annually with summary statistics on any changes and provide 
instructions on how to access their online inventory. There is no need for these systems to 
annually re-submit the complete inventory to the state.  
 
Validation Requirements: EPA should reconsider the content and timing of the proposed 
inventory validation requirement. The validation requirement will represent a distraction and 
unnecessary resource drag for many systems. The requirements are overly prescriptive, and the 
deadline overlaps with the most important time when systems will be working to make real 
progress at LSL replacement. Validation should only be necessary if the state primacy agency 
finds that the methods used to develop the inventory are unreliable. States should be given the 
latitude to review and approve validation work done prior to the LCRI implementation date.  
CONCORD also recommends that the validation language explicitly state that only one point 
on the private side and one point on the public side need validation.  EPA should also state that 
service lines that have been identified by a record on one side of the service and physical 
inspection on the other side do not need to be included in the validation pool.  
 
ELIMINATION OF THE TRIGGER LEVEL AND LOWERING THE ACTION LEVEL  
CONCORD supports the efforts that EPA has made to slightly simplify the rule by 
eliminating the Trigger Level.  However, EPA has failed to adequately analyze and document 
the synergistic impacts of lowering the Action Level, changes to the sampling site selection 
focusing on LSLs, and new sampling and reporting protocols using the highest of 1st and 5th liter 
samples. These proposed changes combined with the 24-hour public notice requirement will do 
unnecessary damage to public confidence as more systems exceed the Action Level, not because 
water quality is worse, but because the goal posts and game rules have been changed.  
 
OUTREACH AND EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS:  
Flexibility to improve coordinated outreach: EPA should carefully review all outreach 
activities for consistency, and design them as an integrated public education program. The 
outreach requirements must allow sufficient flexibility so that they can be thoughtfully 
integrated into a cohesive whole, helping consumers make good choices rather than unnecessarily 
scaring or confusing them. As currently proposed, customers in systems over the Action Level 
would receive the following outreach during a 12-month period:  
1. Two consumer confidence reports, with additional information on LSLs;  
2. an annual notice that they have a LSL or unknown (perhaps 4 additional times if their 
street is in a current LSL replacement program);  
3. exposure to the 24 hour Public Notice, and  

4. a lead education brochure with information on LSLs and replacement efforts (potentially 
twice that year).   
As part of that cohesive education program, for systems with LSLs, EPA should ensure that the 
24-hour Public Notice template emphasizes the following:  
1. That the samples were taken at homes with LSLs,  
2. That customers would have received information about the presence of a LSL or 
unknown, and  
3. A focus on actions the system and residents can take to replace  LSLs and identify 
unknowns.  
The goal should be to encourage consumer action to permanently reduce their potential exposure 
through drinking water by replacing their LSL if they have one.   
The current 60-day delivery requirement should be retained for Public Education after an 
Action Level exceedance. Especially with all the lead-related outreach efforts described above, 
including the new 24-hour Public Notice, there is no need to unnecessarily rush delivery of the 
public education brochures.  
CORROSION CONTROL TREATMENT: 
Corrosion control treatment: Any required changes to treatment and water quality parameters 
needs to be system specific. A one size fits all approach to establishing Optimum Corrosion 
Control Treatment presents real risk to what is often a carefully crafted balancing of objectives 
for simultaneous compliance. Rule text and guidance must make this clear.  
 
 
SIMPLIFYING REQUIREMENTS FOR SYSTEMS WITH FEW OR NO LSLs: 
 
EPA should consider simplifying the compliance and reporting path for systems with no LSLs or 
unknowns. If a system has no identified LSLs or GRR, and no specific indication that they  were 
used historically, there should be no need to conduct extensive potholing or other validation 
efforts, nor should service lines currently inventoried as unknown require risk mitigation efforts 
after disturbances. In cases where there are no known LSLs and no documented history that any 
had ever been installed, the likelihood of unknowns being lead is slight, and the primacy agency 
should have the flexibility to reduce the level of required effort.  
Systems with no LSLs and unknowns or connector updates should be able to submit a statement 
to their Primacy Agency to certify that no inventory updates are currently required.  
 
SCHOOL SAMPLING:  
CONCORD agrees that EPA has offered some additional flexibility for systems that have worked 
with schools and/or childcare facilities on lead testing, but believes the changes do not go far 
enough.  Primacy agencies should have the flexibility to exempt (or reduce the scope of testing 
for) systems with recent past or ongoing school and childcare facility lead testing programs, even 
if they are not exactly congruent with the specific requirements in the proposed rule.  
 
 
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to comment on this complex and important effort to further 
reduce potential lead exposures to consumers from drinking water and premise plumbing.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Marco Philippon 
Water Treatment Superintendent 
General Services Department | City of Concord 
53 Hutchins Street, Concord, NH 03301 
MPhilippon@concordnh.gov 
(603) 230-3951

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0847 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
The Honorable Michael Regan  
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
 
For electronic delivery to the docket via https://www.regulations.gov/  
  
RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (Docket 
Id#: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801)  
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
On behalf of the New England Water Works Association (NEWWA), in conjunction with the 
state associations Green Mountain Water Environment Association, Maine Water Utilities 
Association, Massachusetts Water Works Association, New Hampshire Water Works 
Association, and Rhode Island Water Works Association, we are pleased to provide the 
following comments to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements (LCRI).  Our organizations represent drinking water professionals 
throughout the New England states.  
Our organizations applaud the U.S. EPA for its efforts in developing a rule that will provide 
important, positive changes that will lead to further reduction of lead in the nation’s drinking 
water. Doing so will involve substantial, collaborative efforts between state and federal agencies, 
utilities, and the general public, where all will need to work together and conduct due diligence 
to minimize lead exposure. We recognize that while significant progress has been made over the 
past several decades in reducing children’s exposure to lead in their environment, even small 
exposures may result in detrimental health effects. The Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
offer the opportunity to make further progress in reducing potential lead exposure from drinking 
water.   

2 
 
Upon review, our organizations offer the following comments to the below key items within the 
proposed rule, and endorse the much more detailed comments being offered by the national 
water associations. In addition to our comments on the substance of the proposed rule, we wish 
to focus your initial attention on an important issue of rule scheduling and compliance that 
should be resolved immediately.  
EPA must immediately provide regulatory clarity and certainty about LCRR requirements 
and deadlines.  We support EPA’s approach of eliminating confusion and unnecessary 
expenditures of resources by deferring compliance with many aspects of the LCRR until the 
compliance date of LCRI.  However, until the LCRI is finalized, water systems have no 
assurance of what will be in it, and there is concern that even if we assume that the final rule will 
contain the deferral of LCRR deadlines, any delay in issuance leaves systems vulnerable to non-
compliance. NEWWA will be providing training and guidance on the LCRI in upcoming courses 
and at our spring and fall conferences. At present, we cannot in good faith provide specific 
advice on whether systems should continue to assume compliance with LCRR by October 2024.  
COMMENTS ON THE LCRI PROPOSAL:  
The following sections provide specific recommendations on the proposed rule provisions and 
responses to some of the related EPA requests for comments. A number of NEWWA members 
participated in the development of multiple national water association’s comments, and we urge 
you to carefully consider those as well. 
LCR AS A TREATMENT TECHNIQUE:  
NEWWA supports the continued use of the Safe Drinking Water Act’s (SDWA’s) Treatment 
Technique framework for reducing the risk of lead in drinking water.  
LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS:  
EPA has overstepped its authority in saying that access equals control: NEWWA supports 
the timely full removal of all lead service lines (LSLs1). However, we have serious concerns 
that EPA has overstepped its authority under the Safe Drinking Water Act.  EPA has presented 
contorted logic in attempting to demonstrate that having an owner allow access equals actual 
control. We do not agree that this is the case. Many of our water systems are actively working 
with their customers to voluntarily replace service lines on private property, often with 
substantial local funding, but the emphasis in those programs is that participation is voluntary. 
Water systems are not asserting that they have control, but rather are requesting access from the 
owner who has control over their property. Water systems do not control customer-owned 
portions of their plumbing and therefore cannot force customers to remove lead fixtures or 
plumbing materials without major changes to terms and condition agreements and methods to 
address legal liability implications.  
 
1 Unless specifically stated, for simplicity we are referring to both lead service lines and galvanized requiring 
replacement as LSL.  

3 
 
Federal Funding is Essential: EPA must make additional targeted funding available if 
communities across the nation are to succeed in eliminating LSLs within a decade. NEWWA 
members have serious concerns that the federal government’s financial commitment falls far 
short of the funds needed to complete the job nationwide, and that much of EPA’s public rhetoric 
on funding deliberately understates what a small fraction of the total cost will be covered by 
current federal commitments. Failure of the federal government to step up and provide adequate 
resources will either result in communities being unable to meet the deadlines in the LCRI, or 
will affect their ability to meet other regulatory requirements and system maintenance needs.  
Proposed PFAS standards, suggested changes in the disinfection byproducts rules, and concerns 
about aged infrastructure will all require attention and funds at many of our member’s systems. 
Many systems are already challenged by existing state rules for PFAS, and will be further 
challenged if EPA finalizes its PFAS rule as proposed. New England has many of the oldest 
water systems in the U.S., and much of the oldest infrastructure in need of the most resources is 
in our poorest communities.  EPA’s own estimates2 of need for Drinking Water State Revolving 
Fund-eligible infrastructure projects that are necessary over the 20-year period for water systems 
in New England to continue to provide safe drinking water to the public exceeds $28 billion. 
With respect to cost estimates to address the replacement of lead service lines, EPA estimated in 
the same report that “Based on the findings from the 7th DWINSA, the total projected number of 
LSLs in the United States is 9.2 million for the states, U.S. territories, Puerto Rico, and the 
District of Columbia…. The estimated cost to replace these LSLs ranges from approximately $50 
billion to $80 billion (2021 dollars).”  This estimate does not account for the cost to replace 
Galvanized Requiring Replacement lines.  Unless the federal government increases its support, 
the burden of resolving the decades or centuries old issue of lead service lines will be borne by 
our most vulnerable ratepayers. 
Accelerated Replacement and CCT: NEWWA supports EPA’s use of incentives to 
accelerate LSL replacement, particularly the provision to defer construction or re-optimization of 
corrosion control treatment if a system can replace all its LSLs within 5 years of exceeding the 
proposed new lead Action Level. Both the LCRR and the LCRI recognize that lead service lines 
represent the most significant source of lead when they are present, and emphasize this by 
requiring that salvaged lead service lines be included in any evaluation of corrosion control.  
Requiring a focus on modifying carefully balanced treatment objectives, even as LSLs are 
bringing replaced, is inappropriate. NEWWA believes that EPA has struck an appropriate 
balance with this provision of encouraging that LSL replacement be conducted faster.  
Ten Year Deadlines: EPA should separate the metrics for replacing LSLs from those for 
resolving lead status unknown services. The current combined 3-year rolling average metrics 
for monitoring compliance with LSL replacement and resolution of unknowns are unworkable, 
and will almost inevitably result in unavoidable non-compliance for many if not most water 
systems. Systems with many more unknowns than confirmed LSLs, which appears to be the case 
for many systems in the preliminary inventories we have seen, will quickly exhaust the pool of 
 
2DRINKING WATER INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT 7TH REPORT TO CONGRESS – September 
2023:  https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-09/Seventh%20DWINSA_September2023_Final.pdf 

4 
 
LSLs to replace. And even if that were not an issue (for example, in a system with mostly 
confirmed LSLs and relatively few unknowns), the 3-year rolling average may discourage efforts 
to initially replace LSLs quickly. Replacing or resolving more than 10 percent for several early 
years will prevent compliance in later years with the proposed 3-year rolling average mechanism.  
NEWWA recommends that EPA revise this requirement by instead requiring a cumulative 
10 percent average beginning in year three for replacement of LSLs and a separate cumulative 10 
percent average for resolving unknowns.  
Counting Refusals: NEWWA also recommends that the final rule clarify how homes with 
LSLs where the owner has refused access to their private property and declined participation in 
the system’s LSL replacement program are accounted for in progress reporting. It is clear that 
some owners will simply refuse access, even at no cost, leaving some properties with a LSL in 
place. EPA’s proposal provides an appropriate provision that refusal after four attempts indicates 
that the property is not within the control of the water system. What is left unclear is whether a 
system can count that towards its annual 10 percent progress, and more importantly, whether the 
system would be in compliance at the end of 10 years (or five in the case where a system is 
availing itself of the incentivized deferral of corrosion control treatment provision). The final 
rule must make it clear that the replacement obligations are only applicable to those LSLs where 
the owner has allowed access.   
Partial Replacements: NEWWA supports the provision to allow partial replacements when 
they are conducted as part of an emergency repair or in coordination with planned infrastructure 
work. While the proposed exclusion of partial replacements during planned infrastructure work 
relative to LSL replacement projects is intended to prevent systems from intentionally 
conducting partial replacements, it does not account for customer refusal and further impedes 
lead removal. If a system is implementing a LSL replacement project in a neighborhood and a 
customer refuses to participate, prohibiting a partial replacement prevents the removal of the 
public-portion of the LSL and would require remobilization and additional costs to conduct the 
replacement in the future. EPA should remove this prohibition or at a minimum include language 
permitting partial replacements in these cases. 
SYSTEMS WITH MULTIPLE ACTION LEVEL EXCEEDANCES:  
Requiring filters: EPA should revisit the requirement to offer filters to all customers if a 
system has multiple Action Level (AL) exceedances.  With the lower proposed AL and the 
changes in sampling and reporting protocols, many systems will likely exceed the AL. Even in 
our older region, for many of the systems that have lead service lines, they account for less than 
one percent of the total number of service lines in the system.  If filters are needed at all, the 
focus should be on those buildings with LSLs.  Providing filters to buildings without a LSL will 
confuse the public and dilute the focus on replacing LSLs where they exist.  Providing them to 
buildings with LSLs could reduce the owner’s impetus to replace the LSL. EPA should 
eliminate this provision in its entirety, or at a minimum focus the offer on only those buildings 
with LSLs. 

5 
 
Availability of certified filters:  There are likely to be substantial issues with availability of 
appropriately certified filters if this becomes a nationwide mandate. We have already heard from 
systems that are proactively making filters available as part of LSL investigations and 
replacements that they are having difficulty purchasing even lots of a few hundred filters, let 
alone the thousands that would be needed for larger systems if this requirement were to be 
implemented.  
If EPA chooses to retain any part of this requirement, it must clarify what the term “make 
filters available” means in practice, as the preamble states that the system must only make them 
available at “no direct cost” for low-income customers which implies that for all others, they 
could be offered to the customer at cost3.  EPA should consider the feasibility of creating a 
national program, similar to the COVID test kit program, where EPA would directly provide 
certified filters to consumers.  This would simplify the requirement and make it nationally 
uniform. 
We also believe there will need to be an aggressive public outreach campaign conducted by EPA 
on the proper maintenance of POU filters.  Filters need to be regularly changed to ensure that 
water quality is maintained.  Our members are concerned that improperly maintained filters 
could lead to unintended negative public health impacts due to biological growth, etc.      
SAMPLING AND RESULTS REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:  
Rejecting inappropriate samples: EPA should further clarify when a system can reject an 
inappropriately collected sample. The rule preamble discusses ways a system can identify and 
avoid analyzing inappropriately collected samples, but there is no parallel rule. EPA should 
either provide additional language in the rule itself, or at a minimum develop explicit 
guidance that buildings that are not currently occupied or samples with stagnation times in 
excess of 12 hours should be discarded and new samples collected.  
Sample reporting requirements:  Requiring that sample results be provided to the sampler 
within three calendar days presents systems with the substantial risk of inadvertent and 
potentially unavoidable non-compliance.  Analysis and reporting of results typically takes 
several weeks from when the sample is collected - one or two additional days to provide the 
results is not a crisis. Monday holidays and shortened Friday work hours mean that when results 
are received on a Friday, there may well be no one to receive and respond to the data during that 
entire three-calendar-day period.  Water system staff have many varied responsibilities to 
manage their systems actively and safely; there is not a dedicated staff person awaiting results, 
ready to jump into action to immediately generate and distribute letters. EPA should change the 
rule to allow at a minimum, 5 business days and more ideally 7 business days, and limit 
rapid data transmittal to samples over the Action Level, retaining the current 30-day 
notification for all other samples.  Requiring as EPA proposes in the LCRI that all samples 
receive rush delivery notification defeats the purpose of quickly delivering elevated results.  
When a result is over the AL, water system staff should be able to prioritize directly connecting 
 
3 This requirement is clearly distinguished for the language related to replacement of LSL or disturbances of LSL 
which requires that the system “provide filters and replacement cartridges.”  

6 
 
with and educating those samplers (and beginning the process of working with the resident to 
begin the required Distribution System and Site Assessment).  
Sampling schedules: EPA should consider staggering implementation of standard monitoring. 
In prior rules, EPA has staggered certain requirements for monitoring with larger systems going 
first, and smaller systems staggered behind.  This allows for some lessons to be learned, and 
mitigates overload of laboratory capacity and primacy agency attention.  
Sample Collection Frequency: Systems with no LSLs with current sampling results below the 
AL that have qualified for reduced monitoring for many consecutive years should have a means 
to continue on reduced monitoring as deemed appropriate by the Primacy Agency. 
INVENTORY REQUIREMENTS:   
EPA should remove fire services and other non-potable service lines from inventory and 
replacement requirements if there are appropriate administrative safeguards to prevent potable 
uses. Similarly, there has been confusion about system obligations for piping downstream of the 
recognized service line.  A service line is clearly defined as connecting the system’s main with 
the building.  Additional piping connecting buildings, or connecting buildings with 
appurtenances on private property are not service lines. It should not be the responsibility of the 
water system to try to decipher materials beyond the service line, in facilities such as trailer parks 
or office or condominium complexes.  
 
EPA should remove service lines serving abandoned properties from inventory and 
replacement requirements if there are appropriate administrative safeguards to assure 
construction of appropriate service line materials prior to the property receiving service. If the 
system has the appropriate administrative safeguards in place, this serves no useful purpose and 
diverts resources from achieving LSL replacement at occupied locations.  
 
EPA should retain the LCRR requirement that systems must only replace lead connectors as 
they are encountered.  EPA should not include the replacement of connectors in the mandatory 
LSL replacement requirements because in many cases connector material records are not 
available, and field investigating all connector material in the absence of records would not be 
feasible or practical for most systems. Lead connectors should only be included in service line 
inventories for the purpose of identifying potential sampling locations, and only where existing 
records indicate their presence.  
Galvanized service lines: While NEWWA supports the inclusion of galvanized service lines 
downstream of a LSL in the inventory and replacement mandates of the proposed rule, we do 
not support the inclusion of those galvanized services that ever were downstream of a LSL or 
are currently downstream of unknown service lines in the inventory and replacement mandates. 
Including them in the mandate increases the total cost of replacement programs, with limited 
benefit. In addition, as EPA is requiring that all unknowns be resolved within 10 years, any 
galvanized service lines downstream of unknowns will be either identified as needing 
replacement because the upstream line was positively identified as lead, or the upstream service 
line will be positively identified as not lead. In the case of the latter, EPA should remove its 
requirement for systems to demonstrate that the upstream portion was never a LSL, as this is not 

7 
 
possible given the previously unknown nature of the material, and instead reclassify the service 
line as non-lead and remove it from the replacement pool.  
Use of state laws or regulation prohibiting lead: EPA should be explicit that service lines 
without recorded material can  be classed as non-lead if state law or regulation extant at the time 
of construction prohibited the use of lead.  For example, the 1926 Maine State Law Lead Pipe 
ban should be allowed to qualify homes built in or after 1927 to be classified as Non-Lead.  
 
Simplifying Inventory Updates:  Systems with online inventories should be able to simply 
notify their state primacy agency annually with summary statistics on any changes and provide 
instructions on how to access their online inventory. There is no need for these systems to 
annually re-submit the complete inventory to the state.  
 
Validation Requirements: EPA should reconsider the content and timing of the proposed 
inventory validation requirement. The validation requirement will represent a distraction and 
unnecessary resource drag for many systems. The requirements are overly prescriptive, and the 
deadline overlaps with the most important time when systems will be working to make real 
progress at LSL replacement. Validation should only be necessary if the state primacy agency 
finds that the methods used to develop the inventory are unreliable. States should be given the 
latitude to review and approve validation work done prior to the LCRI implementation date.  
NEWWA also recommends that the validation language explicitly state that only one point on 
the private side and one point on the public side need validation.  EPA should also state that 
service lines that have been identified by a record on one side of the service and physical 
inspection on the other side do not need to be included in the validation pool.  
ELIMINATION OF THE TRIGGER LEVEL AND LOWERING THE ACTION LEVEL  
NEWWA supports the efforts that EPA has made to slightly simplify the rule by eliminating 
the Trigger Level.  However, EPA has failed to adequately analyze and document the 
synergistic impacts of lowering the Action Level, changes to the sampling site selection focusing 
on LSLs, and new sampling and reporting protocols using the highest of 1st and 5th liter samples. 
These proposed changes combined with the 24-hour public notice requirement will do 
unnecessary damage to public confidence as more systems exceed the Action Level, not because 
water quality is worse, but because the goal posts and game rules have been changed.  
OUTREACH AND EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS:  
Flexibility to improve coordinated outreach: EPA should carefully review all outreach 
activities for consistency, and design them as an integrated public education program. The 
outreach requirements must allow sufficient flexibility so that they can be thoughtfully 
integrated into a cohesive whole, helping consumers make good choices rather than 
unnecessarily scaring or confusing them. As currently proposed, customers in systems over the 
Action Level would receive the following outreach during a 12-month period:  
1. Two consumer confidence reports, with additional information on LSLs;  

8 
 
2. an annual notice that they have a LSL or unknown (perhaps 4 additional times if their 
street is in a current LSL replacement program);  
3. exposure to the 24 hour Public Notice, and  
4. a lead education brochure with information on LSLs and replacement efforts (potentially 
twice that year).   
As part of that cohesive education program, for systems with LSLs, EPA should ensure that 
the 24-hour Public Notice template emphasizes the following:  
1. That the samples were taken at homes with LSLs,  
2. That customers would have received information about the presence of a LSL or 
unknown, and  
3. A focus on actions the system and residents can take to replace  LSLs and identify 
unknowns.  
The goal should be to encourage consumer action to permanently reduce their potential exposure 
through drinking water by replacing their LSL if they have one.   
The current 60-day delivery requirement should be retained for Public Education after an 
Action Level exceedance. Especially with all the lead-related outreach efforts described above, 
including the new 24-hour Public Notice, there is no need to unnecessarily rush delivery of the 
public education brochures.  
CORROSION CONTROL TREATMENT: 
Corrosion control treatment: Any required changes to treatment and water quality parameters 
needs to be system specific. A one size fits all approach to establishing Optimum Corrosion 
Control Treatment presents real risk to what is often a carefully crafted balancing of objectives 
for simultaneous compliance. Rule text and guidance must make this clear.  
 
SIMPLIFYING REQUIREMENTS FOR SYSTEMS WITH FEW OR NO LSLs: 
 
EPA should consider simplifying the compliance and reporting path for systems with no LSLs or 
unknowns. If a system has no identified LSLs or GRR, and no specific indication that they were 
used historically, there should be no need to conduct extensive potholing or other validation 
efforts, nor should service lines currently inventoried as unknown require risk mitigation efforts 
after disturbances. In cases where there are no known LSLs and no documented history that any 
had ever been installed, the likelihood of unknowns being lead is slight, and the primacy agency 
should have the flexibility to reduce the level of required effort.  
Systems with no LSLs and unknowns or connector updates should be able to submit a statement 
to their Primacy Agency to certify that no inventory updates are currently required.  
SCHOOL SAMPLING:  
NEWWA agrees that EPA has offered some additional flexibility for systems that have worked 
with schools and/or childcare facilities on lead testing, but believes the changes do not go far 
enough.  Primacy agencies should have the flexibility to exempt (or reduce the scope of testing 

9 
 
for) systems with recent past or ongoing school and childcare facility lead testing programs, even 
if they are not exactly congruent with the specific requirements in the proposed rule.  
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to comment on this complex and important effort to further 
reduce potential lead exposures to consumers from drinking water and premise plumbing.  
 
Kirsten King, CEO 
New England Water Works Association, Inc. 
Representing 2,000 Water Professionals Across New England 
 
Joseph Duncan, President 
Green Mountain Water Environment Association 
Representing 450 Vermont Water Professionals 
 
 
Nicole Pellenz, Executive Director 
Maine Water Utilities Association 
Representing 1,600 Maine Water Professionals 
 
Jennifer Pederson, Executive Director 
Massachusetts Water Works Association, Inc. 
Representing 1,400 Massachusetts Water Professionals 
 
Samuel Currier, President and CEO 
New Hampshire Water Works Association, Inc. 
Representing 300 New Hampshire Water Professionals 
 
Jessica Lynch, President 
Rhode Island Water Works Association 
Representing 150 Rhode Island Water Professionals

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1346 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
700 Fifth Avenue |  PO Box 34018  |  Seattle, WA 98124-4018  |  206-684-3000  |  seattle.gov/util 
 
 
February 5, 2024  
 
The Honorable Michael Regan  
Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC  20460  
 
 
FOR ELECTRONIC DELIVERY  
RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper Improvements (Docket ID#:  
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801)  
 
Dear Administrator Regan,  
Seattle Public Utilities (SPU) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the Proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI).   SPU would like to express our support for the Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements in general.  Public health protection should be a top priority for the US 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), including the reduction of exposure to lead. 
 
There are a number of areas of the rule that we have concerns about or would like clarification. 
 
1. School and Childcare testing requirements as written in the LCRI and LCRR could result in 
an increased burden on utilities with little to no public health improvement for some 
utilities, especially if the utility has very low lead levels (<lead PQL) in routine testing and is 
producing water meeting the optimized corrosion control treatment (OCCT) requirements.  
Limiting the use of lead testing results from schools to only those completed after 2021 
seems unnecessarily restrictive.  Any lead results from testing done at schools and 
childcare facilities that meets the proposed sampling criteria should be allowed as long as 
the utility can show that water quality conditions have been consistently meeting the OCCT 
requirements during the time of testing, the utility’s 90th percentile level is consistently 
below the 5 ppb, and the facilities are not connected to the system by a lead service line or 
GRR.  Please clarify if the school testing requirements include privately operated schools. 
 
2. Please clarify that utilities with no known lead service lines or galvanized requiring 
replacement (GRR) can remain on reduced monitoring even if there are some unknown 
service lines in the system. 
 
3. Including connector materials (i.e. lead goosenecks) in the inventory should be a much 
lower priority than service line materials.  Many utilities do not document the materials 
used for connectors, and determining the materials used for connectors could be a huge 

700 Fifth Avenue |  PO Box 34018  |  Seattle, WA 98124-4018  |  206-684-3000  |  seattle.gov/util 
 
burden with very little public health benefit, especially for those utilities with no known lead 
service lines or GRR.   We agree with the requirement to replace lead connectors when 
encountered in the course of regular work. 
 
4. If LCRI is requiring utilities to inventory all service line materials within 10 years of 
implementation (this needs clarification), there should be a clause allowing systems with 
no known LSLs or GRR to stop updating the inventory when a certain level of “knowns” is 
reached.  For example, if the utility has documented a minimum of 10% (or whatever a 
statistically representative number is) of their service lines, and no lead service lines were 
found, it should be assumed that the remaining service lines are also not lead. 
 
5. Please clarify if utilities with no known lead service lines on the public side, but a significant 
portion of unknowns on the private side:  
 
o Will be subject to the requirement of replacing “unknowns” at a rate of 10% per 
year. 
 
o Will need to provide filter pitchers to the customers with unknown materials. 
 
o Will need to offer tap sampling to those customers with unknown service lines. 
 
6. Please clarify the start date for distributing pitchers when lead connectors are found and 
replaced. 
 
7. Please clarify if utilities with no known lead service lines on the public side, but with lead 
connectors, will need to change sampling locations if the location of the lead connectors is 
unknown.   
 
8. Reporting results to customers within 3 days of receiving the results from the laboratory 
may be a burden for those utilities with results <5 ppb.  This requirement should only apply 
to those customers with results > 5 ppb. 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide comments on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements.  If you have any questions regarding these comments, please contact Seattle 
Public Utilities at lynn.kirby@seattle.gov or 206-684-0216. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Lynn Kirby 
SPU Water Quality Engineer 
 
 
Cc: 
Alex Chen, SPU Water Line of Business Deputy Director  
Winsome Robinson Williams, SPU Drinking Water Quality Division Director

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1386 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
EPA Docket Center, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20460
Dear Administrator Regan,
Enclosed you will find the names of 865 individuals who commented on your proposed regulations to
establish emissions standards for heavy-duty vehicles such as delivery trucks, garbage trucks,
day/sleeper cabs, and school/transit buses. These standards aim to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
starting in model year 2027. The rule sets vehicle emission standards for new heavy-duty trucks and
buses.
The signers below agree that:
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of
water systems by 2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of
exposure to lead, young people want the EPA to adopt strong standards that help our nation address one
of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic lead pipes. That is why I’m writing
to show my support.
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as
prioritizing replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action
level—are a strong step in the right direction.
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the
most transparent, equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect
public health by finalizing the most ambitious rule possible by October 2024.
Thank you for your consideration.
Sincerely,
Kyli Wagner
Director, Defend Our Future

﻿Contact Name Preferred State/Province
"Gomez, Jessica"
MD
"Erpelding-Garratt, Elizabeth"FL
"Salazar, Francisco J"TX
"Padmanabhan, Urmila"
CA
"Bobitsky, Bug"
CO
"Massey, Cf massey" NY
"Christen, Louis"
ME
"Mulcare, James"
WA
"Jordan, Lois MARIE" AZ
"Goldstein, Sonia E"
NY
"Brzezinski, Matt"
MI
"Wilson, angela S"
VA
"Steichen, Dale E"
IL
"Daniells, Eva"HI
"countryman, charles r"
OH
"Tovar, John" IA
"Morris, Kevin"TN
"Edwards, David"
OR
"Windhauser, Bret"
NY
"Angell, JL"
CA
"Schwab, Judith Kay" WA
"Meyer, Colonel RONALD"
FL
"Eisenhower, Diane" FL
"Sewald, Michelle"
CO
"Schwab, Judith Kay" WA
"Sanchez, Dana"
CO
"Smith, Velda" AZ
"Magpale, Mario"
CA
"Swa, Mo"
ID
"Radwany, Julia"
OH
"O'Neil, Bob"
RI
"Stern, Richard"
NY
"Temple, Michele"
NY
"Spafford, Michael"
OH
"Gilman, Meg" NH
"Erlbaum, Sheila J"
PA
"Colton, Cammy"
KS
"Granlund, Fred"
CA
"Sanderson, Michele" CA
"Lupien, Sue Ellen"
AR
"Horwitz, Martin A"
CA
"hartman, nancy B"
CA

"Larick, Bob"
NC
"Bonn, Ernestine G"
CA
"Kliche, Diana S"
CA
"Sanderson, Michele" CA
"Justin, Karen"CA
"Hanna, Rebecca"
CA
"Harper, Marilynn A"
PA
"Stolfi, Jackie" NY
"Kornfeld, Laurel E"
NJ
"Glier, Ingeborg BARBARA" NV
"Mikus, Michael"
CA
"Evan, V"
IL
"Stawinoga, Greg A" IL
"Kulkarni, Robin"
MN
"Scott, Carole M"
MO
"Whitten, Gail"OK
"Alsieux, Barbara"
NJ
"Snyder, Joanne M"
CA
"McClintock, Gloria"
WA
"Roemisch, Debrah L"
IN
"Hoch, Barbara ANN" MA
"English, Victoria"
MA
"Granato, Linda LORETTA"
PA
"Nacey, Tom" WI
"Walker, David A."
AZ
"Allison, Paul" TX
"Vaught, Kevin Kevin" TN
"Weisgram, Stefanie" MN
"Silesky, Ericka"
NM
"Babore, Patti"NV
"Dorsey, Ann" CA
"Davenport, June"
MA
"Tereschak, Cassandra"
PA
"Rosen, Ken" CA
"Oda, John ARTHUR"CA
"Deery, Theresa"
SC
"Gillaspie, Richard"
TN
"Allen, Kimberly G."
TX
"Garvey, Lydia MARY"
OK
"Hauer, Nancy JOANN"
MN
"Bedri, Muse" PA
"Katsouros, Tracey"
MD
"Porter, Joelle ELIZABETH"
NV

"English, Shirley TAYLOR"
MO
"Mireault, Kathleen A"MA
"Beausoleil, Mychal Demi"
TX
"Woodall, Sandra SCOTT"
TX
"Johnson, Richard N" WA
"Hohenshelt, Felicity" FL
"Tate, Charmaine"
CA
"Wettersten, Jill"
OH
"Pardi, Marco M"
GA
"Rizzonelli, Alan"
WA
"Zettek, Sarah"
MA
"Mason, Kathy JANE" MI
"East, Christopher"
WA
"Burchell, Alison"
CO
"nasta, steven"
NY
"Foley, Susan F"
MA
"Valney, JOHN Shirley"
NV
"Turner, Carolyn AVON"
GA
"Berumen, Yolanda"
CA
"Iltis, Michael G"
WI
"Watson, Harold Watson"
MO
"Pavcovich, Michelle" WA
"BENOIT, MARIA"
MI
"Smith, Robert Arthur"PA
"LaRue, Erik ROBERT"
WA
"Johnson-Todd, Evelyn"
CA
"Derrickson, Ray"
NC
"Saarinen, Tamara A" WA
"Boice, Ruth LOUISE"
NJ
"Grant, Mary" VA
"Murdock, Lauren"
CA
"Yow, Linda J" MO
"Jumonville, John B." TX
"Andrychowski, Steven"
CT
"Tuning, Sarah"
ID
"Weinstein, Pamela Ann"
GA
"Herndobler, Beth"
CA
"Ansah, Ama" DC
"Wootan, Cathy"
OH
"Redish, Maryellen VICTORIA"
CA
"P, Meera"
CA
"Hickey, Ronald GEORGE"
IL
"Tountas, Barbara"
WA

"Mackey, Frederick"
CO
"Maeve, Caitt" CO
"Hartig, Frank"NC
"Saxon, Diana SUE" OR
"Burns, Charlie"
CT
"Goetschius, Lascinda G"
NJ
"Jensen, Cornelia J"
AZ
"Dishman, Patricia"
TN
"Muchowski, Phoenix"
MN
"Brabham, Lorraine E"
NJ
"Lomas, Leslie S"
CO
"malina, joseph"
NV
"Porter, Tim"
FL
"Del Valle, Javier"
CA
"Shed, Francene"
OK
"Moss, Andrew"
CO
"Frohn, Joyce E."
WI
"Koester, Emily"
VA
"Price, Marilyn F"
CA
"Welkowitz, William DANIEL" VA
"Bridges, Linda L"
IL
"barrows, mike"
MA
"Schmidt, Roger WILLIAM"
WI
"Findlay, Clinton"
NY
"Novkov, Russell"
WI
"Kling, Joanna"
IL
"La Serra, Stephen"
MA
"Inlender, Rosina"
NY
"Charrier, JL" MN
"BABBITT, SUSAN Mary"
PA
"heyn, louis"
CA
"McCarthy, Julie"
CO
"Schultz, Arnie"
CO
"Mathews, Holger MICHAEL" WA
"Albright, Gary"
WA
"Wilmoth, Charles"
NC
"Danowski, K WILLIAM"
PA
"Townsend, Sara"
CA
"Bobroff, Alex A."
IL
"Roderer, Sara RodererSara" VA
"Noel, Darrell" NY
"Shallman, Elsy"
FL
"Viacrucis, John D"
MN

"White, Nancy P"
WA
"Beggs, Lilian"CA
"Arnold, Carlos"
CA
"Larick, Bob"
NC
"Bowman, Candy"
CA
"Hurwitz, Jeffrey A"
CA
"Corey, Marilee"
OR
"Bailey, Stephen LEA"WA
"Lopez, Randy"
TX
"Coltman, Evelyn"
NC
"Florio, Dawn" OH
"Hoehne, Angela"
AL
"Thompson, Jahrell"
NY
"Clapp, Jonathan"
MA
"Anderson, Dorothy A"
MA
"Prostko, Linda D"
MI
"Lord, Herbert A"
SC
"Jones, Michele"
CO
"Rynes, Michael J"
IL
"sorensen, lenore HELEN"
CA
"Jones, Avery"FL
"Lindsay, Jessie"
NJ
"McAuliffe, Elizabeth A"
IL
"Taylor, melvin R"
CA
"Zinn, Andrea"NY
"Provost, Clifford J"
NY
"Buchanan, Robert"
CA
"Garcia, Armando A. A."
CA
"Larson, Beth" AZ
"Bohney, John"
MO
"Russelle, Carole"
OR
"Hanks, Laura Laura" OR
"graves, michelle"
MO
"Sedon, Douglas"
MD
"Alloway, Richard"
PA
"Skolnick, Kate R"
NY
"Clark, Marilyn JEAN" VA
"Salt, Max"
RI
"Campanini, Thomas A"
PA
"Barrett, Donna"
IL
"Misovich, Maria"
IN
"Steers, Sandra"
VA
"Pragheimer, Michael"PA

"Piker, Tanya" CO
"Graves, Thomas M" PA
"Blackwell-Marchant, Patricia"
CA
"Zizzo, James J"
NC
"Carnahan, Cheryl"
NY
"Sabinson, Mara B"
NH
"Rocco, Chuck"
CA
"Ogle, Veronica"
NV
"Eisenberg, Paul David"
MD
"Graves, Thomas M" PA
"Garitty, Michael K"
CA
"Wu, Blake"
CA
"Agulnick, Mark"
NY
"Phan, Tammy"
MO
"MacNeil, d'Anne"
AZ
"Moran, Judy" FL
"Sells, Gregory"
TX
"Betts, Grace M"
NY
"Shokenu, David"
WA
"Richardson, Annick D"
OH
"Davis, Heather ANNE"
OR
"barry, karyn L"
MA
"Bailey, Stephen LEA"WA
"Fitch, Kaitlin" NY
"Plutschuck, Donna" CO
"Grenard, Mark Hayduke"
AZ
"Harris, Tom" NJ
"Likens, Jessica"
CA
"Vogt, Axel"
TX
"Christensen, Julie"
WI
"Richie, Lauren MICHELLE" AL
"Castro, Mafalda"
KY
"Raible, Annette MARIE"
CA
"ALK, MAGGIE"
WI
"Barrera, Edwin"
NY
"Fergeson, Cheryl"
UT
"E, Cheryl"
TX
"Forman, Janet G"
NY
"Guancione, Karen"
NJ
"Wagner, Kyli" WI
"Connelly, Barbara FRANCES"
MD
"Jordan, Lois MARIE" AZ
"Steichen, Dale E"
IL

"Stolfi, Jackie" NY
"Onessimo, Dean"
FL
"Althiser, Kenneth C" CA
"Gilman, Meg" NH
"Goldstein, Sonia"
NY
"nasta, steven"
NY
"Berumen, Yolanda"
CA
"Provost, Clifford J"
NY
"Hoch, Barbara ANN" MA
"Layne, Allister Anthony"
GA
"Brzezinski, Matt"
MI
"Gill, Alan"
NV
"forman, fay"
NY
"P, Meera"
CA
"hemmila, rodney"
MN
"Beckerman, Gary Beckerman M"
CA
"Gorman RN, Bonnie"MA
"Smith, Robert Arthur"PA
"Albanese, Dawn M" IL
"Herndobler, Beth"
CA
"Radwany, Julia"
OH
"Inlender, Rosina"
NY
"Mulcare, James"
WA
"Ku, Michelle E"
CO
"Diamond, Michael"
NY
"Conard, Linc" CA
"Jackson, Shirley"
MO
"Hull, Gary LYNN"
UT
"Brandon, Victoria J" CA
"Dowson, Eleanor"
WA
"Angell, JL"
CA
"Morris, Kevin"TN
"English, Victoria"
MA
"Edwards, David"
OR
"Padmanabhan, Urmila"
CA
"Hull, Juanita LYNN" UT
"Peirce, susan"
NM
"Kliche, Diana S"
CA
"Rowell, Patricia ANN"
VA
"Rials, Jennifer REBECCA"
MN
"Gibson-Rogers, Candi"
MI
"Moran, Judy" FL
"Mullen, Timothy"
MN

"Garcia, Armando A. A."
CA
"Teed, Cornelia B"
WA
"Kostopouelus, Brye Finoxelli"
MI
"Sabinson, Mara B"
NH
"Lazio, Rochelle A"
OH
"Swa, Mo"
ID
"Hewett, Rosemary C"
MA
"McCormack, Alex"
NJ
"Kulkarni, Robin"
MN
"Keim, Lisa M"IL
"Temple, Michele"
NY
"O'Neil, Bob"
RI
"Greer, Helen Gex"
AZ
"Carnahan, Cheryl"
NY
"Muchowski, Phoenix"
MN
"Vaught, Kevin Kevin" TN
"Daniell, Clerc"
WV
"Corey, Marilee"
OR
"Tountas, Barbara"
WA
"Strycker, Chloe"
TX
"countryman, charles r"
OH
"Glaeske, Lynne"
CO
"Drinkwater, Edward" PA
"Khaang, Harley"
MD
"Stern, Richard"
NY
"Mecke, Ernst"CA
"Katsouros, Tracey"
MD
"Granato, Linda LORETTA"
PA
"Horwitz, Martin A"
CA
"Swanson, Betsy"
CT
"Walker, David A."
AZ
"Gillaspie, Richard"
TN
"Mireault, Kathleen A"MA
"Cole, Lincoln P"
FL
"Hanna, Rebecca"
CA
"Nacey, Tom" WI
"Faith-Smith, Bonnie" MA
"Smith, Charles"
FL
"Solomon, Donald J" RI
"Corry, Ronit" CA
"dicken, donald"
MD
"Becker, Elaine"
VA
"Hurwitz, Jeffrey A"
CA

"Gold, Warren M."
CA
"Lord, Herbert A"
SC
"Schwab, Judith Kay" WA
"Saxon, Diana SUE" OR
"Levin, Beth G"
OR
"Allen, Kimberly G."
TX
"Wilson, angela S"
VA
"Erlbaum, Sheila J"
PA
"Salazar, Francisco J"TX
"BABBITT, SUSAN Mary"
PA
"Grenard, Mark Hayduke"
AZ
"Clapp, Jonathan"
MA
"Dickerson, Susan CHARLOTTE"
MD
"Bock, Ketra" NM
"Grose, Harriet"
NJ
"Grose, Harriet"
NJ
"Prostko, Linda D"
MI
"Butler, Mark" SC
"Grose, Harriet"
NJ
"Ridgeway, Willam"
PA
"Matthews, Allison PAIGE"
GA
"Porter, Susan Snyder and Susan"
PA
"Porter, Susan Snyder and Susan"
PA
"Roderer, Sara RodererSara" VA
"Allison, Paul" TX
"Iltis, Michael G"
WI
"McClure, Louise"
NJ
"Stawinoga, Greg A" IL
"Sedon, Douglas"
MD
"McCarthy, Maureen R"
MA
"Kirchner, John"
IN
"Stanley, Doris"
FL
"Lackowitz, Deborah" OR
"Garvey, Lydia MARY"
OK
"Francis, Stuart"
IA
"Bedri, Muse" PA
"Kailihiwa, Juliana"
HI
"Tereschak, Cassandra"
PA
"Wright, Felicia"
AZ
"Ney, Janet"
PA
"Oda, John ARTHUR"CA
"Jones, Michele"
CO
"hartman, nancy B"
CA

"Andrychowski, Steven"
CT
"Goetschius, Lascinda G"
NJ
"Barrett, Donna"
IL
"Wiant, Jean E"
PA
"Jahn, Bev"
CO
"Eisenhower, Diane" FL
"Shelby, B.C." OR
"Zinn, Andrea"NY
"Smiley, Joy F"
NY
"Hohenshelt, Felicity" FL
"EDWARDS, GERALD"
TX
"Lupien, Sue Ellen"
AR
"Burns, Charlie"
CT
"Kornfeld, Laurel E"
NJ
"Liss, Cynthia"NY
"Danowski, K WILLIAM"
PA
"Garitty, Michael K"
CA
"Lochner, Jan"CA
"Wendell, Patricia"
PA
"Mason, Kathy JANE" MI
"Heyl, Robert" OR
"Jumonville, John B." TX
"Devine, Karla"
CA
"Kolassa, Michael F." NY
"Son, Eugene"OK
"Blackwell-Marchant, Patricia"
CA
"Jastromb, Virginia"
MA
"Farhadi, Sarina"
IL
"McClintock, Gloria"
WA
"de Seve, Richard"
NH
"Welkowitz, William DANIEL" VA
"Mylius, Jerry WAYNE"
TX
"Ahern, Eugenia"
PA
"Foley, Susan F"
MA
"Ucko, Aaron" MD
"Swartzel, Barbara"
MI
"Rosen, Ken" CA
"Miller, Titus"
PA
"Lomas, Leslie S"
CO
"Weiler, Carol"WI
"Malven, Tania J."
AZ
"Beausoleil, Mychal Demi"
TX
"Murdock, Lauren"
CA

"Fite, Gregory"CA
"Davis, Katherine"
CO
"Novkov, Russell"
WI
"hoang, lynn MI"
CA
"Massey, Cf massey" NY
"Burton, Patricia"
MD
"Watson, Harold Watson"
MO
"uiterwyk, daniel"
FL
"Cox, Lanie"
WA
"Spafford, Michael"
OH
"MacNeil, d'Anne"
AZ
"Price, Marilyn F"
CA
"Dishman, Patricia"
TN
"Loomer, Cecelia"
MO
"Jensen, Cornelia J"
AZ
"Stern, Richard"
NY
"heyn, louis"
CA
"Fogan, Sara R"
CA
"Rountree, Janet F"
VA
"Reuscher, F. Carlene"
CA
"Frohn, Joyce E."
WI
"Shook, Philip"AZ
"Taggart, David Curtis"
NJ
"Keithler, Mary ANN" CO
"Johnson-Todd, Evelyn"
CA
"Musser, Ellyn Z"
GA
"Sells, Gregory"
TX
"Claar, Ally"
CO
"Dorsey, Ann" CA
"Smith, S."
NY
"White, Nancy P"
WA
"Arnold, Carlos"
CA
"Clegg, K."
CO
"Evan, V"
IL
"McCarthy, Julie"
CO
"NEW, ROBERT"
VT
"Ripberger, Michael FRANCIS"
NM
"Ripberger, Tina"
NM
"Ayamiwin arrington, bryan iyinu"
FL
"Townsend, Sara"
CA
"Noel, Darrell" NY
"Ande, H"
MN
"Lopez, Randy"
TX

"Johnson, David"
CA
"raforth, laura" NY
"De Crignis, Marco"
TX
"Bowman, Candy"
CA
"Derrickson, Ray"
NC
"Gorte, Cynthia"
MI
"Oda, John ARTHUR"CA
"Pielke, Janet V"
CA
"Shallman, Elsy"
FL
"Shallman, Elsy"
FL
"Thompson, Andrea" OK
"Rynes, Michael J"
IL
"Harper, Marilynn A"
PA
"Canty, Ken Ken"
MA
"Hoehne, Angela"
AL
"Znidar, Erin" OH
"Jiranek, Pamela S"
VA
"Houseman, Emma S"
MA
"Spradlin, Karen WOHLBOLD"
AL
"Hartig, Frank"NC
"beatty, Nan" NC
"Jones, Avery"FL
"Bulla, Pat"
TX
"Uhing, Nicole"
IA
"Buchanan, Robert"
CA
"Uhing, Nicole"
IA
"Perryman, Toddy"
MT
"blake, richard"
MI
"Hanks, Laura Laura" OR
"Dion, Patricia B"
OH
"Mathews, Holger MICHAEL" WA
"Sheldon, Cheryl"
TX
"E, Cheryl"
TX
"Albright, Gary"
WA
"Skolnick, Katharine" NY
"Lowe, Noah" WA
"Tuning, Sarah"
ID
"Plutschuck, Donna" CO
"Sorgeler, Barbara ANNA"
DE
"Nam, S."
NY
"Zizzo, James J"
NC
"Williams, Deborah"
CO
"Alloway, Richard"
PA

"Alloway, Richard"
PA
"Kirk, Faith SHRINSKY"
MD
"Leinbach, Barbara"
PA
"Christensen, Julie"
WI
"Silver, Barbara"
OH
"Eisenberg, Paul David"
MD
"Magpale, Mario"
CA
"Florio, Dawn" OH
"Levine, Rhoda J."
NY
"Glover, Robert E."
CA
"Monson, Todd C"
NM
"Monson, Todd C"
NM
"Monson, Todd C"
NM
"Öztürk, Aysin"
KY
"Kenyon, Dawn"
NY
"Taylor, melvin R"
CA
"graves, michelle"
MO
"Dobson, Patricia M" CO
"Jones, Kyle C"
NY
"Burns, JL"
KS
"Harris, Tom" NJ
"barry, karyn L"
MA
"Konheim Heffron, Josh"
NY
"Cote, Katherine B"
MA
"Phan, Tammy"
MO
"Del Valle, Javier"
CA
"Bobroff, Alex A."
IL
"Harrison, Catherine C."
VA
"Pappano, Rachael"
ME
"Murphy, Melahn"
FL
"Hayden, Elise"
WI
"Tuning, Sarah"
ID
"Layne, Allister Anthony"
GA
"Cofer, Rosalba"
CA
"Gill, Alan"
NV
"Lanzl, Catherine A"
CA
"Tountas, Barbara"
WA
"Lochner, Jan"CA
"Castillo, Anthony GENE"
CA
"Herndobler, Beth"
CA
"Hurwitz, Jeffrey A"
CA
"Courtaway, Robbi"
MO
"Granato, Linda LORETTA"
PA

"Diamond, Michael"
NY
"hemmila, rodney"
MN
"giltzow, sheila"
WA
"Lord, Herbert A"
SC
"Zeveloff, L."
UT
"Kirk, Faith SHRINSKY"
MD
"Miller, Susan"OH
"Ridgeway, Willam"
PA
"Andrychowski, Steven"
CT
"Alexander, J" MD
"Allen, Kimberly G."
TX
"Hall, Kim"
IL
"Hedren, Shannon"
MN
"Hegedus, Barbara J" PA
"Chalker, Mikki"
NY
"Devine, Karla"
CA
"Dawson, James"
CA
"Fillmore, Jamie"
OR
"Hanna, Rebecca"
CA
"Mecke, Ernst"CA
"Rosen, Ken" CA
"Barrett, Donna"
IL
"McCormick, Douglas W"
CA
"Beaver, Patricia"
OK
"Carvajal, Rene"
TX
"Rhodes, Janet L"
CA
"Lackowitz, Deborah" OR
"Carvajal, Rene"
TX
"Sieck, Joanne"
MN
"Dowson, Eleanor"
WA
"Cordeiro, Brock N."
MA
"maggied, michael"
SD
"Onessimo, Dean"
FL
"ODwyer, Joan"
CA
"Arnold, Carlos"
CA
"Tolbert, Tim" CA
"Fortier, Fritz" NV
"Bhence, Blaze"
CA
"beatty, Nan" NC
"Bedri, Muse" PA
"Swa, Mo"
ID
"VerDuin, Melissa Melissa"
MI
"Mireault, Kathleen A"MA

"Leinbach, Barbara"
PA
"Mangiameli, Jolyn"
NE
"Leming, Chad"
LA
"Salazar, Francisco J"TX
"Beausoleil, Mychal Demi"
TX
"Friedman, Donna"
FL
"Rowe, Justin"CA
"Wiant, Jean E"
PA
"Walp, Susan P."
CA
"Lee, Steven" MO
"ackerman, judith A"
NY
"Zinn, Andrea and Eric"
NY
"Teevan, John P"
CA
"Garcia, Manny"
CO
"DuBois, John GIBBS"
WA
"Hefner, Andrew"
NC
"Reynolds, Michele Michele" MI
"Watts-Rosenfeld, Susan MARIE"
CA
"Nam, S."
NY
"Steichen, Dale E"
IL
"Staab, Alfred"KS
"Herron, John"TX
"Francis, Stuart"
IA
"Wheeler, Maureen"
MD
"Saarinen, Tanara"
WA
"Winsberg, Julie Beth"
IL
"Gillaspie, Richard"
TN
"Reeves, L"
IL
"Hull, Gary LYNN"
UT
"Johnson, Arleen"
NY
"Garcia, Armando"
CA
"Hull, Juanita LYNN" UT
"Horwitz, Martin A"
CA
"Lazio, Rochelle A"
OH
"Kondrak, Steven"
NY
"Buescher, Michael WILLIAM"
TX
"BABBITT, SUSAN Mary"
PA
"Oxman, Sharen Beth"
OH
"Bobroff, Alex A."
IL
"Reimers, Andrea DAWN"
NC
"Temple, Michele"
NY
"Morris, Kevin"TN
"SIGMANN, PETER" FL

"Bernat, Susan"
ME
"Pardi, Marco M"
GA
"Berumen, Yolanda"
CA
"Sullivan, Diane"
WA
"Schwab, Judith Kay" WA
"Leffel, Rusty" KS
"Lomas, Leslie S"
CO
"Burns, Charlie"
CT
"Hassinger, Richard" MA
"Florio, Dawn" OH
"Wilson, angela S"
VA
"Derrickson, Ray"
NC
"Kirchner, John"
IN
"Dunkle, Douglas"
NM
"Shelby, Bc"
OR
"Sewald, Michelle"
CO
"Sullivan, Tad" CA
"Hollander, Nancy"
CA
"Peter, Judith A"
FL
"Boguske, Matthew"
WA
"Bostock, Vic" CA
"Napoleon, Laura H" NY
"Sanchez, Dana"
CO
"North, Ellen" FL
"Shallman, Elsy"
FL
"Brimecombe, Lynne E."
MI
"Weisgram, Stefanie" MN
"Spradlin, Karen WOHLBOLD"
AL
"Salt, Max"
RI
"Erpelding-Garratt, Elizabeth"FL
"Mugglestone, Lindsay E"
CA
"LaRue, Erik ROBERT"
WA
"Nacey, Tom" WI
"Prostko, Linda D"
MI
"Brabham, Lorraine E"
NJ
"Hosta, Denise"
FL
"McCarter, Thomas"
CA
"Charrier, JL" MN
"de Seve, Richard"
NH
"Wilmoth, Charles"
NC
"gordon, jeffrey"
WV
"Houseman, Emma S"
MA
"Rynes, Michael J"
IL

"Stern, Richard"
NY
"Tillman, Elena"
MA
"Harris, Tom" NJ
"Hoehne, Angela"
AL
"Rittenhouse, Nancy" FL
"Melsopp, Carol"
NY
"Tomsky, Andy"
CA
"Sonin, John S."
AK
"Sedon, Douglas"
MD
"Larick, Bob"
NC
"Corey, Marilee"
OR
"Fielder, Linda A"
TX
"Modjeski, Jan"
SC
"Smock, Amanda BETH"
NY
"Mulcare, James"
WA
"Esche, Rebecca Wish"
MA
"Albright, Gary"
WA
"Rocco, Chuck"
CA
"Steffen, Maria MADELEINE"CA
"heiser, shawn"
CA
"Porter, Susan Snyder and Susan"
PA
"Moss, Drew" CO
"Albanese, Dawn M" IL
"Spafford, Michael"
OH
"Wood, Ruby" FL
"Benjamin, Elaine"
CA
"Noel, Darrell" NY
"Barrington, Tim"
CA
"Edwards, David"
OR
"Parkinson, Brian Patrick"
CO
"Nafziger, Nikki Renee"
CA
"Pritchett, Thomas H" PA
"Wienne, Jacob"
WI
"Corry, Ronit" CA
"Butler, Jane MAE"
WV
"Jones, Kyle C"
NY
"Ward, Samantha"
CO
"McClintock, Gloria"
WA
"Thinesen, Pamela"
MN
"Massey, Cf massey" NY
"Strate, Kris L"UT
"Ricciardi, Anthony A"GA
"Reisberg, Judy"
CA

"Meyer, Colonel RONALD"
FL
"Sharma, Neil"NY
"Vaught, Kevin Kevin" TN
"Vaughan, Lisa M"
MD
"barry, karyn L"
MA
"Fogan, Sara R"
CA
"Smith, Robert Arthur"PA
"Sanderson, Michele" CA
"Palm, Lowell T"
OH
"Pecoraro, Jillian"
NJ
"Jepson, Brett"
CO
"Angell, JL"
CA
"Gomez Murphy, Maria"
AZ
"Hohenshelt, Felicity" FL
"Chase, John P"
TN
"Allison, Paul" TX
"Kliche, Diana S"
CA
"Ande, H"
MN
"Dorsey, Ann" CA
"Gurtman, Audrey"
NY
"AVERETT, A.J."
CA
"Simmons, Paula J"
TN
"Hewett, Rosemary C"
MA
"Barrett, Addison"
WA
"Brunskill, Nan"
OH
"Young, Barbara"
FL
"Arnaboldi, Allan"
CA
"Eisenberg, Michael E"
NC
"Toler, Ellie"
SC
"Schiffelbian, Alexander LLOYD"
VA
"Stewart, Sarah B"
MA
"Callens, Nate"
ND
"Sorgeler, Barbara ANNA"
DE
"graves, michelle"
MO
"Goetschius, Lascinda G"
NJ
"McKee, Patrick"
OK
"Harper, Marilynn A"
PA
"Colton, Cammy"
KS
"Ostrow, Hillary"
CA
"Roemisch, Debrah L"
IN
"Moser, Paul D"
OH
"Sabinson, Mara B"
NH
"Wohlberg, Robert WILLIAM" MN

"Kulkarni, Robin"
MN
"Son, Eugene"OK
"Hartman III R.Ph., George" CO
"Welkowitz, William DANIEL" VA
"Hartig, Frank"NC
"Ucko, Aaron" MD
"Keithler, Mary ANN" CO
"Fishman, Ted"
CA
"Jones, Christopher" IN
"nasta, steven"
NY
"Blackwell-Marchant, Patricia"
CA
"Muchowski, Phoenix"
MN
"Burton, Patricia"
MD
"Becker, Elaine"
VA
"Vaccaro, Terry"
NJ
"PEIRCE, SUSAN SILBERBERG"
NM
"Grenard, Mark Hayduke"
AZ
"Gross, Sandra"
PA
"Davis, Katherine"
CO
"Sandel, Norman"
CT
"Troutman, Bruce D." FL
"Alexander, Robert"
CO
"BENOIT, MARIA"
MI
"sorensen, lenore HELEN"
CA
"Bridges, Linda L"
IL
"davis, Cory"
CO
"Carnahan, Cheryl"
NY
"Lundholm, Mark T."
IL
"Katsouros, Tracey"
MD
"Burns, JL"
KS
"Bonnett, Andrea"
CA
"Bonn, Ernestine G"
CA
"Casey, Mary Mynott" NH
"Pillinger, Hal" NY
"Goldstein, Sonia E"
NY
"Kolassa, Michael F." NY
"Hammer, Diana J"
MT
"Pavcovich, Michelle" WA
"Arnold, Charles"
NH
"Dishman, Patricia B" TN
"Jones, Michele"
CO
"Huber, Diane M."
CO
"Drinkwater, Edward" PA

"Ross, Bruce RICHARD"
TX
"Rowell, Patricia ANN"
VA
"Jordan, Lois MARIE" AZ
"Stevens, Gavi"
FL
"Mullen, Timothy"
MN
"Sink, Randle Christian"
CA
"Khaang, Harley"
MD
"Porter, Joelle ELIZABETH"
NV
"Walker, David A."
AZ
"Linden, S. A."OH
"Mehringer, Marilyn"
CO
"Croner, Margaret A." MO
"Mehringer, Marilyn"
CO
"Rehn, Debra L"
OR
"Fergeson, Cheryl"
UT
"Clark Jr, James A"
CO
"Clark Jr, James A"
CO
"Eisenberg, Paul David"
MD
"Kahakalau, Nalei"
HI
"Marangoni, Eugene" CA
"Garvey, Lydia MARY"
OK
"Saxon, Diana SUE" OR
"Crim, Noel"
AZ
"Brzezinski, Matt"
MI
"Erlbaum, Sheila J"
PA
"Burke, Dana" IL
"arena, greg N"
DE
"Russell, Donna BRICE"
CA
"Russell, Donna BRICE"
CA
"Bray, Olin"
CO
"Berry, Peggy Ann"
OH
"Percy, Patrick R."
LA
"Pennington, Jerry"
CA
"Pinsof, Robin B"
IL
"Johnson-Todd, Evelyn"
CA
"Jensen, Cornelia J"
AZ
"Watson, Harold Watson"
MO
"Killiebrew, Felicia"
MO
"Padmanabhan, Urmila"
CA
"English, Victoria"
MA
"NEW, ROBERT"
VT
"Glaeske, Lynne"
CO
"Jastromb, Virginia"
MA

"Novkov, Russell"
WI
"Jiranek, Pamela S"
VA
"Gomez, Jessica"
MD
"Houdashelt, Mark L" CO
"Houdashelt, Mark L" CO

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0818 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
unleadedkids.org
1
 
 
February 4, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T, 1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Submitted to Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801. 
 
Re: Comments on Proposed Improvements to Lead and Copper Rule:  
 
 
To Whom It May Concern:  
 
Unleaded Kids enthusiastically supports EPA’s proposed 
improvements to the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) published 
in the December 6, 2023, Federal Register. If finalized as 
proposed, the rule should virtually eliminate the estimated 9.2 
million lead service lines (LSLs) from our public water systems 
with the vast majority replaced by 2037.1 This would be a major 
achievement in the effort to reduce children’s and adult’s exposure 
to lead in drinking water. 
 
We applaud EPA for investing the three years since the 2021 LCR 
revisions to dramatically improve the rule by: 
 
Ensuring the estimated socioeconomic benefits of the rule include: 1) reduced deaths from 
cardiovascular disease (CVD) from adult exposure to lead; 2) fewer cases of Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) from early childhood exposure to lead; and 3) fewer 
cases of babies born with low birth weight from exposure to lead during the pregnancy. The 
agency’s investment in rigorously evaluating the scientific evidence and developing peer-
reviewed quantitative models demonstrates the tremendous benefits of reducing people’s 
exposure to lead, not just from drinking water but from all sources. Specifically, the 
socioeconomic benefits from the proposed rule vastly outweigh the cost and range from $17.3 to 
$34.8 billion per year – a whopping 8 to 12 times the annual cost of replacement. 
 
Requiring replacement of all LSLs as an integral part of a safe drinking water compliance 
program instead of as a last resort when the lead action level is exceeded. By uncoupling full 
LSL replacement from lead action level exceedances, Americans can have real hope that they will 
not be drinking water through a lead pipe.  
 
Refining the public notice and transparency provisions based on feedback from impacted 
communities. These improvements enable communities to better track progress, identify 
problems, and more effectively engage in helping the water system succeed. As a result, water 
systems are more likely to comply with the rule. 
 
Basing water systems responsibility to fully replace LSLs on their control of the service line 
instead of ownership and then defining control based on access. This change addresses problems 
that have plagued LSL replacement since the 1990s by enabling water systems to simply redirect 
 
1 Based on publishing a final rule in October 2024, compliance would be required in late 2027. 
Unleaded Kids is the only 
national organization focusing 
on reducing the cumulative 
impact of all sources of 
children’s exposure to lead. 
For more information see 
www.unleadedkids.org.  

 
 
Page 2 
 
responsibility to customers to address safe drinking water concerns with LSLs on private 
property.  
 
Fixing various implementation challenges so that the water systems would have significant 
incentives to replace LSLs, lead connectors, and service lines that are galvanized requiring 
replacement (GRR). When incentives are properly aligned, water systems and customers have 
greater reason to replace LSLs in a cost-effective manner.  
 
After providing our specific recommendations to improve the proposal in Part I, we will respond to 
selected EPA requests for comments in Part II. 
 
 
Part I: Specific Recommendations to Improve the Proposal 
 
As we reviewed the proposal closely, we identified several areas where it could be improved. The primary 
areas where those improvements are needed consist of: 
1. Amending the definition of “service line” to clearly include both the portions owned by the 
property owner and the water system; 
2. Providing criteria to establish when a water system has “access” to LSLs; 
3. Eliminating deferred deadline limiting mandatory full LSL replacements to 10,000 per year; 
4. Modifying the deferred deadline for 0.039 replacements so it is based on the number of service 
lines and not the number of households; and 
5. Reducing the lead action level to 5 parts per billion (ppb) but continuing to use the 10 ppb as a 
trigger for greater corrosion control.  
 
  
1. 
Amending the definition of “service line” to clearly include both the portions owned by the 
property owner and the water system. 
 
The proposal modifies 40 C.F.R. § 141.2 by simplifying the definition of “lead service line,” removing 
the definition of “full lead service line replacement,” and adding a definition of “service line.” These 
changes address significant problems with circular and confusing definitions created by the 2021 
revisions to the LCR, especially in the final three sentences of the definition of “lead service line.”2 
 
However, the changes go too far when they eliminate a reference to property ownership in the definition 
of the lead service line. Specifically, a key sentence proposed for deletion says: “A lead service line may 
be owned by the water system, owned by the property owner, or both.”3  
 
Without this sentence, water systems could define the service line as if it were in multiple parts based on 
ownership. Yet, the pipe is an integral unit designed to move drinking water from the main to the home or 
building. The service line’s function does not change based on ownership. EPA clearly – and justifiably – 
did not intend that outcome based on its reasoning in the preamble to the proposed rule and the changes 
made to § 141.84(d).  
 
2 The proposal would change the definition of lead service line at 40 C.F.R. § 141.2. as follows: “Lead service line 
means a portion of pipe that is made of lead, which connects the water main to the building inlet. A lead service line 
may be owned by the water system, owned by the property owner, or both. For the purposes of this subpart, a 
galvanized service line is considered a lead service line if it ever was or is currently downstream of any lead service 
line or service line of unknown material. If the only lead piping serving the home is a lead gooseneck, pigtail, or 
connector, and it is not a galvanized service line that is considered a lead service line the service line is not a lead 
service line. For purposes of § 141.86(a) only, a galvanized service line is not considered a lead service line.”  
3 Id. 

 
 
Page 3 
 
 
We strongly encourage EPA to restore the sentence by adding it to the end of the definition of “service 
line” so it reads:  
 
Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe which connects 
the water main to the building inlet. Where a building is not present, the service line connects the 
water main to the outlet. A service line may be owned by the water system, owned by the property 
owner, or both. 
 
The definition of a “lead service line” would remain as proposed to read: 
 
Lead service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a service line that is made 
of lead or where a portion of the service line is made of lead. 
 
 
2. 
Providing criteria to establish when a water system has “access” to LSLs.  
 
According to the preamble of the proposed rule, the improvements to the LCR are intended to require that 
water systems conduct full LSL replacement without regard to ownership, as long as they are under the 
control of the water system. In the proposal, “control” is based on “access” to the service lines, and the 
proposal provides “requirements and flexibilities to increase access and expedite full service line 
replacement . . .”4  
 
Unfortunately, the proposal does not establish criteria that water systems can follow to determine whether 
they have access to a service line. Without clear criteria, water systems are likely to narrowly define 
“access” so that an LSL that is owned by a private property owner, in part or in whole, is not the system’s 
responsibility. This issue has plagued progress on LSL replacement and undermined efforts to reduce lead 
in drinking water since 1991. 
 
Instead of providing useful criteria to establish if access is present, EPA takes the unusual - and 
unnecessary – step of stating at § 141.84(d)(2)(i) that “[t]his rule does not establish the criteria for 
determining whether a system has access to conduct full service line replacement.” Nonetheless, § 
141.84(d)(2) hints at criteria with a confusing parenthetical example - “(e.g., legal access, physical 
access).”  
 
The resulting ambiguity is likely to make one of the most important provisions of the proposed rule 
difficult to enforce – an unfortunate outcome that undermines the public health goal of the Safe Drinking 
Water Act (SDWA) because it all-to-often leaves environmental justice communities that lack the 
resources, political clout, or access to lawyers most at risk.  
 
In the preamble, EPA explained that it was silent “because of the wide variation of relevant State and local 
laws and water tariff agreements as well as the potential for these to change over time.”5 We recognize 
that there is a wide variation in laws and that they change over time, but that is hardly justification to 
avoid establishing criteria that would avoid confusion and endless legal disputes. 
 
4 88 Federal Register 84920 stating that “EPA is proposing to treat a service line as under the system’s control 
wherever a water system has adequate access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full service line 
replacement. This means that a water system would be in violation of the rule if the system fails to replace a service 
line in accordance with the proposed requirements even though it has adequate access to conduct a full service line 
replacement.”  
5 Id. 

 
 
Page 4 
 
 
From our perspective, SDWA’s purpose is to protect public health. This is a public purpose that empowers 
government agencies at the federal level and in every State to act even if it involves private property.  
 
In this case, we suggest that the criteria be added to § 141.84(d)(2) that sets forth a process that water 
systems should follow to determine if they have sufficient access, and, therefore, control. The process 
should be based on the provisions of the proposed rule that require water systems to seek access by 
engaging with the owner of property under which the service line is buried. If the property owner 
provides access and gives a green light to the water system to replace the service line, the water system 
has control. If the property owner refuses to provide access, the water system lacks the control needed to 
trigger the full service line replacement provisions. In addition, the proposed rule recognizes that property 
owners change by requiring water systems to provide notice of the LSL to new customers with the 
language inviting the new owner to have the service line replaced.  
 
Therefore, we recommend the following changes6 to proposed § 141.84(d) regarding mandatory full 
service line replacement: 
 
(1) All water systems must replace all lead and galvanized requiring replacement service lines 
under the control of the water system unless the replacement would leave in place a partial lead 
service line.  
 
(2) Where a water system has access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full service 
line replacement, the service line is under its control, and the water system must replace the 
service line regardless of ownership of the line or the property it is on. Where a water system 
does not have access to conduct full service line replacement, the water system is not required by 
this rule to replace the line, but the water system must document the reasons that the water system 
does not have access and include any specific laws, regulations, and/or water tariff agreements 
that affect the water system’s ability to gain access to conduct full replacement of lead service 
line or a and galvanized requiring replacement service line replacement identified pursuant to 
paragraph (c)(1)(viii) of this section. The water system must provide this documentation to the 
State pursuant to § 141.90(e)(10).  
 
(i) This rule does not establish the criteria for determining whether a system has access to 
conduct full service line replacement. The criteria for determining whether a system has 
access to conduct full service line replacement include: whether the system can safely 
enter the property; whether the system can safely conduct the replacement; and whether 
the system has obtained the property owner’s consent, if consent is required for access. 
Presence of a lead service line on private property does not, by itself, determine whether 
a system has access to conduct full service line replacement for purposes of this rule. Any 
State or local laws or water tariff agreement requirements to gain access to conduct full 
service line replacement must be identified in the service line replacement plan as 
described in paragraph (c) of this section and in the notification provided to persons 
served by lead, galvanized requiring replacement, and unknown service lines as described 
in § 141.85(e).  
 
(3) Where a water system has legal access pursuant to § 141.84(d)(2)(i) to conduct full service 
line replacement only if property owner consent is obtained, the water system must make a 
‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain property owner consent or written waiver documenting refusal of 
access for the purpose of full lead service line replacement. If such a water system does not obtain 
 
6 Changes are in red font. Underlined text indicates text to be added. Strikethrough text indicates text to be deleted. 

 
 
Page 5 
 
consent after making a ‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain it from any property owner, then the water 
system is not required by this rule to replace any portion of the service line at that address.  
 
As noted above, we also recommend: 
 
Removing from § 141.84(d)(1) the confusing phrase “unless the replacement would leave in 
place a partial lead service line.” As written, it makes little sense to us since it implies that full 
replacement would not be required if a partial would remain.  
 
Adding to the first sentence in § 141.84(d)(2) the phrase “regardless of ownership of the line or 
the property it is on” to reinforce that ownership of the line is not the controlling factor. This 
phrase is in the current definition of “full LSL replacement” at § 141.2 that EPA proposes to 
delete as confusing.7  
 
Revising the text in the third sentence of § 141.84(d)(2) to avoid saying “galvanized requiring 
replacement service line replacement.” While accurate, the use of the word “replacement” twice 
so close together is awkward. 
 
Deleting the word “legal” in § 141.84(d)(3) since it is unnecessary. 
 
 
3. 
Eliminating deferred deadline limiting mandatory full LSL replacements to 10,000 per year. 
 
Unleaded Kids wants LSLs to be removed from service as soon as possible. EPA’s proposal giving ten 
years for the vast majority of water systems to remove LSLs is a significant step towards that goal. 
 
We also understand EPA’s concerns about affordability as well as the disruption to the community. 
Therefore, we are not opposed to giving a few more years to those water systems such as Chicago Water 
that have a huge number of LSLs.  
 
However, we oppose deferring the ten-year deadline based on an absolute number of LSLs – whether 
8,000 or 10,000 – replaced each year as EPA proposes at § 141.84(d)(5)(i). Unlike many major 
infrastructure projects such as installing a water treatment plant, replacing LSLs is completely scalable; 
each additional crew can increase the number of LSLs replaced. The only limit is finding crews to do the 
work – a situation that will change based on local conditions. The examples EPA provides to justify that 
limit do not address whether the water system had a reason or the capacity to go faster.  
 
In addition, EPA acknowledges that only a few cities, such as Chicago, Cleveland, or New York have so 
many LSLs that they could benefit from the deferral. In Chicago Water’s case, they will be allowed to 
defer completely full service line replacement for more than 40 years – until 2067 – to remove the LSLs. 
This is unacceptably long.  
 
We also think that writing a rule for a few water systems is inappropriate. Instead of building a deferral 
based on an absolute number into the rule, those water systems with more than 100,000 LSLs should 
pursue a variance or consent decree that is tailored to their situation much as Denver Water has done. That 
process includes public participation and periodic reviews. 
 
For these reasons, we recommend that EPA delete § 141.84(d)(5)(i).  
 
 
 
7 The current rules says” “full lead service line replacement means the replacement of a lead service line (as well as 
galvanized service lines requiring replacement), as defined in this section, that results in the entire length of the 
service line, regardless of service line ownership, . . .” (emphasis added). 

 
 
Page 6 
 
4. 
Modifying the deferred deadline for 0.039 replacements/year so it is based on the number of 
service lines and not the number of households. 
 
We see EPA’s logic in granting a deferral for water systems with a high percentage of LSLs. It is a more 
rational approach to considering affordability. 
  
Therefore, we are not opposed to the provision at § 141.84(d)(5)(i) that would defer the ten-year full 
service line replacement deadline a few years if a water system would be required to replace each year 
more than 3.9% of the number households it serves. Based on EPA’s calculations in Exhibit 4 of the 
Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI),8 5 to 17 
large systems, 141 to 420 medium systems, and 570 to 1,737 small systems may exceed this 3.9% 
threshold based on a ten-year replacement deadline. And almost all those systems would have LSLs 
replaced in 17 years.  
 
However, we recommend that EPA base the deferral on the number of service lines instead of households 
and adjust the percentage accordingly. We make this recommendation because: 
 
Determining the number of households served by a water system with confidence is difficult, 
even under the best of circumstances. For example, single family homes are often subdivided into 
multiple households and the number of homes in manufactured housing communities can change 
year-to-year. Most communities lack a solid inventory of households. 
 
Unlike households, water systems know with confidence the number of service lines because they 
use it for billing purposes.  
 
The number of service lines is an essential part of the inventory. As a result, relying on service 
lines would simplify compliance assurance and enforcement. 
 
In addition, basing the deferral for LSL replacement on the number of households creates a number of 
complications that EPA did not appear to consider. For example, multi-family properties with more than 
20 households are unlikely to have LSLs because their service lines are typically larger than 2” in 
diameter – a size that is uncommon for lead pipe. As a result, water systems with significant numbers of 
large multi-family properties would be differently affected than those large percentages of single-family 
homes. 
 
We understand that switching from households to service lines may require that EPA increase the 3.9% 
number. But the change is warranted.  
 
 
5. 
Reducing the lead action level to 5 ppb but continuing to use the 10 ppb as a trigger for 
greater corrosion control.  
 
We fully support EPA’s proposal to reduce the lead action level from 15 ppb to 10 ppb. Based on Exhibit 
4 of the preamble, 95% of water systems without LSLs can achieve 15 ppb. If they have LSLs, between 
73% and 80% can meet 15 ppb. Dropping the level to 10 ppb would mean 91% of water systems without 
LSLs can achieve it. If they have LSLs, the percentage drops to 59% to 65% depending on the 
effectiveness of corrosion control technology (CCT).  
 
8 https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0709.  

 
 
Page 7 
 
 
 
The challenge is that the lead action level is generally considered by the public to be health-based and is 
commonly used to indicate that the water has acceptable levels of lead and poses no significant risk. 
Given what we know about the risks of lead, we think that the message from a lead action level of 10 ppb 
is a problem.  
 
EPA should consider lowering it to 5 ppb – the practical quantification limit.9 This would be consistent 
with EPA August 2023 proposal10 to tighten the lead dust hazard standard for lead-based paint to a level 
that is “greater than zero.”  
 
As we reviewed EPA’s reasoning in the preamble for not adopting a lead action level of 5 ppb, it is largely 
based on the burden to water systems and States to adequately assess the proper corrosion control 
treatment. The agency also references limited technical capacity to conduct the assessment. Furthermore, 
EPA properly points to the need to focus water systems and States on LSL replacement given its 
significant impact on lead contamination of drinking water.  
 
EPA’s reasoning did not appear to consider the positive implications of a more protective level on the 
public education requirements. From our experience, a lower action level would strengthen community 
engagement and avoid implying that 10 ppb were somehow safe or without hazard. 
 
For these reasons, we suggest that, just as it did with LSL replacement, EPA should consider loosening the 
connection between lead action level exceedances and corrosion control treatment. The corrosion control 
treatment can still be conditioned on the 90th percentile exceeding 10 ppb. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 EPA sets the practical quantification limit is ‘‘the minimum concentration of an analyte (substance) that can be 
measured with a high degree of confidence that the analyte is present at or above that concentration.’’ 40 C.F.R. § 
141.2. We think EPA should also consider revising the PQL to reflect current methods but understand that the issue 
is beyond the scope of this immediate rulemaking. 
10 See August 1, 2023 Federal Register at page 50444. See also Docket No. EPA–HQ–OPPT–2023–0231 at 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2023-0231-0001.  

 
 
Page 8 
 
Part II: Responses to Selected EPA Requests for Comment 
 
A. Requests for Comment on General Matters 
Whether the proposed revisions to the LCR revision’s treatment technique are effective to prevent 
known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible in accordance with the SDWA. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: Yes, the proposed revisions should reduce anticipated adverse health 
effects from exposure to lead in drinking water. However, we provide specific recommendations 
in Part I above where the proposal should be improved in feasible and practical ways to further 
reduce those anticipated adverse health effects.  
Whether the proposed requirements of the rule are enforceable and promote compliance without the 
need for State or Federal enforcement action. EPA also solicits comment on ways the rule could be 
modified to better promote compliance. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: Yes, the proposed revisions are enforceable and should promote 
compliance without the need for State or Federal enforcement action by providing greater 
transparency and public education to impacted communities than the current version of the 
LCR. However, in Part I we provide five specific recommendations in which the proposal could 
be improved to make the rule more enforceable and promote compliance.  
 
Specifically, EPA should: 1) provide criteria to establish when a water system has sufficient 
access to conduct full service line replacements; 2) use the number of service lines instead of 
households to determine whether the water system is eligible for a deferred deadline under § 
141.84(d)(5)(i); and 3) clarify the definition of “service line” to avoid confusion about whether 
a service line can be defined by ownership rather than its function.  
B. Requests for Comment on Service Line Replacement
All aspects of the proposed scope of the replacement requirements, including the criteria used to define 
a full service line replacement (e.g., cutting the pipe at abandoned properties, replacing the entire service 
line) and which lead sources are subject to replacement under the mandatory program. EPA is seeking 
comment on whether to prohibit reconnection of any disconnected LSL or GRR service line. EPA is 
requesting comment on whether the Agency should include lead connectors or galvanized service lines 
that are or were downstream of a lead connector as part of mandatory replacement. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We enthusiastically support EPA’s proposed improvements to the 2021 
Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) published in the December 6, 2023 Federal Register. In 
particular, we support the provisions:  
1) Requiring replacement of all LSLs as an integral part of a safe drinking water 
compliance program instead of as a last resort when the lead action level is exceeded. 
By uncoupling full LSL replacement from lead action level exceedances, Americans can 
have real hope that they will not be drinking water through a lead pipe.   
2) Refining the public notice and transparency provisions based on feedback from 
impacted communities. These improvements enable communities to better track 
progress, identify problems, and more effectively engage in helping the water system 
succeed. As a result, water systems are more likely to comply with the rule. 
3) Basing water systems responsibility to fully replace LSLs based on control instead of 
ownership and defining control based on access. This change addresses problems that 
have plagued LSL replacement since the 1990s by enabling water systems to simply 

 
 
Page 9 
 
redirect responsibility to customers for fixing the issue of service lines on private 
property.  
4) Fixing various implementation challenges so that the water systems would have 
significant incentives to replace LSLs, lead connectors, and galvanized service lines 
requiring replacement. 
 
Unleaded Kids supports a prohibition on reconnection of any disconnected LSL or GRR service 
line. We also support EPA’s inclusion of lead connectors or galvanized service lines that are or 
were downstream of a lead connector as part of mandatory replacement. 
Whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent should be more than four times (e.g., five, 
six, or seven times). 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: Four times using multiple mechanisms as provided in the proposed 
rule represents a reasonable effort. While more is always better, EPA has established a practical 
minimum. 
Whether the proposed LCR improvements appropriately interprets “control” for the purposes of the 
mandatory replacement provision (i.e., require systems to conduct full service line replacement in 
situations where the system has access to conduct the full replacement). 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: Yes, the proposed improvements to the LCR appropriately interprets 
control based on access. However, EPA needs to provide criteria for water systems to use to 
determine access. We recommend in Part I, Section 2 specific changes to address those 
shortcomings. 
The proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement deadlines. EPA is seeking comment on 
whether it is feasible for systems across the nation to complete service line replacement in a shorter 
timeframe than ten years, such as in six, seven, or eight years.  
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We want to see the timeframe be as short as possible, especially if EPA 
is to provide deferred deadines. In many cases, seven years would be practical. Or the 
timeframe for complying with the rule could be shortened from three years to one since 
compliance is based on a three-year rolling average, giving the water system an opportunity to 
ramp up. 
 
We recommend that EPA drop the deferrable deadline at § 141.84(d)(5)(i) based on an absolute 
maximum. Unlike many major infrastructure projects, such as installing a water treatment 
plant, replacing each LSL is a unit operation that can be scaled up with no real limit; each 
additional crew increased the capacity of the water system to replace LSLs. The only limit is 
finding crews to do the work – a situation that will change based on local conditions. With only 
a handful of water systems having more than 100,000 LSL, EPA should rely on the other 
deferral at § 141.84(d)(5)(ii) or use the variance provisions in SDWA as it did for Denver Water 
or use a consent decree. 

 
 
Page 10 
 
EPA is seeking comment on the rate construct approach, including how to calculate compliance with a 
given service line replacement deadline and average annual rate calculated across a rolling three-year 
period. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support EPA’s proposed approach. 
EPA also seeks comment on whether systems should be required to meet a minimum replacement rate in 
the first three years after the compliance date to give States an opportunity to enforce replacement rate 
progress sooner than three years after the compliance date. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We think EPA should seriously consider requiring compliance with a 
minimum replacement rate after the first year (in 2025 if the rule is promulgated in 2024) as 
long as it allows for a three-year rolling average. The rolling average should give a water 
system that starts off slow in the first year time to make up for the shortfall in the latter two 
years.  
EPA also seeks comment on the complexity of the rate construct. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: A treatment technology rule like the LCR is inherently complex 
because it specifies how the distribution system and the relationship to customers is managed. 
We think EPA has struck a reasonable balance. 
EPA is taking comment on whether States, as a condition of primacy, or EPA when it is directly 
implementing the program, should be required to set initial shortened deadlines by a certain timeframe, 
such as no later than 60 days after the compliance date. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support initial shortened deadlines. 
The overall approach and basis to offer deferred service line replacement to systems with a high 
proportion of LSLs and GRR service lines in their distribution system relative to their total number of 
households served. EPA is requesting comment on its proposed threshold of 0.039 average annual 
number of replacements per household served, which is used to calculate the number of years that 
systems can defer. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We do not oppose the deferral deadline at § 141.84(d)(5)(ii). 
However, as described in Part I, Section 4, the deferral should be based on the number of 
service lines instead of households. We understand that EPA may need to increase the number 
greater than 0.039 with a switch to the number of service lines because there are almost always 
more households than service lines in a water system. 
Whether to require the State, as a condition of primacy, to approve the use of the deferred deadline 
provision where the water system qualifies for it and/or whether to require the State, as a condition of 
primacy, to assess whether it would be feasible for a system to meet the ten-year deadline or a shorter 
deadline even if the system meets the regulatory criteria for the deferred deadline. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We would support States assessing whether it would be feasible to 
meet the 10-year deadline or a shorter deadline even if the system meets the regulatory criteria 
for the deferred deadline. 

 
 
Page 11 
 
The proposed use of a maximum threshold of 10,000 annual service line replacements for systems with 
atypically high numbers of LSLs and GRR service lines as well as seeking comment on the alternate 
threshold of 8,000 annual service line replacements. EPA is also seeking feedback on other thresholds 
and supporting data.  
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We oppose deferring the ten-year deadline based on an absolute 
number of LSLs – whether 8,000 or 10,000 – replaced each year as EPA proposes at § 
141.84(d)(5)(i). Unlike many major infrastructure projects such as installing a water treatment 
plant, replacing LSLs is completely scalable; each additional crew can increase the number of 
LSLs replaced. The only limit is finding crews to do the work – a situation will change based on 
local conditions. The examples EPA provides to justify that limit do not address whether the 
water system had a reason or the capacity to go faster.  
 
In addition, EPA acknowledges that only a few cities, such as Chicago, Cleveland, or New York 
have so many LSLs that they could benefit from the deferral. In Chicago Water’s case, it will 
have more than 40 years – until 2067 – to remove the LSLs. This is unacceptably long.  
 
We also think that writing a rule for a few water systems is inappropriate. Instead of building a 
deferral based on an absolute number into the rule, those water systems with more than 100,000 
LSLs should pursue a variance or consent decree that is tailored to their situation much as 
Denver Water has done. That process includes public participation and periodic reviews. 
 
For these reasons, we recommend that EPA delete § 141.84(d)(5)(i). 
The requirement for systems to install a dielectric coupling when conducting a partial replacement of an 
LSL or GRR to separate the remaining LSL or GRR service line and the replaced service line unless the 
replaced service line is made of plastic and other recommended risk mitigation activities. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support the requirement to install a dielectric coupling as 
proposed. 
The proposed requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line replacement unless it is conducted in 
accordance with emergency or planned infrastructure work (excluding planned infrastructure work 
solely for the purposes of replacing lead and GRR service lines as part of a service line replacement 
program). 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We want to avoid partial LSL replacements whenever possible. We are 
not opposed to EPA’s balancing in the proposed rule by banning partials except for emergencies 
or planned infrastructure work as long as there is a ten-year deadline to replace LSLs (with very 
limited deferrals as explained above). 
EPA is seeking comment on whether partial service line replacement should be prohibited during 
“planned infrastructure work” or with certain types of planned infrastructure work. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We would recommend that EPA consider banning partial LSL 
replacement as part of planned infrastructure work. However, we understand EPA’s rationale 
for the limited exemption and are not opposed to it as long as there is a ten-year deadline to 
replace LSLs (with very limited deferrals as explained above). 
 

 
 
Page 12 
 
C. Requests for Comment on Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan
EPA is proposing a threshold of systems serving greater than 50,000 persons to host the inventory and 
plan online, which is the required threshold under the LCRR. EPA is seeking comment on the size 
threshold at which systems must host their publicly accessible inventory, inventory summary data, 
replacement summary data, and service line replacement plan online, and whether it should be lowered 
relative to the LCRR requirements. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We recommend lowering the threshold to 10,000 persons served 
because the online mapping tools are readily available to water systems. We strongly support 
the use of street addresses unless not an available as EPA has proposed. 
EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of non-lead service lines in their 
inventory that were categorized using methods other than records review or visual inspection of at least 
two points along the line. EPA is requesting comment on the number of validations required, the 
proposed 95% confidence level approach used to develop the number of validations required, the criteria 
for which methods used to categorize non-lead service lines should be included in the validation pool 
(including whether non-lead lines categorized based on records should be subject to validation), and the 
seven-year timeline for systems on a ten-year replacement deadline to complete the validation 
requirements. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We strongly support the proposed validation requirements including 
the 95% confidence level approach; greater confidence is not essential for the inventory to be 
useful. We also encourage EPA to be clear in communications to the public, States, and water 
system that absolute certainty is not possible and can be counterproductive as it draws 
resources aways from full LSL replacement. We also strongly support the requirement that the 
validation be completed three years before the replacement deadline but not longer than seven 
years.  
Comment on establishing a deadline for systems to identify all unknown service lines prior to their 
service line replacement deadlines. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We strongly support the proposed validation requirements including 
the 95% confidence level approach. We also strongly support the requirement that the validation 
be completed three years before the replacement deadline but not longer than seven years. 
Comment on a requirement for systems to update their service line replacement plans if there are any 
changes, such as changes to laws and policies applicable to full service line replacement. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We strongly support the proposed requirements to update the plan if 
there are any changes to the circumstances on which the plan is based including laws and 
policies applicable to full service line replacement. 
D. Requests for Comment on Lead Action and Trigger Levels 
EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of 0.010 mg/L, as well as comment and 
supporting data on alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, with regards to generally effective 
corrosion control treatment and identifying systems most at risk of elevated levels of lead in drinking 
water. 

 
 
Page 13 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: As explained in Part I, Section 5, we recommend that EPA drop the 
lead action level to 5 ppb. We can support keeping the corrosion control treatment requirements 
linked to 10 ppb even though it may increase the complexity of the rule. 
EPA is also seeking comment on the use of the action level to determine when additional public 
education is required, and the use of the same action level for public education as for the CCT 
provisions. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: As explained in Part I, Section 5, we recommend that EPA drop the  
lead action level to 5 ppb. We can support keeping the corrosion control treatment requirements 
linked to 10 ppb even though it may increase the complexity of the rule.  
EPA is seeking public comment, data, and information on the anticipated benefits and tradeoffs, 
including for public health and administrative burden on systems and States, if more small and medium 
systems are required to conduct a detailed optimized CCT demonstration and take other actions if they 
exceed the proposed action level of 0.010 mg/L or other lower values, while water systems are 
simultaneously mandated to conduct full service line replacement. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We think EPA is properly focusing the effort on full service line 
replacement and appropriately balanced the burden on States, water systems, and the available 
technical expertise.  
E. Request for Comment on Corrosion Control
The proposed option for a water system to delay optimized CCT until after the system has replaced all 
of its LSLs and GRR service lines, while the system achieves at least 20 percent removal per year and 
must have no LSLs, GRR service lines, or lead status unknown service lines remaining at the end of the 
five-year period. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support the proposed approach. It strikes a reasonable balance 
and is feasible. 
F. Requests for Comment on Compliance Alternatives for a Lead Action Level Exceedance for 
Small Community Water Systems and Non-Transient, Non-Community Water Systems
EPA is proposing that small system flexibilities be limited to community water systems (CWSs) serving 
3,300 persons and fewer and all non-transient, non-community water systems for the remaining 
compliance alternatives of point-of-use devices and plumbing replacement. EPA is seeking comment on 
whether the Agency should allow systems serving up to 10,000 persons (or another threshold) to be 
eligible to use the small system compliance flexibility provision. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support EPA’s proposal to use 3,300 as the threshold.  
G. Requests for Comment on Public Education
The proposed determination that the public education treatment technique is feasible and prevents 
known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We recommend that EPA drop the lead action level to 5 ppb because it 
will better educate the public, be consistent with EPA’s proposed approach on lead-dust from 
lead-based paint standards, and encourage greater participation in full service line 
replacement. See explanation in Part I, Section 5.  

 
 
Page 14 
 
Whether the types and timing of outreach activities proposed for systems failing to meet the mandatory 
service line replacement rate are appropriate and whether other activities should be considered. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support EPA’s proposal. The agency has struck a reasonable 
balance. 
Whether EPA should require systems to annually notify consumers if they are served by a lead 
connector, in addition to notifications for sites with lead, GRR, or lead status unknown service lines. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support EPA’s proposal. The agency has struck a reasonable 
balance. 
Whether EPA should require additional public education requirements to further encourage swift service 
line replacement faster than the ten-year replacement deadline. For example, should water systems that 
have LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines five years after the compliance date for the 
LCRI be required to increase the frequency of the notification of service line materials from annual to 
once every six months? 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support effective notifications. It is not clear that doing them every 
six months as opposed to annually would have much of an impact. It is more important to lower 
the lead action level for public education purposes to 5 ppb.  
H. Requests for Comment on Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action 
Level Exceedances 
Whether water systems should be required to take additional actions when the system exceeds the lead 
action level multiple times and if so, what actions are appropriate and feasible, and when these 
additional actions should be required under the LCRI. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: A water system with multiple lead action level exceedances should be 
expected to take additional actions. As was successfully done by Denver Water, one of those 
actions should include providing residents that have LSLs with NSF-53 certified filters until 
their LSL is replaced and the water has cleared sampling levels. We acknowledge that lowering 
the lead action level to 5 ppb may warrant additional tiers for multiple exceedances.  
Whether EPA should use three action level exceedances in a five-year period for identifying systems 
with multiple action level exceedances where additional action is warranted, and whether additional 
actions should be required sooner or later than the five-year period, or whether EPA should use a 
modified metric (number of consecutive action level exceedances in a set time period) or a different 
metric entirely (i.e., based on one or more factors other than the number of action level exceedances in a 
set time period). 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support EPA’s proposal. We acknowledge that lowering the lead 
action level to 5 ppb may warrant additional tiers for multiple exceedances.   

 
 
Page 15 
 
Whether EPA should require water systems to make filters certified to reduce lead and replacement 
cartridges, along with instructions for use, available to all consumers within 60 days of a system having 
multiple action level exceedances and whether there are any supporting or contrary data on whether the 
proposed filter requirement would be protective of public health. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: Yes, we think filters certified to reduce lead and replacement 
cartridges should be provided. Not only do they better protect residents, but they also provide an 
incentive to residents to participate in full service line replacement as soon as possible because 
it means they no longer need to filter their water. 
The proposed requirements for systems to develop a filter plan and submit to the State after the system 
has multiple action level exceedances for the first time, and whether EPA should require systems to take 
additional actions to facilitate filter distribution. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: Yes, but we recognize that over time, the plan may become 
standardized.  For now, Denver Water is a model that demonstrates the importance of 
supporting the filter distribution with effective public education on their use. 
Alternative requirements for systems with multiple action level exceedances to provide filters to their 
consumers, such as requiring water systems to provide filters and replacement cartridges to consumers 
served by an LSL, GRR service line, or unknown service line or to all consumers, or to require systems 
to consult with the State upon meeting the criteria for multiple action level exceedances, after which the 
State determines the appropriate action to reduce lead exposure. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support EPA’s proposal. 
An additional provision providing discretion to States to allow systems with multiple action level 
exceedances to discontinue the proposed required actions sooner if the system takes actions (e.g., 
installs optimized or re-optimized CCT, completes mandatory service line replacement) and is at or 
below the lead action level for two consecutive monitoring periods. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We can accept giving States the discretion. 
Whether, in addition to the proposed requirements, EPA should provide States discretion to determine 
appropriate action following a multiple action level exceedance that is tailored to meet specific system 
needs. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We can accept giving States the discretion. 
I. Requests for Comment on Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities 
Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or to sample more frequently in schools 
and child care facilities. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We think that every fixture used for cooking or drinking water should 
be sampled. We have not seen sufficient evidence that EPA, States, water systems, or schools are 
able to predict with confidence which fixtures are representative. If that information becomes 
available, EPA can adjust the requirements in the rule. 

 
 
Page 16 
 
The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community water systems from the 
requirement for lead sampling in schools and child care facilities during the five-year period after the 
LCRI compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021 but prior to the LCRI 
compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver requirements of § 141.92(h). 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support the provision allowing States to issue waivers in the 
circumstances described above. 
Whether or not to allow States to waive the requirements of § 141.92 for CWSs in schools and child 
care facilities that use and maintain filters certified to reduce lead, and if so, whether the waiver should 
only be allowed where schools and child care facilities are required by State or local law to install point-
of-use devices and maintain them. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: If the filters are demonstrated to be used and maintained, we can 
support allowing states to waive the requirements. 
 
The minimum requirements for States to provide a waiver (e.g., should the waiver be limited to 
locations where the filter use is required by State or local law; should the waiver be limited to locations 
where Sate or local law requires periodic sampling or testing to ensure proper filter use). 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: The rule should require periodic sampling or testing to ensure proper 
filter use. 
Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and child care facility sampling results publicly 
available, and if so, how frequently and in what manner. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support transparency. EPA should require utilities to make the test 
results publicly available if the school system or the state does not. 
J. Request for Comment on Reporting and Recordkeeping 
EPA is requesting comment on the expansion of the inventory reporting to include lead connectors and 
non-lead service lines. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support the expansion of the inventory reporting to include lead 
connectors and non-lead service lines. 
K. Requests for Comment on Compliance Dates 
Whether it is practicable for water systems to implement notification and risk mitigation provisions after 
full and partial service line replacement (§ 141.84(h)), notification of a service line disturbance (§ 
141.85(g)), and associated reporting requirements (§141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) upon the effective date of 
the LCRI. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: Because the requirements are similar enough to the ones in the 2021 
revisions to the LSL, we recommend that EPA require compliance upon the effective date of the 
LCRI.   

 
 
Page 17 
 
Whether earlier alternative compliance dates for LCRI are practicable such that water systems transition 
directly from LCR to LCRI in less than three years (i.e., one or two years) based on the assumption that 
water systems would comply with the LCR until the LCRI compliance date. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support earlier alternative compliance dates for the LCRI. 
L. Questions from within Preamble 
A system’s existing authority to access the service line and complete the full service line replacement 
might provide the system with the legal authority to conduct the service line replacement over the 
objection of the property owner or resident. However, as some stakeholders noted, requiring service line 
replacement at properties where customers object to their replacement could create potential safety 
concerns for utility staff. EPA is seeking comment on whether the proposed LCRI should either allow 
systems to treat those service lines as not under the control of the system and forego replacement of the 
lines or require systems to conduct full service line replacement in situations where the system has legal 
access to conduct the full replacement but property owners or residents deny physical access. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: In Part I Section 2, we provide criteria by which a water system would 
establish it has sufficient control to conduct full service line replacement. The criteria for should 
include:  
 
Whether the system can safely enter the property;  
 
Whether the system can safely conduct the replacement; and  
 
Whether the system has obtained the property owner’s consent, if consent is required for 
access. 
 
The process should be based on the provisions in the proposed rule that require water systems to 
seek access by engaging with the owner of the property under which the service line is buried. If 
the property owner provides access and gives a green light to the water system to replace the 
service line, the water system has control. If the property owner refuses to provide access, the 
water system lacks the control needed to trigger the full service line replacement provisions.  
 
In addition, the proposed rule recognizes that property owners change by requiring water 
systems to provide notice of the LSL to new customers with mandatory text inviting the new 
owner to have the service line replaced.  
A deadline for inventory completion that precedes the deadline for mandatory service line replacement 
could reduce the possibility of non-compliance with the replacement deadline, but it would not have the 
advantages of a consolidated deadline as described above. EPA seeks comment on its rationale for the 
consolidated deadline approach as compared to an earlier deadline for identifying unknown service 
lines. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We support EPA’s proposed approach. The benefits of a consolidated 
deadline are not sufficient to warrant a different approach. 

 
 
Page 18 
 
While water systems are required to notify consumers of disturbances resulting from water main 
replacement under these proposed requirements, EPA is also requesting comment on whether to require 
distribution of filters for this type of disturbance. 
 
Unleaded Kids comment: We think filters certified to reduce lead and replacement cartridges 
should be provided for disturbances. The releases of lead from these disturbances are too 
unpredictable to hope that flushing will suffice. If evidence emerges allowing predictions, then 
EPA can modify the rule. 
 
At Unleaded Kids, we appreciate the opportunity to comment on EPA’s proposed improvements to the 
LCR. For more information, please contact Tom Neltner at tneltner@unleadedkids.org or 317-442-3973.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tom Neltner 
National Director 
Unleaded Kids 
tneltner@unleadedkids.org 
317-442-3973

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0834 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0915 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
As a water operator in the State of Michigan, we have been working under the strictest 
lead and copper rule of any state since 2019.  
EPA will be utilizing much of Michigan’s L/C rule to finalize their revised rule.  
The Michigan rule has several flaws, and the state refuses any discussion.  
Now these flaws will be nationwide.
Water providers were not included in developing the Michigan rule.  People that 
were making the decisions did not perform this kind of work for a living.  It is easy to put 
something on paper and say do this and create deadlines…however, if you have not 
performed this kind of work or understand cost of pipe material, cement, topsoil, 
plumbing, customer outreach, and the manpower that will be needed, you are creating a 
financial burden that will only be passed on in water rate cost.
Residential Compliance.    Anytime a municipality pointed out that the rule’s actions 
were not lawful, or residents would not cooperate…we were told to shut the water off to 
the home.  Regardless if the water bill is paid up to date, we are to force the issue on 
the resident.  Leaving the municipality to deal with the fall-out, not the State.
Public vs Private Property.  There are strict rules/laws regarding municipalities 
working on private property.  Municipalities do not perform upgrades to private property.  
However, the new rule mandates municipalities replace the lead service line all the way 
to the water meter inside the private home.  The Michigan rule conflicts with Bolt vs. City 
of Lansing.  The State of Michigan is forcing municipalities to perform work on private 
property.  (Municipalities do not replace leaky roofs that cause mold issues, remediate 
lead paint, fix sewers that back up, correct electrical issues, cut private trees, fix private 
driveways…etc.)
Soon enough, a law firm will bring a class action lawsuit against a municipality that used 
public funding on private property, regardless of intentions.   
We have already seen this occur in Michigan with Stormwater Utilities, and it cost 
municipalities millions of dollars.  
If the lead service line needs to be replaced, then the homeowner should be provided a 
grant to have private work performed and keep municipalities protected from a lawsuit. 
Municipalities could use there ordinances to oversee the work is performed correctly.
Sampling Method.  The 1st and 5th liter sampling are intended to check the water 
quality throughout the residential water service line.  However, the aerators on faucets
utilized to take the sample MUST stay in place during the sampling.  
An aerator screen will trap particles and other debris.  This debris can cause false 
positives on water samples.  
Aerators are part of private plumbing that requires regular maintenance and cleaning.  
Michigan list aerators a health issue for lead exposure because of particulates can be 
trapped, its in all their documentation, yet municipalities are forbidden to remove or 
clean an aerator before taking a 1st or 5th liter sample…we must take the sample with a 

dirty aerator in place.  Only if the sample fails can the aerator be cleaned for 
resampling.
If we are to be sampling water quality in the service line, the aerator needs to be 
removed.  
No other type of water sample is taken with an aerator in place, this includes Chlorine
Residual, Bacteriological, or Disinfection By-Product sampling to name a few.
Funding.  Since 2019, there has been little to no funding to combat the lead service line 
replacements.  Historically, no municipality ever budgeted for lead service line removal 
and lead service lines exist in some of the oldest and the most financially challenged 
communities.
The recommended EPA revision may cost an additional $ 600,000.00 per year, if a 
funding source is not found.  That could be up to a $ 12.00 increase per unit of water 
per customer, for many customers who already are financially challenged.  (A home that 
uses an average of 4 units per month will pay an additional $48.00 monthly.)
Where do municipalities get the funding to meet compliance?
The only offering is “State Revolving Funds (SRF).”  This is a loan that must be paid 
back with interest.  Paying “interest” is another payment made with public funding for 
private property work.
A SRF will be another added expense to already stretched budgets, which will only 
result in water rate hikes nationwide.
Red Tape.  Funding red tape needs to be loosened to allow a greater number of 
qualified contractors to be utilized.  There are only so many contractors that meet the 
funding standards to be awarded work.
EPAs New 10-year Timeframe.  EPA needs to reconsider their 10-year replacement 
rule.
With this nationwide revision, will there be enough contractors available to complete the 
work in EPAs timeframe? This shortened timeframe will cause contractor costs to
skyrocket, and any funding will not go as far as planned.
Aside from that, there are only so many suppliers that can supply the materials needed 
to properly address water service line replacements. How will the supply chain keep up 
with demand, which will result in municipalities not meeting compliance.  
Since Covid, our general materials and supplies that took only days to receive, are now 
taking months, with high-cost increases.
Is this a Crisis or Not?  The State and Federal agencies allowed “lead” to be an 
approved material for water service lines over seventy years ago.
Current operators are tasked/mandated with remediating the problem without a funding 
source.

I ask this…If this is such a “Public Health Crisis,” why is proper funding so 
scarce?

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1327 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0765 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
The regulations set by the EPA aimed to protect public health by establishing 
standards for the allowable levels of lead and copper in drinking water. The 
Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) is a specific regulation under the NPDWR that 
addresses these contaminants.
Improvements to the regulations may include updates to standards, testing 
requirements, monitoring procedures, and public notification protocols. 
Improvements are often driven by advances in scientific understanding, 
technological developments, and experiences gained from incidents of water 
contamination.
Possible areas of improvement could include:
•
Lowering Action Levels: The EPA might consider lowering 
the action levels for lead and copper in drinking water to reflect updated health 
risk assessments.
•
Enhanced Monitoring: Improved methods of monitoring and 
testing for lead and copper could be implemented to ensure more accurate 
and timely identification of water quality issues.
•
Public Education and Notification: Strengthening 
requirements for public education and notification about lead and copper 
levels in drinking water can help raise awareness and empower communities 
to take action.
•
Lead Service Line Replacement: Regulations might be 
updated to accelerate the replacement of lead service lines, which are a 
significant source of lead contamination in drinking water.
•
Infrastructure Investment: Increased emphasis on funding 
and support for water infrastructure projects to address aging pipes and 
mitigate the risk of lead and copper leaching into the water supply.
•
Compliance and Enforcement: Strengthening measures for 
ensuring water systems' compliance with regulations and enhancing 
enforcement mechanisms to hold non-compliant entities accountable.
•
http://vexanshop.com

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0749 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: James Hewett <jhewett@greatfallsmt.net>  
Sent: Monday, December 4, 2023 4:01 PM 
To: safewater <safewater@epa.gov> 
Subject: lead service line replacement 
 
 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements will require lead service line replacement to be complete 
in 10 years. If water service lines are privately owned from the public water main to the home, who is 
required to replace? The Municipality or the homeowner who owns the service line?  
 
James Hewett 
Civil Engineer Project Manager 
City of Great Falls – Engineering 
1025 25th Ave NE 
Great Falls, Mt. 59404 
(406) 455-8146 
jhewett@greatfallsmt.net 
 
 
 
City of Great Falls e-mails may be subject to Montana's Right To Know law (Article II Sec 9, Montana 
Constitution) and may be a Public Record (2-6-1002, M.C.A.) and available for public inspection.  
 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1139 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
By way of background, Women for a Healthy Environment (WHE) is a nonprofit in 
Pennsylvania that addresses environmental exposures that impact public health. Our organization 
uses a scientific approach to achieve equitable lives free of environmental hazards through 
advocacy and community-based programs. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide public comment on the proposed revisions to the Lead 
and Copper Rule, an issue WHE has directly been engaged with since its formation in 2009. Our 
three main program areas are Healthy Homes, Healthy Schools and Healthy Early Learning 
Centers. Each of these programs has provided support and assistance to the community to 
respond to lead in drinking water by distributing water pitchers that remove lead in drinking 
water; holding community education sessions that address lead in drinking water; providing 
funding and technical assistance to test and remediate for lead in drinking water; and advocating 
for policy change to better protect public health at the local, state and federal levels of 
government. 
Following are our organization’s comments regarding the proposed National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements.  
 
Public Education: 
EPA must provide updated educational resources so that the public knows and understands how 
to protect themselves from lead in drinking water exposures. To achieve the public health goals 
of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), the following components of public education are 
referenced and relied upon: corrosion control, source water treatment, lead service line 
replacement, and public education. These components separately must introduce an effective 
layer of consumer protection, and all these components together must produce a system of 
consumer protections that maximizes the Lead and Copper Rule’s (LCR) public health protective 
capacity as a whole. For this to happen, the four components must be based on:  
• the best available, peer-reviewed science, as well as  
• robust understanding about how water utilities implement (or don’t) the LCR, how oversight 
agencies enforce (or don’t) the LCR, and how consumers are empowered (or not) to make 
health-protective decisions in relation to lead in water and the LCR. 

National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements – Women 
for a Healthy Environment 
 
2 | P a g e  
 
 
As an example, oftentimes we hear from residents that their water system didn’t exceed the 
15ppb reference level so their drinking water is lead-free and safe, without understanding that 
indeed their home could have lead service lines and premise plumbing that contains lead, both of 
which may be contributing to contaminated drinking water. The EPA website and educational 
materials must make this information clear for the public and that currently does not exist. 
Residents across the country need to know how to make informed decisions about such things as 
testing (which is practically useless due to the high variability in testing protocol and results), 
lead service line replacement (i.e., full is better than partial), filtering options and how to 
interpret the Consumer Confidence Report (e.g., the 90th percentile value says little about lead 
levels at people's individual taps). 
Public education is critical; it must be understandable and consistent. In WHE’s Something’s in 
the Water report published in 2021, we surveyed the 36 water systems across Allegheny County. 
Of those that responded, 41% indicated their system does not provide notice to consumers if 
partial lead line replacements are about to occur. 
Public versus Private Lead Service Line Replacements: 
In PA the Municipal Authorities Act of 1945 posed significant challenges to water systems 
seeking to conduct full lead service line replacements. The law, at the time, stated that 
municipalities could only utilize these funds to remediate public lines. To amend this, several 
water systems petitioned the state legislature and the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission 
(PUC) to allow systems to use funds for private line replacement. In March 2017, the PA PUC 
and York Water Company set a precedent by permitting the use of these funds for private lines.  
Will this state action be required across the country? Will other state legislatures be willing to 
take this action to ensure clarity of the system’s ability to conduct a full lead service line 
replacement? We have been in conversations with one water system that conducted partial lead 
service line replacements in the 1970s, and now, knowing more about the potential health 
impacts that may exist from that action, want to do better; however, they cannot access the funds 
necessary to replace the private side that was left intact. This leads to frustration amongst all – 
the water system and community it serves. 
According to our findings in the Something’s in the Water report, most water systems do not offer 
lead testing, and of those that do, only three systems of the 36 confirmed they can offer testing 
free of charge. This, again, points to an issue of capacity and resources within each water system. 
We are asking EPA for the following: 
1. Require water utilities to cover the full cost of lead service line replacement. This will 
prevent the financial burden from being placed on low-income homeowners and renters, 
whose landlords are unlikely to pay the cost of lead pipe replacement. This is especially 
important in environmental justice communities that already face disproportionate lead 
contamination. 

National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements – Women 
for a Healthy Environment 
 
3 | P a g e  
 
 
2. Ensure water utilities do not take more than a decade to remove lead service lines. We do 
not want another generation of our kids to be harmed by lead-contaminated tap water, or to 
expose adults with cardiovascular disease to additional risk of heart attack or death. 
Consumer Confidence Report: 
We have many instances where a smaller water system purchases its water from a larger system 
and, as such, does not conduct or oversee the water treatment process. Therefore, the corrosion 
control evaluation component for systems in exceedance, as mandated by the LCR, does not 
apply to them and they have little control. How will this situation be addressed in the revisions? 
In addition, our analysis looked at water system violations. From 2016 to March 2020, there 
were five instances where the water system failed to submit its Consumer Confidence Report, as 
well as failures to issue public notice. In fact, one water system failed to submit for at least three 
years in a row and then two violations were issued in 2022 due to failure to submit a timely CCR 
after all that time. Additionally, 6% of the water systems didn’t have the CCR posted on their 
website and perhaps never will due to staff capacity issues. How will regulations related to CCR 
compliance be enforced and support provided to the smaller water systems?  
Schools and Childcare Centers: 
Communication and direction for schools and childcare centers is lacking in the proposed 
revisions. As a result, there continues to be inconsistencies with states passing legislation that 
does not protect public health, such as was done in PA. Our organization manages a program that 
provides funding to test and remediate for lead in all sources in schools and early learning 
centers. We have tested over 200 learning environments for lead in drinking water. What we have 
found is that when you test for lead in drinking water, you find lead in drinking water. And this is 
not just the result of lead service lines entering the buildings but includes premise plumbing, as 
well as kettles in cafeterias and drinking water fountains. We know lead is present, we test for it, 
and then there is no remediation plan to address it. We are failing our school children who drink 
that water over 180 days a year.   
Our interaction with schools has informed us that personnel still believe that the school should 
only be concerned if their lead testing results (or their local water system’s CCR) exceeds the 15 
ppb, the reference level for water systems. Our State of Environmental Health in PA Schools 
report examines environmental factors such as lead in drinking water in schools. Reviewing 2019 
data, we noted that of the 99 school districts in southwestern PA: 
• Only 66.7% of the districts who tested performed these tests in all their school buildings  
• Of the school districts with lead levels exceeding 15 ppb, 43.8% sent remediation records 
(there were no records present for the remaining districts) 
• Lead testing in one district revealed concentrations on “1st draw” samples reached 
alarming levels of 1,920 ppb 
 

National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements – Women 
for a Healthy Environment 
 
4 | P a g e  
 
 
In our statewide sample of the 164 districts sampled: 
• Only 82% of school districts reported testing for lead in drinking water, despite the statewide 
requirement which notably had a large loophole to not test by providing public notice. And of 
those that reported an exceedance of 15 ppb which is atrocious, one-third did not indicate that 
they had taken any corrective action. 
We know with the variability of testing that one day you could take a sample from a sink in a 
classroom and it could provide one reading and you can go back the following day and get a 
completely different lead level reading. And there is a significant disconnect between EPAs 3T 
for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water guidance and these revisions.  
This is all to say that the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements is completely silent regarding regulations for schools and childcare centers, which 
is a critical misstep and not health protective for our most vulnerable. Clearly this is a needed 
space to focus time, attention and resources. If you go to the EPA’s general fact sheet on the 
proposed revisions, there is no mention of schools and childcare centers because it wasn’t 
addressed in these revisions. Again, a shortcoming, so that means it goes back to the previous 
administration’s lead and copper rule revisions.  
Both Michigan and Washington, D.C., now have “filter first” policies that require schools and 
childcare centers to install filters at every tap that’s used for drinking or cooking. This approach 
would require all childcare centers and schools to install filtered drinking water devices, develop 
a “drinking water management plan”, test the filtered water regularly, and communicate with 
families about the improved water quality. We need to protect children’s health in all spaces, 
especially where they spend their days in the learning environment.  
In closing, this is an opportunity to correct the outdated EPA narrative and to provide consistent, 
accurate education and messaging regarding lead in drinking water. Right now, nonprofits such 
as WHE and other community members are filling this gap, using best available science, to better 
inform residents and it appears contradictory to EPA’s communications. That confusion is unfair 
to the general public. This is an opportunity to right the wrongs. Investment in improved public 
education would result in greater public health protection.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0951 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1128 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 1st, 2024
Indiana Lead Coalition/Hoosier Environmental Council
3951 N Meridian St #100
Indianapolis, IN 46208
Re: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule
Improvements, Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801,
The Indiana Lead Coalition, hosted by Hoosier Environmental Council, consists of
over 50 individuals dedicated to ending childhood lead poisoning. The group meets
monthly to discuss lead and healthy housing related policies. The Indiana Lead
Coalition is action oriented and has advocated for policies, both at the state and
federal level, to improve the lives of families at risk of lead poisoning. Members of
the group hail from various institutions, including but not limited to academia, local
government, not-for-profits, philanthropy, and advocacy.
Though not directly responsible for LSL, the Indiana Lead Coalition shares the EPA’s
goal of reducing lead exposure through drinking water and preventing lead
poisoning through policy change, like the the proposed Lead and Copper Rule
Improvements (LCRI)
The Indiana Lead Coalition’s comments focus on the following issues:
●
Lead Pipe Identification and Replacement
●
Tap Sampling and Corrective Action
●
Outreach and Prevention
Lead Pipe Identification and Replacement
While we commend the EPA for its goal of 100% Lead Pipe Replacement within 10
years, the Coalition seeks clarity with regards to (a) prioritization of lead pipe
identification and (b) next steps following the identification. The Coalition recognizes
that certain cities/areas/census tracts are at higher risk of lead exposure. This is, in
part, due to high levels of lead in children who are tested and/or low childhood lead
testing rates in these areas.
In addition, the Lead Coalition desires the LCRI to provide further clarity around the
parties responsible for lead service line (LSL) identification and replacement.
Though water systems are responsible for the identification of LSLs, they ultimately
rely on homeowners and property owners to submit information on their respective
service lines.
Water systems in the state of Indiana have come across issues with identifying and
replacing LSLs due to unresponsive and/or out of state property managers. This,

along with relying on homeowners to voluntarily submit information on their service
lines, could prevent the EPA from achieving its goal of LSL replacement within 10
years.
It is unclear if the LSL replacement ultimately falls under the responsibility of the
homeowner or the water system. In addition, the proposed rule change does not
state the qualifications or type of professional needed to replace LSL. As we’ve seen
in the case of HUD related Lead Remediation grants available in the state of
Indiana, contractors who are qualified and willing to do the work of lead remediation
and abatement are limited.
Tap Sampling and Corrective Action
The proposed LCRI would require water systems to collect first and fifth liter
samples at sites with LSL. The higher of the two values would be used to determine
compliance. In addition, the LCRI would lower the lead action level to 10 µg/L.
The Indiana Lead Coalition strongly encourages the LCRI to include guidance on the
prioritization of tap sampling and remediation for LSL sites. Tap sampling should first
be conducted at sites that present the highest risk to the community, such as
schools and daycares. In addition, the Indiana Lead Coalition strongly recommends
sampling be performed during/after events that disturb chemical treatment that
prevents corrosion in the pipes.
Following tap sampling procedures, the Indiana Lead Coalition believes that the lead
action level should be as low as technically feasible. This should be guided by
exposure level for babies who get water from formula. If a baby drinks 2 pints of
formula per day, that’s about 10 micrograms of lead, which poses severe health risks
to the child.
Outreach and Prevention
While the Indiana Lead Coalition acknowledges outreach as a valuable tool to alert
homeowners of potential lead risk and exposure, the LCRI does not specify what
types of public notification (PN) or public education (PE) should be utilized in the
case of tap results that exceed the action level. Public notice and education is most
effective when an individual can be contacted directly or by multiple channels.
Relying on one method, such as a mailer or postcard, can be ineffective, especially
for groups that do not rely on mail for communication. The Indiana Lead Coalition
suggests that the LCRI indicates effective forms of PN and PE to improve outreach
and education of the general public.
The Indiana Lead Coalition also requests clarification when it comes to providing
water filters to those with LSL. “Making water filters available” is not very clear

guidance. It would be more straightforward to require the non-complying water
systems to deliver a faucet-mount water filter to each customer’s porch. In addition,
they should supply replacement cartridges every ~3 months, depending on the
recommended filter change cycle for the product purchased.
In conclusion, the Indiana Lead Coalition thanks the EPA for the opportunity to
provide comments on the LCRI. The group acknowledges that remediating leaded
infrastructure is a complex issue and appreciates the work of the EPA to reduce lead
in drinking water. The Indiana Lead Coalition kindly asks the EPA to consider these
comments in an effort to further support this work.
Sincerely,
Jocelyn Keranen, Environmental Health Project Manager, Hoosier Environmental
Council
Judith Fox, Clinical Professor Emeritus, South Bend Lead Affinity Group
Susan Jo Thomas, Executive Director, Covering Kids & Families in Indiana
Dr. Ellen Ireland, Indiana University - Terre Haute
Angela Herrmann, Program Manager, Indiana University - Indianapolis
Mary Blackburn, Creation Care Advocate, Indiana Committee on Legislation
James Moseley, Owner CEO, Envirokinetics, Inc.
Christopher Weintraut, Executive Director, Indiana Chapter of the American
Academy of Pediatrics
Karla Johnson, Indiana Lead Coalition member

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1334 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
2020 North Meridian St. | Indianapolis | IN 46202 
CitizensEnergyGroup.com 
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
Via Electronic Submittal:  https://www.regulations.gov/ 
 
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0802 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper:  Improvements 
(LCRI) 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Mail Code 28221T 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Mr. Michael Goldberg 
Standards and Risk Management Division 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Mail Code 4607M 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
 
RE: 
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0802 [88 Fed. Reg. 84878, December 6, 2023] 
Comments on Proposed Rule 
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg: 
 
 
Citizens Energy Group (Citizens) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the proposed 
rule issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper:  Improvements (LCRI). [88 Fed. Reg. 84,878 (December 6, 
2023)].    
 
Citizens is a Public Charitable Trust that provides natural gas, steam, chilled water, 
drinking water, and wastewater services in Central Indiana.  Citizens owns and operates four (4) 
community water systems (CWS) in Central Indiana.  Two (2) of Citizens’ CWS are considered 
large systems for purposes of regulation under the Safe Drinking Water Act – Citizens Water – 
Indianapolis and Citizens Water of Westfield.  Citizens also owns and operates a medium CWS, 
Citizens Water – Morgan County, and a small CWS, Citizens Water of Westfield – South Madison.  
 

Comments of Citizens Energy Group 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
Lead and Copper Rule:  Improvements Proposed Rule 
February 5, 2024 
Page 2 of 10 
 
Citizens' largest system, Citizens Water – Indianapolis, serves a population of over 
860,000, in addition to customers through seven (7) consecutive systems.  Citizens Water of 
Westfield serves a population of over 53,000.   Citizens Water – Morgan County serves a 
population of 5,600; and Citizens Water of Westfield - South Madison serves a population of 65.   
 
Considering the variety of CWS owned and operated by Citizens, we are well-qualified to 
comment on the impacts of the proposed LCRI not only on the large water systems, but also to the 
requirements that are proposed for small and medium systems.  As the owner and operator of these 
CWS, Citizens is an affected stakeholder in this rulemaking.  The unique legal structure of 
Citizens, as an entity that does not have shareholders, also meaningfully gives our perspectives on 
this proposed rule. 
 
 
Citizens wishes to make clear that it supports the efforts of EPA and the states to ensure 
that safe, reliable drinking water is provided to our end-use customers.  We support efforts to 
minimize the impact of lead in our drinking water, but also wish to ensure that those efforts neither 
put CWS at risk of non-compliance with new regulatory requirements, nor result in significant rate 
increases that threaten affordability for customers of Citizens’ water systems, especially those 
customers in environmental justice impacted areas.   
The financial implications of this proposed rule on the customers of Citizens, including 
those customers in the Citizens Water - Indianapolis utility where approximately 1/3 of whom 
have earnings below the federal poverty line, prompts Citizens to offer constructive comments in 
hopes of mitigating the financial burdens this proposed rule may impose on our customers, 
especially on those who may be disproportionately impacted financially.  
To help our customers who require financial assistance with the costs for the basic 
necessities, such as clean water, Citizens is proud to offer and partner in several programs such as 
the Warm Heart Warm Home Foundation1 (“WHWH Foundation”).  WHWH Foundation is a 
residential customer payment assistance fund - funded by Citizens’ donations, Utility Shield 
proceeds, and customer donations – to help customers in need to prevent disconnection or to 
reconnect service.  Citizens also encourages customers needing assistance to contact 211 Connect 
– a program of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration2. However, it is important 
to note that these assistance programs alone do not fully ease the potential burden of the rising 
rates that could result to comply with the requirements of this proposed rule. 
 
As a member of the American Water Works Association (AWWA), Citizens supports and 
endorses the AWWA’s comments submitted on this proposed rule.  To substantiate the points made 
by the AWWA, Citizens offers the following supplemental comments and observations in addition 
to giving the perspective as the owner and operator of water systems that will be charged with the 
implementation of the requirements in the proposed LCRI rule if it is finalized. 
 
 
1 https://info.citizensenergygroup.com/warm-heart-warm-home 
2 https://in211.communityos.org/ 

Comments of Citizens Energy Group 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
Lead and Copper Rule:  Improvements Proposed Rule 
February 5, 2024 
Page 3 of 10 
 
LSL Replacement Time Frame and Minimum Replacement Rates Must Recognize Constraints 
Beyond the Control of Water Systems 
 
Citizens has a history of supporting the implementation of a lead service line3 (LSL) 
replacement program and, following Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission (IURC) approval, 
has proactively initiated an LSL replacement program for the Citizens Water – Indianapolis system. 
Citizens advocated for Indiana legislative changes to allow water systems to seek approval from 
the IURC to implement the rate-funded LSL replacement programs4.  In this current 2024 session 
of the Indiana General Assembly, Citizens supports Senate Bill 55 that will allow a utility operating 
under an IURC-approved LSL Replacement Plan the access needed to conduct full LSL 
replacements if the owner is not responsive to requests to enroll in the LSL replacement program 
or does not elect to replace the LSLs on their own within a specified timeframe.   
 
As it relates to the proposed LCRI and the minimum LSL replacement rate that a water 
system must meet, the three-year rolling average 10% compliance obligation provides water 
systems some (although limited) protection against factors that may influence year-over-year 
success in replacing LSL, but does not protect water utilities if the threshold is not achieved due 
to factors outside the water utilities control, such as the ability to timely procure materials or skilled 
labor.   
 
Implementing a strict minimum replacement rate in the first three (3) years of the LSL 
program to “…give States an opportunity to enforce replacement rate progress sooner than three 
years after the compliance date[.]6” does not take into account the time that water systems may 
need to get an LSL program in place or to overcome the very real supply chain barriers that limit 
the ability for water utilities to timely procure critical materials. Since 2020, Citizens, like other 
water utilities throughout the nation, has first-hand experience with supply chain issues, such as 
ever-changing lead times that extend delivery dates far beyond what may have been planned and 
abnormally high cost escalations. 
 
Most recently, Citizens’ rate-funded LSL replacement program was approved by the IURC 
in March of 2022.  This approval was the culmination of over four years of efforts developing the 
inventory of lead service line locations, developing plans, promoting enabling legislative changes, 
submitting an LSL Replacement Plan to the IURC, subsequently obtaining IURC Plan approval, 
separately filing for funding authorization and ultimately obtaining funding approval.  While 
Citizens is appreciative of the legislative tools now available in Indiana, there are significant timing 
elements that must be considered to fully implement programs of the scale proposed in this rule. 
 
 
3 Throughout these comments, the use of “LSL” includes both lead service lines and galvanized requiring 
replacement. 
4 See 88 Fed. Reg. 84,926 
5 See https://iga.in.gov/legislative/2024/bills/senate/5/details. Last accessed 25 January 2024. 
6 88 Fed. Reg. 84,916 

Comments of Citizens Energy Group 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
Lead and Copper Rule:  Improvements Proposed Rule 
February 5, 2024 
Page 4 of 10 
 
For example, over the next three years, water systems will stand up the LSL replacement 
programs needed to address the estimated 9.2 million LSLs across the nation.    Because these new 
programs will be coming together at the same time, material and skilled labor shortages are more 
than likely7 to develop across the supply chain, creating a barrier to timely implementation of this 
proposed rule.   
 
Citizens’ experiences with the lead time to fulfill brass valve orders – items critical to LSL 
replacements – is six (6) months or more due to limited manufacturing capacity.  Although new 
manufacturing facilities are proposed for construction and additional capacity is being added at 
existing manufacturing facilities8, including at Indiana-based manufacturer The Ford Meter Box 
Company, Inc., this increased capacity is not forecasted to be available until late 20279.  While this 
forecasted increase in supply will result in a less constrained market in approximately three (3) 
years, orders for brass valves and other components needed to support the LSL replacement 
programs will continue to be placed in the interim; it will take some time to fully relieve the 
anticipated logjam of orders for this material. 
 
Stated in another way, Citizens anticipates longer lead times as demand increases for the 
various brass components utilized by water systems across the U.S., at least until the brass 
manufacturing capacity adjusts for market conditions. This anticipated increase in brass 
component lead times (of unpredictable lengths) stands to further delay the ability of LSL 
replacement programs nationwide to meet the ambitious goals set forth in the LCRI.  
 
The increased demand for these brass components coupled with the limited availability 
likely will cause the price for these brass components to rise, having the unfortunate and 
unintentional impact of raising the overall anticipated cost of the LSL replacement program for 
water systems nationwide.  As described later in these comments, most water systems will then be 
forced to make very complex and difficult decisions, working to balance the mandatory LSL 
replacement program with the existing programs that water systems are implementing to address 
the nation’s aging water infrastructure and to support growth. 
 
7 See, for example, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,914 (“…EPA also assumes that market forces will largely correct for shortages in 
labor or supplies, especially because the proposed compliance date for the final rule would allow three years for market 
corrections to occur before the 10-year service line replacement requirements even begin.” Emphasis added.) and 88 
Fed. Reg. 84,915 (“EPA is proposing to use a rolling average because the Agency recognizes the potential for annual 
variability in a system’s annual replacement program that can affect the percent of service lines replaced each year. 
During the proposed LCRI external engagements, EPA heard many stakeholders highlight the potential for temporary 
disruptions to affect the number of service lines a system can replace annually, such as supply chain disruptions, 
workforce limitations, natural disaster incidents, and factors related to a system’s access to conduct full service line 
replacements like customer consent.” Emphasis added.) 
8https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/06/22/fact-sheethistoric-biden-
%E2%81%A0harris-administration-investments-in-water-infrastructure-and-lead-pipe-replacement-are-creating-
new-domestic-manufacturing-job/ (Last accessed 29 January 2024.) 
9https://www.iedc.in.gov/events/news/details/2023/07/14/long-standing-family-owned-manufacturer-plans-multi-
million-dollar-expansion-to-drive-long-term-growth-in-
wabash#:~:text=Ford%20Meter%20Box%2C%20which%20was,room%20for%20future%20production%20lines. 
(Last accessed 29 January 2024.) 

Comments of Citizens Energy Group 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
Lead and Copper Rule:  Improvements Proposed Rule 
February 5, 2024 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
Additionally, many older homes in communities like Indianapolis with lead service lines 
have ‘inside set’ meters (water meters that are located inside a basement or cellar of a home).   Like 
a number of other communities, Citizens, through its Water Standards Manual that dictate 
construction specifications, no longer permits the installation of new inside meter sets and requires 
existing inside meter sets to be replaced if the service line is modified.  Citizens is using LSL 
replacement projects as an opportunity to install a new water meter in an exterior location 
(typically a meter pit) that is accessible to the utility without entering the customer’s premise.  This 
relocation of the customer’s water meter is funded through the LSL replacement project. 
Unfortunately, supply chain constraints and delays also exist for residential water meters and for 
the components required to equip meters with automatic meter reading (AMR) capabilities.  Lead 
times for standard residential water meters have ranged between 12 and 24 weeks over the last two 
years, and the reported lead time is approximately 37 weeks for the electronic components that 
support the AMR technology.   Unfortunately, and in Citizens experience, it is common for 
materials to be received beyond promised ship dates, making it challenging for water systems to 
plan for shifting lead times.  
 
These cumulative impacts of the volatile supply chain delays must be factored in as water 
systems, including Citizens, develop schedules for implementation of LSL replacement projects.  
While there are strategies, including building a stock of supplies and materials through bulk 
procurement far in advance, as available, these strategies must be balanced against and with other 
needs by water systems.  These materials must be paid for, which means the water system must 
have available funds to support the advanced purchase while ensuring sufficient space is available 
for the storage of these materials - whether it be within each water utility’s own facilities, rental of 
a secure location or ensuring that a materials supplier will maintain stock reserved solely for the 
use of that water system.  The uncertainty in reported lead times only complicates the efforts to 
adequately plan and prepare for the deployment of LSL replacement projects.  Finally, as water 
systems across the U.S. contemplate how to deliver the LSL replacements required by the proposed 
LCRI no later than 2037, these advanced purchasing strategies will place additional burden on the 
supply chain.   
 
Challenges with Access Can Create Delays Beyond the Control of a Water System 
 
As EPA notes in the preamble, ownership of the LSL in many jurisdictions resides with the 
customer, not the water system; for those water systems, these LSLs are not “under the control” of 
the water system10.  While water systems have sufficient legal authority to replace the portion of 
the LSL that lies within the right-of-way, the LCRI prohibits partial service line replacements 
except in emergency situations, and then only in rare conditions.  The failure to obtain access (from 
the owner) is not, at least not in LCRI as proposed, a condition that would warrant a partial 
replacement of the LSL.  Thus, at present, a water system MUST have the customer’s permission 
to access private property to complete the full service line replacement.  In Citizens’ limited 
experience with our rate-funded LSL replacement program, obtaining the customer’s permission 
 
10 88 Fed Reg 84,923 

Comments of Citizens Energy Group 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
Lead and Copper Rule:  Improvements Proposed Rule 
February 5, 2024 
Page 6 of 10 
 
has taken extensive time to accomplish if able to be accomplished at all. In neighborhoods that are 
predominantly owner-occupied, enrolment in the LSL replacement program averages 90%; 
however, in neighborhoods that are predominantly rentals, enrollment falls to approximately 60%.   
Without permission, accessing the property could be considered trespass and place our employees 
in harm’s way. 
 
Partial Lead Service Line Replacements Should Be Permitted  
 
 
Citizens appreciates the concerns expressed by EPA in the preamble discussion regarding 
partial lead service line replacements. In addition to our comments above regarding delays that can 
be created because of limits on access to private property, based on our experiences, Citizens 
believes that partial replacement of LSLs for neighborhood projects creates public benefits that 
should be realized.  Notwithstanding our current efforts in the Indiana General Assembly regarding 
access to an owner’s property for the purposes of implementing the LSL replacement project to a 
home, owners would need to enroll into the program, but still, several do not.  Our experience is 
not novel.   
 
A neighborhood-wide LSL replacement project involves numerous street cuts and 
excavation to facilitate the replacement of the LSLs; once the neighborhood project is complete, 
restoration of customer’s properties and the public right of way is placed back to the condition 
prior to the replacement project.  Without allowing for partial replacement of the LSL in the right 
of way, a portion arguably under the control of the water system, the water system would need to 
go back into a neighborhood to complete a “one-off” LSL replacement after the original 
neighborhood-wide project is complete.  
 
These “one-off” projects create disruptions for the entire neighborhood as the street cut is 
made to address the individual replacement and, in many cases, into a newly paved street which 
reduces the integrity, and resulting asset life, of the street itself. Newly paved roads are an 
important piece of infrastructure serving the highly urbanized communities within Citizens’ 
service territory. Further, this adds additional costs to the overall project that can be avoided if the 
final LCRI rule allows for a portion of the service line, namely within the utility the right of way, 
to be replaced (as a “partial” LSL replacement).  Based on Citizens’ experience with its own LSL 
replacement program, the cost of performing one-off service line replacements is nearly double 
the cost of the programmatic replacements, in large part as a result of the repaving and penalties 
incurred for cutting into pavement within the 3-year warranty period, as well as inefficiencies with 
labor to support the work. 
 
Citizens believes that following these partial service line replacements, it would make 
common sense, as an option, for a water system to leave behind a pitcher filter and replacement 
cartridges, as well as (yet again) information on how to contact the water system in order to enroll 
in the LSL replacement program (i.e., grant the water system access to the owner’s property) for 
purposes of replacing the customer-owned portion of the service line located on private property 
at a later time.   
 

Comments of Citizens Energy Group 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
Lead and Copper Rule:  Improvements Proposed Rule 
February 5, 2024 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
Another example of a circumstance where a partial LSL replacement would be most 
efficient and least disruptive, Citizens often coordinates with the City of Indianapolis and other 
utilities to minimize the impact that infrastructure projects (including road widening, intersection 
projects, and road resurfacing projects) have on the local communities.  On January 29, 2024, 
Citizens and the City of Indianapolis Department of Public Works announced a targeted LSL 
replacement project ahead of a planned road construction project11.  The intent is to enroll every 
eligible owner in the LSL replacement project to maximize the public benefit through coordination 
with the City of Indianapolis.  This specific project was highlighted in local media stories12 to raise 
public awareness of the intent to implement an LSL replacement project as a strategy to increase 
enrollment in the program. However, despite Citizens’ and the City of Indianapolis’ best efforts to 
highlight this project, there will inevitably be some properties where Citizens is unable to obtain 
property owner approval to conduct the work.   Should LCRI be finalized as proposed, it would 
limit Citizens ability to conduct partial LSL replacements, which, as previously noted, creates 
impacts in future years for the neighborhood should customers who did not enroll in the LSL 
replacement program opt into the program, or as the water system implements its mandatory LSL 
replacement program (such as the one proposed in the LCRI). 
 
Water Systems Must Balance Multiple Priorities when Funding the LSL Replacement Program 
 
In the preamble to the LCRI, EPA indicates a preference that a water system’s LSL 
replacement program be offered to the owner without incurring a separate cost, which Citizens 
believes is the most effective way to implement the LSL replacement program.  However, many 
water utilities are highly leveraged and challenged in issuing further debt to fund their existing 
capital improvement programs, even if at zero- or low-interest borrowing.  Providing water 
systems with federal funding through grants specifically for LSL replacements would provide 
greater financial flexibility versus zero or low interest federal funding. Grants would provide 
significant benefits to most water system, increasing their ability to meet the 10-year replacement 
timeline while also helping to address affordability issues.  EPA’s position in the preamble seems 
straight forward but does not consider the existing constraints on funding.  
 
“EPA does, however, strongly encourage customer-side service line replacement to 
be offered at no direct cost to the customer wherever possible to achieve higher 
customer participation rates and reduce potential environmental justice impacts that 
may result where customers cannot afford to replace their portion of the line.  EPA 
anticipates the proposed requirements and flexibilities to incentivize systems 
obtaining access, as described above in section V.B.5., would also incentivize water 
systems to fund customer-side service line replacement. Furthermore, significant 
Federal funding is available for service line replacement (discussed in section 
 
11 
https://blog.citizensenergygroup.com/news/citizens-energy-group-will-replace-lead-service-lines-ahead-of-indy-
dpw-construction 
12 See, for example,  https://fox59.com/video/lead-service-pipes-to-be-removed-along-2-indy-streets/9383416/ and 
dhttps://www.wthr.com/article/news/local/indianapolis-citizens-energy-group-partner-to-replace-lead-pipelines-
water-quality/531-796764f2-0e76-4046-86a7-6acdb0b6f49e 

Comments of Citizens Energy Group 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
Lead and Copper Rule:  Improvements Proposed Rule 
February 5, 2024 
Page 8 of 10 
 
IV.G.), some of which is directed to disadvantaged communities least likely to 
afford full service line replacement. Additionally, Federal civil rights laws, 
including Title VI as described in sections IV.H. and V.B.9., incentivize systems to 
achieve full replacement outcomes that do not discriminate on the basis of race, 
color, or national origin.”13  
 
The funding mechanisms for water system capital programs (like a system-funded LSL 
replacement program) are complex.  Water systems that use the “pay-go” funding model to finance 
capital programs seek to balance both maximizing the funding that can be achieved through 
customer rates while minimizing rate shock to those customers who can least afford it.  Citizens 
adopted this approach in framing its IURC-approved rate-funded LSL replacement program.   
 
Water systems like Citizens Water – Indianapolis can issue debt to fund capital programs 
but must carefully manage the debt coverage obligations to protect customers from rate shock - 
rate funds will be required to cover both principal and interest payments over the course of the 
debt repayment.  Further, incurring additional debt to support the implementation of an LSL 
replacement program does not relieve the water systems of obligations to cover not only routine 
Operations & Maintenance expenses but also existing debt repayment needs through customer 
rates that are unrelated to the LSL replacement programs.  Thus, incurring debt through a federal 
loan (even if the federal loan carries zero interest) is simply another funding option available to 
communities that may or may not be better for customers compared to a fully rate funded pay-go 
funding program. 
 
Importantly, while the preamble to the proposed LCRI rule speaks of federal funding 
available to water systems, it does not guarantee this funding to water systems at any set level in 
any calendar year, nor is this federal funding guaranteed in future federal budget cycles. Further, 
the distribution of funding to states does not guarantee a minimum distribution to each water 
system with LSLs in any calendar year.  Therefore, it is difficult to budget and plan the LSL 
replacement work over the course of the proposed 10-year replacement program. Without funding 
guarantees, this adds another potential financial burden on the water utility – that, in turn, may 
need to adjust rates for its customers to fund these much needed projects.  Citizens does not take 
making rate changes, especially if the rates are to rise, lightly; further, granting approval for a rate 
case is no easy task when a water utility is under the jurisdiction of a state public utility 
commission, like the IURCA formula for the allocation of federal funds by the states that would 
ensure states distribute (on an annual basis) a minimum percentage of the funds to small systems 
and a minimum percentage to each water system in a state that accounts for 10% or more of the 
LSLs statewide would help to alleviate some of the uncertainty water systems face when 
considering funding for the LSL replacement program. 
 
 
As indicated above, the IURC oversees the regulatory activities of Citizens through its state 
statutes and authority requiring a level of formality and approval “to make decisions that are in the 
 
13 88 Fed. Reg. 84923 – 84924  

Comments of Citizens Energy Group 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
Lead and Copper Rule:  Improvements Proposed Rule 
February 5, 2024 
Page 9 of 10 
 
public interest to ensure the utilities provide safe and reliable service at just and reasonable rates.”14  
Compliance with the IURC orders creates a level of responsibility and accountability that is higher 
than municipal water systems with rates set by a town council or local public works board.  
 
 
Finally, in addition to ensuring that adequate funding is made available for the LSL 
replacement program that balances the financial obligations of a water system, water systems must 
also prioritize the demands on the pool of funds available.  The EPA released its Seventh Report 
to Congress of Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs in September 202315 (Infrastructure Needs 
Report).   The Infrastructure Needs Report highlights the estimated $625 billion in infrastructure 
investment needs by water systems across the U.S., including over $11 billion in Indiana alone 
over the 20 year forecast period.  While these investments reflect the needs of the LSL replacement 
program (estimated as a need of $50 billion to $80 billion), the Infrastructure Needs Report also 
reflects much needed investments in other water system infrastructure, including over $100 billion 
investment in treatment plants, nearly $25 billion in source of supply, and over $55 billion in 
storage.  Furthermore, the Infrastructure Needs Report highlights the more than $420 billion in 
distribution/transmission needs for water systems, a figure that includes the LSL replacement 
program. 
 
 
These infrastructure demands require that water systems plan for and procure the necessary 
skilled labor and materials to complete the much-needed projects to protect the drinking water 
delivered to our communities.  The skilled trades and many of the materials and components that 
will be needed to support an LSL replacement program are also required to deliver many of the 
other infrastructure projects identified in the Infrastructure Needs Report.  This competition for 
skilled trades labor may create an additional challenge that we believe can consequently further 
escalate the costs for implementation of this replacement program. 
 
Restoration of Water Service Should Not Be Unnecessarily Delayed as a Result of Disturbances 
Described at § 141.85(g) 
 
Notification to customers of potential health risks is an extremely important aspect of 
public health protection.  The proposed LCRI incorporates multiple requirements to enhance 
existing requirements for CWS to provide these notifications.  A specific area of additional 
notification in the proposed LCRI relates to lead service line disturbances and the requirement to 
provide notification to customers before a lead service line that has been shut off is returned to 
service.  Citizens supports communications to customers in these events to provide awareness of 
potential risks. However, water utilities operate on a 24 hour per day, 7 day per week schedule that 
can often result in actions occurring during late-night or early-morning hours that are not amenable 
to customer notification, and that could even provide safety risks to utility employees attempting 
 
14 https://www.in.gov/iurc/about-us/about-the-iurc/ 
15 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.  Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment.  7th Report 
to Congress. December 18, 2023.  https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-
09/Seventh%20DWINSA_September2023_Final.pdf.  Last Accessed 5 February 2024. Note that all dollars in this 
report are expressed as 2021 dollars. 

Comments of Citizens Energy Group 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
Lead and Copper Rule:  Improvements Proposed Rule 
February 5, 2024 
Page 10 of 10 
 
to make notifications at these hours of the day.  Alternatively, delaying the re-establishment of 
water service to a convenient time to accommodate notification could pose a significant burden on 
customers and increase sanitary risks associated with temporary water outages.   
 
For disturbances that do not require that water service be shut off, such as activities that 
cause vibration of the service line, the proposed LCRI requires notifications be made as soon as 
possible, but not to exceed 24 hours following the disturbance.  Citizens believes that customers 
will be best served by requiring a similar notification approach for all types of disturbances, and 
this approach should not delay restoration of water service or pose a safety risk to utility 
employees. Adopting a process to require notification of all disturbances as soon as possible but 
not to exceed 24 hours would achieve this goal.  
 
* * * 
Conclusion 
 
Citizens appreciates the opportunity to offer these comments on the proposed rule and 
stands ready to assist EPA as may be appropriate.  Please do not hesitate to contact me via e-mail 
at amciver@citizensenergygroup.com or by telephone at (317) 927-4393 should you have 
questions or need additional information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ann W. McIver, QEP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Director, Environmental Stewardship 
 
 
cc:   Mr. Bruno Pigott, Acting Assistant Administrator, U.S. EPA Office of Water

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0854 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
‭February 5th, 2024‬
‭Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801,‬
‭National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements‬
‭Michael S. Regan, Administrator‬
‭US Environmental Protection Agency‬
‭1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW‬
‭Washington, DC 20460‬
‭Dear Administrator Regan,‬
‭On behalf of our millions of members, activists and supporters, the undersigned‬
‭environmental organizations submit the following comments regarding the US Environmental‬
‭Protection Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and‬
‭Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”). The proposal makes several key improvements in how‬
‭lead in drinking water is regulated, and EPA now has the opportunity to review and revise key‬
‭provisions to ensure the final rule results in long-lasting and equitable benefits to impacted‬
‭communities by reducing dangerous exposures to lead.‬
‭Lead contaminated tap water is a nationwide crisis disproportionately impacting low-‬
‭wealth communities and communities of color. Congress has allocated unprecedented funding‬
‭for lead service line removal and has expressly required EPA to address the lead-in-tap-water‬
‭crisis. It is especially critical that EPA ensure the final Lead and Copper Rule Improvements do‬
‭not undermine the momentum generated by this administration on this issue. EPA must retain‬
‭strong provisions in the rule, and improve weak points of the proposal that run contrary to the‬
‭Administration’s stated desire to act boldly and decisively on this environmental justice issue.‬
‭Health experts including scientists at EPA, at the Centers for Disease Control and‬
‭Prevention, and the American Academy of Pediatrics agree that there is no safe level of lead‬
‭exposure. In children, lead exposure can cause cognitive and developmental effects like‬
‭learning and behavioral problems. In adults, health effects include risk of heart disease, high‬
‭blood pressure, kidney or nervous system problems, and cancer.‬‭1‬‭These dangers also manifest‬
‭as financial costs: a recent Harvard School of Public Health study concluded that even modestly‬
‭improved EPA controls on lead in tap water would generate at least $9 billion in health benefits‬
‭annually.‬‭2‬‭Further analyses based on the Harvard study show that removing lead service lines‬
‭would accrue at least 14 times more monetizable health benefits than costs.‬‭3‬‭The benefits‬
‭3‬‭Natural Resources Defense Council, 2023, Getting the Lead Out: Removing Lead Pipes Would Yield‬
‭Hundreds of Billions of Dollars in Health Benefits,‬
‭https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/2023-10/getting-lead-out-health-benefits-ib.pdf‬
‭2‬‭https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/press-releases/regulations-reducing-lead-and-copper-contamination-‬
‭in-drinking-water-generate-9-billion-of-health-benefits-per-year-according-to-new-analysis/‬
‭1‬‭EPA, Lead and Copper Rule Improvements: Proposed Rule, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84880 (Dec. 6, 2023);‬
‭Lanphear, B. P., Rauch, S., Auinger, P., Allen, R. W., & Hornung, R. W. (2018). Low-level lead exposure‬
‭and mortality in US adults: a population-based cohort study. The Lancet. Public health, 3(4), e177–e184.‬
‭1‬

‭would include not only better health for children and adults overall, but also fewer public health‬
‭risks in communities with lower wealth and Black, brown and Indigenous communities already‬
‭disproportionately burdened from cumulative exposure to different pollutants and more drinking‬
‭water quality violations.‬‭4‬
‭The Administration’s prioritization of this crisis is commendable, and the proposal clearly takes‬
‭important steps forward from prior ineffective regulation by including a requirement for the‬
‭removal of lead service lines in ten years, requirements for water systems to sample both the‬
‭first and fifth liter of water passing through lead pipes, a lower (though not low enough) action‬
‭level, and important inventory requirements.‬
‭However, unintended consequences stemming from loopholes could derail the success of the‬
‭rule and disproportionately harm the very communities the administration has engaged and‬
‭promised long-overdue action for. The proposal similarly leaves children unprotected while at‬
‭school or day care. Accordingly, the undersigned organizations urge EPA to ensure the final rule‬
‭is improved in the following key ways:‬
‭Remove the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate‬‭:‬
‭Under the proposal, the places with the most lead service lines or high concentrations of these‬
‭lead pipes would potentially have decades of compliance extensions available. Chicago, for‬
‭example, would have 45 to 56 years to remove all of their lead service lines. It is a fundamental‬
‭injustice that communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed extra decades to fix‬
‭this issue, and it is unnecessary to build such extraordinary exceptions into the rule. We oppose‬
‭as unnecessary any extensions beyond 10 years; Newark was able to replace 120 lead pipes a‬
‭day, and there is no reason other cities cannot meet a 10-year deadline. Clearly, no extensions‬
‭can allow backsliding from the 1991 Lead and Copper Rule’s requirement that a minimum of 7‬
‭percent of lead pipes must be replaced annually–a replacement rate EPA long ago determined‬
‭is feasible.‬
‭Remove the “access” loophole:‬
‭EPA’s mandate states that water systems must replace all lead service lines within their control,‬
‭but EPA’s definition could leave out large numbers of lines and leave them in the ground in‬
‭perpetuity. While the proposed rule is headlined by a requirement for removal of all lead service‬
‭lines in ten years, it actually requires removal only of those service lines that are “under the‬
‭control of the water system unless the replacement would leave in place a partial lead service‬
‭line.” The rule then defines “control” as legal access or physical access without further definition,‬
‭essentially leaving determinations of “control” up to states, water systems and localities to‬
‭determine whether the utility has access.‬
‭4‬‭https://www.nrdc.org/resources/watered-down-justice‬
‭2‬

‭As a result, a water system could “comply” with its requirement to replace all lead service lines‬
‭yet leave vast quantities of lead service lines in the ground by asserting a lack of access to any‬
‭portions of lead service lines under private property. This interpretation is a huge risk, and is‬
‭unnecessary. EPA should affirmatively state that water systems have control over all portions of‬
‭lead service lines, since they generally require or approve use of lead pipes, retain physical‬
‭access to them in an emergency, and ultimately can shut off water through them.‬
‭Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines:‬
‭The proposed rule fails to mandate that water systems pay for removal of the entire lead service‬
‭line, but it is imperative that the final rule does.  Removal of lead pipes can cost thousands of‬
‭dollars. Putting a disproportionate financial burden on impacted low-wealth homeowners and‬
‭renters by allowing utilities to bill property owners individually will result in mostly wealthy and‬
‭white neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced, particularly when combined with the‬
‭aforementioned “access” loophole.‬‭5‬‭There are enough‬‭financing solutions, rate structures, and‬
‭funding streams available that EPA should ensure replacements be made at no direct cost to‬
‭individual consumers. This would achieve more equitable implementation, better protect‬
‭children’s health, and is essential to meet EPA’s statutory mandate to protect public health to the‬
‭extent feasible.‬
‭Public Education about Protection from Lead in Water:‬
‭Right to know reports, public notifications, and public education materials should include‬
‭language that is clear about the possibility of lead exposure from drinking water even when the‬
‭system as a whole is in compliance. Information should include annual messaging about not‬
‭only the risks of contamination from lead service lines but also lead plumbing, which is‬
‭ubiquitous. It should also include information about the effectiveness of lead-certified point of‬
‭use filters as a way for families to reduce lead levels in their drinking water. EPA should forbid‬
‭messaging that states or suggests that tested lead levels below the action level are "safe," and‬
‭emphasize that there is no safe level of lead exposure.‬
‭Incentivize utilities to install filters in schools and child care facilities and ensure that‬
‭children who spend many hours in these settings daily are not at risk of exposure:‬
‭EPA’s proposed provisions related to protections in schools do not meaningfully differ from the‬
‭inadequate Trump administration proposal. EPA should require water systems to either install‬
‭filters certified to remove lead or to conduct thorough, frequent tap testing at all taps with full‬
‭public disclosure of the test results for all schools and child care facilities. Where a school or‬
‭childcare’s lead levels exceed the action level (which we urge be set at 1 ppb per the American‬
‭Academy of Pediatrics recommendation), the water system should be required to remediate by‬
‭installing certified filters.‬
‭5‬‭Baehler KJ, McGraw M, Aquino MJ, Heslin R, McCormick‬‭L, Neltner T. Full Lead Service Line Replacement: A Case‬
‭Study of Equity in Environmental Remediation.‬‭Sustainability‬‭.‬‭2022; 14(1):352. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010352‬
‭3‬

‭Lower the action level to no higher than 5 parts per billion:‬
‭Lowering the action level from 15 to 10 ppb is an important improvement, but still less strict than‬
‭the 5 ppb standard urged by health experts, recommended by Canadian and European‬
‭authorities, and applicable to lead in bottled water in the United States. It is also far less‬
‭stringent than the 1 ppb maximum lead level that the American Academy of Pediatrics‬
‭recommends for children in schools.‬
‭Prevent regrettable substitutions and pollution from removed lead pipes:‬
‭EPA should strongly encourage water systems to replace lead pipes with copper instead of‬
‭plastics such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC), chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC), PEX or HDPE‬
‭pipes. Where federal funds pay for lead pipe replacement, EPA should make such funding‬
‭contingent upon not using plastic. Plastics have known adverse impacts to human health and‬
‭children's development, and replacing one hazard with another will create a new set of health‬
‭hazards for generations to come. Plastic pipes also put fenceline communities at risk during the‬
‭production and disposal phase, when toxic substances can be released into air and water. EPA‬
‭should also address end of life considerations for lead pipes and require that those removed are‬
‭recycled in a safe and environmentally sound manner.‬
‭Lead exposure through drinking water is one of the most solvable health crises of our time. It is‬
‭a problem the administration has prioritized and committed to taking bold action on.The goal of‬
‭removing all lead service lines in ten years is within reach, but only if EPA eliminates loopholes‬
‭that will leave impacted communities riddled with lead service lines for decades longer. Although‬
‭EPA’s proposed rule is a meaningful departure from prior ineffective regulations, without further‬
‭strengthening the proposal the administration risks squandering this crucial opportunity to‬
‭improve our nation’s approach to preventing lead in drinking water. Thank you for this‬
‭opportunity to provide comments.‬
‭Sincerely,‬
‭Alabama Rivers Alliance‬
‭Alliance for the Great Lakes‬
‭Bayou City Waterkeeper‬
‭Benton Harbor Community Water Council‬
‭Bitterroot River Protection Association‬
‭Black Millennials 4 Flint‬
‭Cahaba River Society‬
‭Clean Water Action‬
‭Coastal Carolina Riverwatch‬
‭DLEAD:Detroit Lead Parent Advocacy Group/Wayne State U‬
‭Earthjustice‬
‭Ecology Center‬
‭Emerald Cities Collaborative‬
‭4‬

‭Endangered Species Coalition‬
‭Environmental Working Group‬
‭Food & Water Watch‬
‭For Love of Water (FLOW)‬
‭Get the Lead Out Coalition‬
‭GreenLatinos‬
‭Kentucky Waterways Alliance‬
‭Kissimmee Waterkeeper‬
‭Lake Erie Waterkeeper‬
‭Lawyers for Good Government‬
‭Michigan League of Conservation Voters‬
‭Milwaukee Riverkeeper‬
‭Milwaukee Water Commons‬
‭Natural Resources Defense Council‬
‭Newark Education Workers (NEW) Caucus‬
‭Newburgh Clean Water Project‬
‭Newburgh Clean Water Project‬
‭NY/NJ Baykeeper‬
‭Orange County Coastkeeper‬
‭Parents for Healthy Homes‬
‭Park Watershed‬
‭People's Water Board Coalition‬
‭PolicyLink‬
‭Portland Advocates for Lead Free Drinking Water‬
‭Potomac Riverkeeper Network‬
‭Puget Soundkeeper‬
‭Raritan Riverkeeper‬
‭RE Sources‬
‭River Network‬
‭Riverkeeper, Inc.‬
‭Russian Riverkeeper‬
‭Safe Water Engineering, LLC‬
‭Seneca Lake Guardian‬
‭Sierra Club‬
‭Snake River Waterkeeper‬
‭Southern Environmental Law Center‬
‭Spokane Riverkeeper‬
‭Taproot Earth‬
‭Tennessee Riverkeeper‬
‭The Water Collaborative of Greater New Orleans‬
‭United Parents Against Lead & Other Environmental Hazards (UPAL)‬
‭Waterkeeper Alliance‬
‭We the People of Detroit‬
‭Women for a Healthy Environment‬
‭5‬

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0845 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
CLARKSBURG WATER BOARD 
    A Municipal Corporation Serving Clarksburg Since 1887 
 
 
 
1001 S. Chestnut St. Clarksburg, WV 26301                         (304) 623-3711                    Fax (304) 624-8096 
 
GENERAL MANAGER 
JASON L. MYERS 
 
 
 
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD 
ALBERT N. COX II, PRESIDENT 
PAUL J. HOWE III 
CHAD E. SIGMON 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC  20460 
 
By Electronic Submission: Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
The Clarksburg Water Board (“Board”) is a public water system located in 
Clarksburg, West Virginia providing water service to approximately 17,500 people 
through approximately 8,000 service connections in central West Virginia.  Like 
most utilities in the region, the Board’s system is over 100 years old and contains 
a significant amount of lead service lines.  Just under fifty percent (50%) of the 
Board’s system includes lead or galvanized service lines.  As the agency is aware, 
the Board has been the subject of state and federal enforcement and is facing 
lead contamination issues head on.  Since 2021, the Board has aggressively 
worked to achieve and maintain compliance with the current LCR and is working 
diligently to design phased projects and secure funding so that its pending lead 
service line replacement projects will achieve compliance with USEPA’s proposed 
revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) for lead 
and copper. 
 
This work has highlighted some of the significant issues with the new proposed 
rule as described below.  From the Board’s perspective, which is shared by other 
utilities and associations representing those who produce and deliver the nation’s 
drinking water, the proposed rule ignores critical legal, financial and scheduling 
hurdles that will likely place the majority of public water systems in 
noncompliance with the proposed rule.  The Board feels strongly that this will be 
more prevalent in the Appalachian region due to the prevalence of small and 
medium sized water systems serving rural and disadvantaged communities.  The 
resources available to these critical service providers are already extremely limited 
and the recent environment of increased costs, supply chain delays and limited  
 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
February 5, 2024 
Page Two 
 
 
construction and engineering services have hit these communities particularly 
hard. 
 
The Board hopes that EPA will consider the comments submitted by utilities and 
associations representing them.  No one is in a better position to articulate the 
impracticality and challenges that the requirements of the rule, as proposed, 
could present to the systems that supply our nations water.  The Board 
specifically supports and echoes the content and concerns articulated by the 
West Virginia Municipal Water Quality Association, the Washington Association of 
Sewer and Water Districts, the Illinois Municipal League, and comments on prior 
rules submitted by the American Water Works Association.  The Board is 
currently dealing with some of these significant issues and has serious concerns 
with how these requirements will play out as the Board’s lead service line 
replacement work progresses. 
 
On December 6, 2023, EPA issued for public comment further proposed revisions 
to the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR), found in 40 C.F.R. § 141.80.91), known as 
the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI).  The Board generally supports 
improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule, but believes that, with the best 
intentions, the Agency has gone too far on a number of requirements as described 
below.  Accordingly, we submit these comments because the proposed LCRI 
requirements will create an unfeasible regulatory obligation for both public water 
systems and their ratepayers.  As noted in other comments, we believe that the 
inventory obligations and the manner in which LSL removal is tracked and 
credited to LCR removal benchmarks will be unachievable for many water 
systems.  As noted by others, this will create significant conflict between EPA, 
State agencies, and water utilities as they work to complete the mandated 
replacements. 
 
I. 
The Full Lead Service Line Replacement Requirements in the Rule 
Ignore the Legal Rights and Authority of Public Water Systems. 
 
In the Board’s view, the most significant and problematic requirements of the 
proposed rule are those regarding LSL replacements, inventories, and removal 
goals that expose utilities to potential liability for customer owned service lines.  
Put simply, most public utilities have no rights to access, let alone remove and 
replace, customer owned service lines.  In most jurisdictions, each and every 
customer must specifically consent and grant such access to the public water 
system.  Based on decades of experience, this is going to create a huge issue 
across the country especially in West Virginia and other rural areas.  No level of 
diligence will result in access to 100% of customer-owned infrastructure.  The 
Board has already experienced these refusals during its response to EPA and 
DHHR orders concerning lead contamination in the system over the last two and  

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
February 5, 2024 
Page Three 
 
 
a half years.  A troubling percentage of customers, even after numerous written, 
telephonic, and in person outreach still refuse access even for completely free 
sampling purposes.  This outreach has included and continues to include all 
available public education materials concerning the risks associated with lead. 
 
In West Virginia, it is well established law that the customer service line1 is 
privately owned and maintained; W. Va. Code R. 150-7-3.  The customer service 
line is private property, located outside of the right-of-way held by the water 
system.  The Board does not have a right-of-way to access the customer service 
line to complete a replacement or repair as required by the Proposed Rule.  
Further, entering a service location and modifying private property without 
permission of the private property owner would be an “unreasonable practice” 
under West Virginia Code § 24-2-7 and would clearly expose the utility to liability.  
As such, we urge EPA to reconsider the “reasonable effort” standard for 
attempting to engage private property owners to allow for a full service line 
replacement and the resulting implications for failure to obtain property owner 
consent.  Indefinite obligations for locations after reasonable efforts to secure 
access is not practical or reasonable and provides no clear path to compliance 
with the rule. 
 
As noted by other commenters, EPA lacks the authority to require public water 
utilities to replace privately-owned water infrastructure located on private 
property.  There are significant legal questions about whether public entities can 
even spend public funds for this private purpose.  Historically, at least in West 
Virginia, this has been clearly forbidden.  The Board and its consultants are 
currently working through these issues with West Virginia funding agencies. 
 
EPA cannot and should not withhold credit for a public side lead service line 
replacements where access to private property is denied.  EPA needs to address 
the legality of requiring public water systems to replace private lead service lines 
before imposing such a requirement in the LCRI.  The proposed rule attempts to 
punt this requirement to state programs yet still hold utilities accountable for 
compliance with the federal rule, which in West Virginia, is incorporated by 
reference into the State rules. 
 
Rather than illegally seeking to force public water systems to make improvements 
to private outdoor and indoor plumbing, EPA should give water utilities a benefit 
for each LSL replacement that is performed.  We also share other commenter’s 
concerns regarding whether EPA’s assumed cost to implement the proposed rule 
has included private side LSL replacement costs.  If such an analysis has been  
 
1 Defined as “that portion of the service pipe from the point of service to the structure or premises supplied” in W. Va. 
Code R. 150-7-3.7. 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
February 5, 2024 
Page Four 
 
 
performed, details should be provided which include an analysis of the varying 
regional costs for this work. 
 
Additionally, 
the 
proposed 
LCRI’s 
definition 
and 
discussion 
regarding 
infrastructure that is “Under the Control of the Water System” is flawed and 
ignores the practical realities of private ownership described above.  This 
definition as proposed attempts to expand the longstanding definitions in the 
SDWA in a way that ignores basic property law and vaguely equates “legal access” 
and “physical access”.  It is arguable that any person or entity has “physical 
access” to private property if they are willing to trespass.  EPA also makes vague 
reference to “data and anecdotes” about limited access to customer property.  The 
Board can attest that these issues are not mere anecdotes, but regularly 
occurring challenges that the Board has experienced and continues to experience.  
Customers routinely refuse access for free lead sampling and some have even 
refused free filters despite repeated in person delivery and outreach. 
 
The Board agrees strongly with other commenters who have noted that the 
definition of “Control” must clarify that water utilities are not obligated to replace 
customer-owned LSLs as EPA cannot legally require public utilities to make 
changes to private property.  The key determination for compliance and inventory 
goals should be based on actual ownership.  The proposed requirements are 
written for a complete replacement so that water systems do not get credit for LSL 
replacement if it doesn’t include the customer’s side.  The Board believes that this 
is an illegal provision.  The Board strongly supports full replacements when and 
wherever possible, but utilities cannot be exposed to liability and noncompliance 
for failing to replace plumbing that it does not own.  Those private side 
replacements should instead be driven by federal funding efforts and partial 
replacements should be given the credit they are due, considering they take 
considerable resources to locate and complete. 
 
II. 
Achieving 100% Lead Pipe Replacement Within 10 Years is not 
Reasonable or Achievable for Most Public Water Systems. 
 
The proposed LCRI would require water utilities to complete 100% lead service 
line replacement (LSLR) within 10 years.  While there are alternative timelines for 
(1) systems with a high proportion of lead and GRR service lines in their 
distribution system relative to their total number of households served and (2) 
systems that would otherwise be required to replace greater than 10,000 service 
lines per year under the proposed 10-year replacement requirement, in the vast 
majority of cases, the ten-year timeframe is woefully inadequate.  Using the 
Board’s system as an example, the currently proposed alternative timelines would 
only provide approximately two (2) additional years for the Board to achieve these 
goals and the system includes nearly 50% lead service lines. 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
February 5, 2024 
Page Five 
 
 
EPA estimates that there are more than 50,000 water systems nationwide.  An 
untold number of these systems are already struggling to meet financial 
obligations and lack adequate staffing and resources to meet this requirement as 
currently set forth in the proposed rule. 
 
III. 
The Service Line Inventory Obligations In The Proposed LCRI Will Be 
Overly Burdensome, Especially For Medium And Small Utilities. 
 
The proposed revisions fail to consider the burden that establishing and 
maintaining a service line inventory creates on medium and small water systems.  
EPA should consider that with less resources and less staffing, it will be a 
challenge to update the service line inventory on an annual basis and should 
reduce or eliminate these requirements for small and medium sized systems.  
This exercise will likely yield little benefit to the overall goals of the LCRI and after 
the establishment of a lead service line inventory will have limited benefit.  The 
rule should simply require that inventories be updated as needed as lead service 
line replacement projects progress. 
 
The Board also takes issue with the requirements related to a validation pool of 
non-lead service line locations and echoes the comments presented by the West 
Virginia Municipal Water Quality Association.  The proposed regulation instructs 
water systems to develop a “validation pool” consisting of all lines categorized as 
non-lead minus the non-lead lines that already replaced LSL or GRR lines, non-
lead lines already visually inspected at two points along the line, or non-lead lines 
with documentation demonstrating their composition.  The rule would require 
water systems to randomly and visually inspect as many service lines in the 
validation pool as necessary to ensure a “95% confidence level” that the observed 
proportion of non-lead lines validated is representative of the larger validation 
pool within ten years of the rule’s publication and seven years of submitting 
baseline inventories. 
 
This requirement is an unnecessary and arguably duplicative administrative task 
that will be very resource intensive to comply with.  It also ignores the practical 
implications of the data and document review that is conducted to complete a 
lead service line inventory.  It is unclear how EPA believes that a service line will 
be designated as “non-lead” without documentation or visual inspection.  For 
those locations where records are available describing the materials used for 
service connections, these locations should be specifically excluded from any 
“validation pool” requirements.  This is not currently clear. 
 
Another key factor that should exclude certain locations from validation is the age 
of the service line.  The use of lead in new plumbing systems was officially banned 
in 1986, but its use had been significantly phased out for a number of years  

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
February 5, 2024 
Page Six 
 
 
before that.  At a minimum any service line constructed or replaced after 1986 
should be specifically excluded from validation requirements. 
 
IV. 
Public Disclosure of LSL Addresses 
 
The Board has serious concerns about the public disclosure of individual 
addresses in its lead service line inventory and has received considerable negative 
feedback from its customers regarding the public availability of this information.  
As noted by other commenters, the LCRR includes location identifiers (street, 
intersection, landmark, etc.) served by each LSL, but the LCRI states utilities 
must include a street address with each service line and connector.  Utilities face 
potential liability for the disclosure of this information publicly and the Board 
asserts that this level of specificity in a public database is unnecessary.  Not 
surprisingly, the Board has experienced customer refusal to grant access for pot 
holing and other lead related investigative work because customers do not want 
their addresses identified in the Board’s lead service line inventory.  Each 
customer served by a lead service line will receive annual outreach regarding the 
presence of a lead service line and will also receive other public education and 
outreach as required by the rule.  Additionally, any home that tests for lead will 
receive the sampling results. 
 
The Board and its employees work tirelessly to provide clean, reliable, and safe 
drinking water to its customers and we appreciate the opportunity to comment on 
this critically important EPA rulemaking.  Please contact me if you have any 
questions or if I can provide any additional information related to these 
comments. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Jason L. Myers 
General Manager

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1107 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0838 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
P.O. Box 1148 
Columbia, South Carolina 29202 
Phone (803)-754-4584 or Fax (803)-754-5457 
www.scnaacp.org 
 
  
February 5th, 2024  
  
Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801,   
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
  
Michael S. Regan, Administrator   
US Environmental Protection Agency   
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
  
Dear Administrator Regan,  
  
The South Carolina State Conference of NAACP Branches submits the following comments 
regarding the US Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”). The South Carolina State 
Conference of NAACP State provides leadership for local branches, youth councils, and college 
chapters for environmental and climate justice needs in the state of South Carolina. The NAACP 
and its Center for Environmental and Climate Justice have a longstanding interest in ensuring 
that issues of community engagement and environmental justice center Black communities and 
frontline communities most impacted, including communities in South Carolina.   
  
The South Carolina State Conference of NAACP Branches applauds EPA for proposing stronger 
regulations to protect communities from lead in drinking water. Lead in drinking water has been 
a historically prevalent issue in Black communities, posing extreme risks to the health of young 
people, mothers, and their families. In South Carolina, estimates suggest that there are as many 
as 44,000 lead service lines, threatening families across our state with exposure to a potent and 
irreversible neurotoxin which even at low levels of exposure is linked to damage to the brain and 
nervous system, causes learning disabilities, shorter stature, impaired hearing, and harm to 

blood cells. In South Carolina, we would derive $968,000,000.00 in public health cost savings 
from full lead service line replacement.  
  
In the south, the most vulnerable communities are low income, impoverished, under-resourced, 
and overburdened. When you see these communities they are almost always black 
communities.  Black communities have a greater risk of being exposed to environmental 
injustices. Within the black demographic, populations like pregnant mothers, and children from 
birth to five are impacted the most. These populations are at greater risk of health effects like, 
damage to the brain and nervous system. In black communities, most people don't know what 
to look for or even know that they are impacted so their trust is placed in the hands of agencies 
who are supposed to protect people. Most are unaware of all of the contaminants that are 
consumed and water should be safe for all. Black families should not have to be exposed to 
injustices because everyone should have the right to access to clean drinking water no matter 
where they live. In the black community there are cumulative impacts that we are burdened 
with. Our air is polluted, water polluted, our food is contaminated and we are at higher risks.  We 
deserve a healthy livable environment to live, grow, and thrive in.  Environmental justice should 
be for all, not just those who can afford it.  South Carolina deserves better and we should have 
a people first approach to making sustainable changes for our black communities.   
For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong elements of the 
proposed LCRI such as the requirement for the removal of all lead service lines in ten years, the 
requirements for water systems to sample both the first and fifth liter of water passing through 
lead pipes and a lower action level; but also ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes 
which undermine their goals and ensure that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened.  
 
Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule does not 
leave black communities in South Carolina behind:  
Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it is a fundamental 
injustice that the communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed 40 or more 
years to fix this issue.   
● 
Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines: Removal can cost 
thousands of dollars, and putting the financial burden on impacted communities will result in 
mostly wealthy and white neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced. Removal and 
replacement do not make up major proportions of utility budgets, and utilities should be 
expected to maximize the use of available federal water infrastructure funds and other non-
ratepayer sources of funds to prioritize solving this crisis.   
  
● 
Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who spend many hours there 
daily are not at risk of exposure: Black children face an increased risk of lead exposure 
when compared with white children. The proposal’s suggested testing program does not 
differ from past ineffective programs, and EPA should move towards incentivizing the 
installation of filters and protecting children.  

  
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components would allow for 
environmental injustice to persist.  Black communities and frontline communities have long 
suffered from disinvestment and lack of resources.  Past NAACP analysis has demonstrated 
that race, ethnicity, or language spoken had the strongest relationship to slow and inadequate 
enforcement of the SDWA of any sociodemographic characteristic analyzed.  The final LCRI is a 
rare opportunity to make significant changes in the lives of millions of people in South Carolina, 
and to provide a measure of environmental justice which these families are owed, and we 
encourage this administration to build on the progress made in the proposed rule by 
strengthening the final rule further.  
  
 
  
Brenda Murphy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
                                                                                                                
 
 
 NAACP SC State Conference

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0778 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
The Water Collaborative of Greater New Orleans
1433 N. Claiborne Ave, Suite 201
New Orleans, LA 70116
January 31, 2024
Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
RE: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements
Dear Administrator Regan,
The Water Collaborative of Greater New Orleans (TWC) is a non-profit organization dedicated to
sustainable urban water management, serving as a leader in rights-based water governance in the region.
In alignment with our mission, TWC has played a leading role in the Biden-Harris 'Get the Lead Out'
partnership in New Orleans. Collaborating with the Sewerage and Water Board and two community
organizations, we played a key role in developing an extensive lead awareness program and replacement
plan. Our ongoing efforts aim to contribute to a resilient and equitable water management system,
ensuring the well-being of our communities and the longevity of our shared natural resources.
In the state of Louisiana, there are approximately 266,984 lead service lines. Although the exact
count of lead lines in New Orleans remains unknown, the city's historical age and infrastructure suggest a
substantial presence. Economic challenges in New Orleans may exacerbate this issue, as older and
economically disadvantaged neighborhoods often bear a disproportionate burden of aging infrastructure,
including lead pipes. This underscores the urgent need for comprehensive measures to ensure the safety
and well-being of residents that make the city a cultural hub.
We commend the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) for advancing water quality
measures and building upon the progress initiated by the LCR Revisions. The efforts to protect the quality
of our drinking water are crucial, and we appreciate the agency's commitment to this cause.
The initiative to establish a 10-year timeline for the nationwide replacement of lead service lines
marks a proactive step toward addressing a longstanding issue affecting public health. While
acknowledging these positive strides, it is crucial to strengthen the LCRI to the fullest extent and to
uphold the EPA’s unwavering commitment to public safety. Removing exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe
removal mandate is crucial to prevent communities with the most lead service lines from having
additional decades to address this issue, ensuring fairness and avoiding further injustice. We applaud the
EPA for decisive actions such as removing the lead trigger level, reducing the lead action level, and
adopting a more thorough water testing procedure. Under this procedure, water systems would be
required to collect first and fifth liter samples at sites with lead service lines and use the higher of the two
values when determining compliance with the rule.
However, the recently set limit of 10 parts per billion (ppb), though a step forward, lacks
alignment with health-based scientific considerations, resembling the detached nature of the prior
standard at 15 ppb. Notably, bottled water standards have maintained a 5 ppb limit since 1994. In
alignment with global leaders such as Canada and the European Union, we strongly recommend lowering
the action level to 5 ppb.
1

Additionally, the LCRI should prohibit partial service line replacements. Construction
disturbances during these replacements risk lead leaching into drinking water from nearby lines,
potentially contaminating incoming water for weeks. We also advocate for the immediate availability of
filters in known affected areas, recognizing that residents in disadvantaged communities may face
challenges in affording the replacement of their own lead service lines or the purchase of certified filters.
Residents currently experiencing impacts should swiftly access mitigation measures. Immediate
limitations on their exposure are crucial to preventing further harm.
To meet the ambitious goals of the LCRI, it is crucial to confront a stark reality: placing the
burden of private service line replacement solely on individual ratepayers would force those unable to
afford it to endure ongoing lead exposure. This scenario presents a glaring disparity, disproportionately
affecting the financial and health well-being of the lowest-income customers. Strengthening these efforts
necessitates urgent action from the EPA to mandate utilities cover the entire cost of replacement and
extend their rights to private service lines. This may involve superseding varying state laws and
advocating for the rights of renters. These proactive steps are essential to streamline the process, ensuring
uniformity in addressing the lead pipe issue and maintaining an equitable approach to replacement.
Unfortunately, the LCRI proposal fails to capitalize on the critical opportunity to enhance
regulations for protecting children in educational facilities, lacking improvements upon the provisions set
forth in the LCRR. The American Academy of Pediatrics advises that drinking water provided to children
should not exceed 1 ppb of lead. The current approach of relying on schools for independent water testing
introduces significant challenges, as these institutions may face potential deficiencies in expertise,
resources, and standardized procedures. This reliance raises concerns about the consistency and accuracy
of water testing practices across various educational facilities, which is vital for ensuring the health and
safety of students and staff.
In addressing the critical issue of water safety in educational facilities, the implementation of
lead-certified filters or regular comprehensive tap testing is imperative. To ensure the well-being of
students and staff, the immediate necessity lies in introducing health-protective measures such as filters or
rigorous testing protocols. Unfortunately, the existing rule falls short of safeguarding this need. It lacks a
mandatory stipulation requiring notification to parents, students, or faculty about lead test results, creating
a significant gap in transparency. Moreover, the absence of a requirement for remediation when lead is
detected, combined with a limited testing scope, adds to the deficiencies. This underscores the urgency of
adopting a more extensive approach and extending these increased protections to secondary schools.
Recognizing the paramount importance of prioritizing children's health, we strongly advocate for the
adoption of the Filter First approach, similar to what was recently enacted in Michigan. This
health-protective strategy stands out as a consistent approach, ensuring the well-being of children in
educational environments.
Recognizing that effective communication is paramount in ensuring the success of lead service
line replacement initiatives, we advocate for the EPA to mandate utilities, especially those utilizing
federal funds such as State Revolving Funds, to implement sufficient outreach strategies. This should
include a mix of communication strategies such as mailings, community events, and possibly text
notifications, particularly in areas where lead service lines are being replaced. The goal is to not only
2

inform residents about ongoing projects but also to educate them about the potential risks of lead
exposure and the available resources for mitigation and risk reduction.
Lastly, we recommend the EPA establish a national service line inventory, consolidating all
state-reported progress on a publicly accessible platform. A centralized repository would serve as a
valuable resource for communities, advocacy groups, policymakers, and concerned citizens seeking
up-to-date and accurate information on the nation’s progress. This commitment to outreach and
transparency aligns with the EPA's dedication to meaningful public involvement and fosters
accountability among state agencies, ensuring a well-informed and empowered public.
Recommendations
●
Lower the action level to 5 ppb to better align with health-based scientific considerations.
●
Prohibit partial service line replacements to streamline the process and avoid disturbing the
remaining lead lines.
●
Mandate utilities to cover the costs of full replacement, advocating for uniformity and renters'
rights.
●
Implement enhanced regulations to safeguard children in educational facilities, extending to
secondary schools.
●
Require utilities to perform consistent outreach to engage communities nationwide.
●
Establish a national service line inventory for transparency, accountability, and public access.
In offering these recommendations, our goal is not just to suggest but to demand the
establishment of a comprehensive and equitable water safety framework, in line with The Water
Collaborative's enduring commitment to ensuring communities have access to safe drinking water. By
advocating for strengthened regulations and transparent initiatives, we aspire to transcend mere
compliance, creating lasting improvements in water quality and management. Our aspirations extend
beyond immediate changes, envisioning a future where communities thrive in harmony with their water
resources. Through collaborative efforts and a united pursuit of responsible management practices, we
hope to contribute to a legacy of health and resilience for generations to come.
Sincerely,
The Water Collaborative of Greater New Orleans Team
3

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0747 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Kendall Davis <ksd@lifestraw.com>  
Sent: Friday, December 8, 2023 12:53 PM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Subject: Lead and Copper Rule Compliance 
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg, 
 
I hope this email finds you well. My name is Kendall, and I am a part of LifeStraw, a company dedicated 
to providing innovative products for safe drinking water. I recently came across your work in the 
Standards and Risk Management Division of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, particularly your 
contributions to the Lead and Copper Rule. 
 
I am writing to express my interest in learning more about the Lead and Copper Rule and exploring 
potential collaborative opportunities. Our organization shares a strong commitment to ensuring the 
safety and quality of drinking water for all communities, and I believe that your insights and expertise in 
this area would be invaluable. 
 
I would greatly appreciate the opportunity to connect with you, either through a brief phone call or an 
in-person meeting, at your convenience. During our discussion, I am eager to gain a deeper 
understanding of the current challenges, goals, and initiatives related to the Lead and Copper Rule. 
Additionally, I would like to share how our organization's technologies and solutions have been 
addressing water quality issues in various communities. 
 
If you are open to this conversation, please let me know your availability, and I will do my best to 
accommodate your schedule. Alternatively, if you have a preferred method of communication or a 
specific contact person, please feel free to share that information. 
 
Thank you for considering this request, and I look forward to the possibility of connecting with you to 
exchange insights and ideas regarding the Lead and Copper Rule. Together, we can contribute to the 
improvement of drinking water standards and the protection of public health. 
 
Thanks, 
Kendall Davis (she/her) 
eCommerce Manager 
333 W Ostend St, Suite 300 
Baltimore, Maryland 21230 
W: www.lifestraw.com 
 
 
Everyone deserves equitable access to safe water.  
For every product purchased, a child in need  
receives safe water for a year. 
Learn more

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0783 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Denver 
Washington D.C.
Brian Patrick Kennedy
Sabrina N. Lewellen
Tim Storey
February 1, 2024 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
(LCRI), Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
On behalf of the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL), the bipartisan organization representing the 
legislatures of our nation’s states, commonwealths and territories, we appreciate the opportunity to provide input on the 
proposed improvements to the national primary drinking water regulations for lead and copper. While we vigorously 
applaud the agency’s efforts to address lead in the drinking water of vulnerable populations, we oppose the creation of 
new unfunded mandates. We look forward to working with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to further 
strengthen the state-federal partnership to ensure clean and safe drinking water for all Americans. 
 
Continue State Consultation 
We are encouraged by the administration’s actions to make improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) and the 
Lead Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR), especially given ongoing lead contamination in drinking water systems. As states 
currently possess the ability to obtain and retain primary enforcement responsibilities (primacy) for public water system 
supervision under the Safe Drinking Water Act, we urge the EPA to work in tandem with primacy states on the proposed 
revisions to water testing, service line inventorying and record keeping, actionable lead levels, public notification and 
education, and other compliance requirements to develop the most effective methods and systems in the most cost-
effective manner. We applaud the willingness the EPA has already demonstrated in engaging with primacy states in the 
development and implementation of best testing practices, many of which are already being utilized on the ground. 
Additionally, we urge the EPA to reject all potential new conditions for state primacy as suggested in the proposed Lead 
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) rule. Furthermore, to ensure the protection of human health, we also urge the EPA to 
base all potential revisions on scientifically sound principles.  
 
Avoid Unfunded Mandates and Facilitate New Federal Funding Support  
The implementation of LCRI is estimated to cost billions of dollars. By the EPA’s own admission, implementation and 
administrative costs will likely be significant for various state activities related to the rule. The EPA indicates that even 
considering currently available federal funding opportunities, costs could exceed $174 million per year. While NCSL 
recognizes the availability of additional federal funds outlined and recommended for utilization in LCRI, such as allocated 
funds from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, these funding sources are in no way guaranteed to all individual water 
systems. In fact, certain water systems may experience relatively disproportionate cost burdens due to a lack of expertise 
and capacity necessary to apply for or meet the conditions of supplemental funding. The LCRI’s proposed unfunded 
requirements may also result in disproportionate cost burdens. Some requirements such as the full-service line 
replacement of all lead service lines (LSL) and galvanized requiring replacement service lines (GRR) under a water 
system’s control or the requirement to make water systems serving a minimum population publish their service line 

replacement plans on a publicly available and accessible platform may be prohibitively expensive and technically 
infeasible.  
 
As the EPA moves forward in finalizing the LRCI, we urge the EPA to avoid creating new unfunded federal mandates, 
enable state flexibility and request sufficient funds from Congress to properly fund all existing mandates and 
requirements. Additionally, we ask the EPA to consult with states and confirm they have a clear understanding of any 
potential new costs as existing funding mechanisms are not sufficient to implement this rule.  
 
Consider State Statutory Timelines and Revise Compliance Deadlines 
NCSL strongly encourages the EPA to consider states’ legislative session schedules while working to finalize the LCRI. 
The suggested revisions are substantial, and states must have adequate time to make any needed legislative changes to 
comply with new mandates. State legislatures and state administrators need to be given ample time to restructure their 
compliance approach to follow the potentially confusing EPA proposed plan of having water systems transition from 
compliance with LCR to compliance with LCRI, while simultaneously meeting interim LCRR inventory requirements. 
While NCSL applauds the streamlining of compliance requirements, we advocate for an appropriate timeline for states 
and water system entities to reorient, and, if needed, redesign their compliance plan, especially given the limited number 
of compliance extensions that are expected to be issued for this 10-year objective.  
 
State legislatures’ in-session dates vary significantly across the nation. Although special sessions may be held post 
adjournment, such sessions are often limited in scope and can cost tens of thousands of dollars per day. Depending on the 
timeline for finalizing the proposed rule, many states will not be able to address the rule until the start of their next 
legislative session. Many of these would not start until January 2025. For additional information on state legislative 
calendars and processes for special legislative sessions, please visit NCSL’s website or contact NCSL staff member 
Selena Saucedo (303-856-1529 or selena.saucedo@ncsl.org) 
 
NCSL looks forward to continuing dialogue as the EPA works to finalize LCRI. If you have any questions, please do not 
hesitate to contact NCSL staff members Ben Nasta (202.624.3597 or benjamin.nasta@ncsl.org) or Megan Bland 
(202.624.3569 or megan.bland@ncsl.org). 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Tim Storey 
Chief Executive Officer 
National Conference of State Legislatures

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0863 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1103 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
BlueGreen Alliance 
Harley Stokes, Senior Policy Advisor 
1020 19th St., NW | Suite 750 
Washington, DC 20036 
Hstokes@bluegreenalliance.org 
 
February 5, 2024 
Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
 
BlueGreen Alliance’s Comments on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements  
The BlueGreen Alliance unites labor unions and environmental organizations 
to solve today’s environmental challenges in ways that create and maintain 
quality jobs and build a clean, thriving, and equitable economy. Our 
partnership is firm in its belief that we don’t have to choose between a good 
job and a clean environment—we can and must have both. We are excited to 
offer our comments on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
(LCRI) and specifically on proactive and equitable lead service line replacement 
(LSLR). LSLR represents a significant and scalable opportunity to support and 
create good, union jobs, improve the health of communities, and address 
environmental injustice by prioritizing those communities that have been 
disproportionately impacted by toxic legacy substances like lead. 
The proposed rule makes several key improvements in how lead in drinking 
water is regulated. However, our recommendations include revisions to key 
provisions, as well as new provisions to ensure the final rule results in long-
lasting and equitable public health benefits and supports the creation of good 
jobs. 
 
As stated in the Biden-Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan, replacing lead 
pipes “will put American plumbers and pipefitters to work replacing all of America’s 
lead pipes and service lines and making other critical upgrades. All families, 
children, and Americans should be able to turn on the faucet at home or school and 
drink clean water—including in low-income communities and communities of color 
that have been disproportionally affected by dangerous lead pipes...”i We couldn’t 
agree more. Below are recommendations to ensure the final rule delivers 
exactly that. 
• Remove exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate. Lead in 
water is an urgent public health matter and replacing all lead service 
lines (LSL) within ten years is not only feasible, but necessary. As 
written, the proposed rule only requires most water systems to replace 

 
 
lead lines within ten years. This leaves behind large municipalities—such 
as New York City and Cleveland—with some of the highest densities of 
LSLs and allows a much slower replacement timeline that will continue 
to impact generations of children. It is a fundamental injustice that 
communities with the most lead service lines would be subject to lead 
exposure for decades more than the rest of the country. For example, 
in Chicago the proposed rule would allow 40+ years to fully replace 
LSLs with the current exception in the proposed rule. A second 
provision would allow close to 2,100 water systems across the country 
that have a relatively high percentage of lead pipes to take 20+ years to 
replace lead pipes.ii It is unnecessary to build such exceptions into the 
proposal itself and the BlueGreen Alliance urges the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) to require all LSLs to be replaced within ten 
years without exception.  
 
• Ban cost sharing and mandate water systems fully pay for removal of 
lead service lines. While the proposed rule requires full LSLR (both 
public and private side), it does not require the utility to pay for the 
private side. Therefore, any property owner who will not or cannot 
afford to pay for their side could end up with a partial lead service line 
replacement even though only full LSLR will count towards the 
mandate. At best, partial replacements are a waste of money because 
they do not reduce lead in water; at worst, they substantially increase 
lead levels for months if not years.iii Not only are partial replacements a 
predictable consequence contradictory to the intent of requiring full 
LSLR, but it is also an environmental justice (EJ) issue. Both in theory 
and in practice, lower-income communities suffer because property 
owners cannot afford to replace the pipes, or in the case of renters, 
landlords refuse to pay for replacement. This is what happened in 
Washington D.C. when the utility was not required to pay for the full 
replacement and lower-income neighborhoods and individuals were left 
with lead in their pipes. A study conducted by the Environmental 
Defense Fund (EDF) found lower rates of full LSLR in wards and census 
tracts with lower median household incomes and a higher percentage 
of residents self-identified as African American/Black.iv We recommend 
EPA follow the example of Michigan’s Lead and Copper Rule and 
require full LSLR at no cost to the property owner to ensure maximum 
uptake.v 

 
 
 
• Lower the action level to 5 parts per billion (ppb). We are happy to see 
that trigger levels were eliminated in the proposed rule and that the 
action-based level was lowered from 15 to 10 ppb. However, as stated 
in the Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan the EPA, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC), and countless experts “agree that there 
is no known safe level of lead in a child’s blood.”vi Therefore, we 
continue to advocate lowering the action-based level to a maximum of 
5 ppb. EPA’s sister agency, the Federal and Drug Administration, 
already sets 5 ppb as the allowable limit for lead in bottled water and 
EPA—at minimum—should set the action level to do the same for tap 
water. Ideally, the EPA should move to a Maximum Contaminant Level 
(MCL) which sets a limit on the amount of lead in drinking water. Action 
levels are appropriate when it is not technically or economically feasible 
to determine the level of a contaminant in the water, but it is feasible to 
determine the amount of lead in water. Both the LCRI and past EPA 
regulations direct utilities to determine the level of lead in the water. In 
the LCRI the action level rests on water sampling for lead, and 
previously EPA did set an MCL for lead in 1975. Given the feasibility of 
measuring lead in water and the similarities between dynamics of lead 
in water and other substances for which EPA has established MCLs, the 
agency should set a stringent limit. Moving away from an action level 
will offer clarity and greater protection from this harmful substance. 
 
• Incentivize prevention measures for schools and daycares. The 
proposed rule only requires water systems to offer very limited testing 
for most schools and childcare centers: a single lead test at just five 
locations in each school and just two locations in a childcare center—
once in the first five years—with no mandatory retesting or required 
notice to parents and staff.  Even federally regulated schools and 
childcare centers would only have to remediate taps where tests show 
lead concentrations at 10 ppb or more. This is beyond insufficient to 
detect lead let alone prevent lead exposure. In cases where full 
abatement of lead pipes will take many years—such as in schools and 
childcare centers—we recommend that the new rule facilitate plans to 
ensure that appropriate water filters are installed in taps used for 
cooking and drinking water. These devices are relatively quick and 

 
 
inexpensive to install and offer vital interim assistance in preventing 
lead contamination. 
 
In addition to the above proposed revisions to the proposed LCRI, we 
continue to advocate for the following elements that were entirely absent 
from the proposed rule: 
 
• Discourage or disqualify use of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipes to 
replace lead pipes. We cannot replace one harmful pipe material with 
another. Vinyl chloride is a known human carcinogen and PCV pipes are 
considered the most hazardous pipe materials by the Healthy Building 
Network (HBN). HBN research shows that, of available potable water 
pipe materials, PVC contains “the highest levels of chemicals of 
concern.” In addition, they are typically installed using hazardous 
solvents.vii Furthermore, EPA’s Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution 
Prevention recently included vinyl chloride as a high priority substance 
for risk evaluation under the Toxic Substances Control Act.viii 
 
• 
Provide guidance on choosing the safest, most durable pipe materials. 
Other plastic piping materials can also leach estrogenic substances and 
other chemicals of concern and are more permeable to gasoline and 
other solvents.ix In addition to the problems with plastic water pipes, 
the information on lead in solders and fluxes and the problem of low 
PH water causing copper leaching should be part of an EPA education 
package on replacing lead service lines.x The EPA should provide 
guidance on choosing the safest and most durable option to prevent 
future health risks. 
 
• Recycle old lead pipes at U.S. facilities. Currently, there are no 
provisions in the proposed rule regarding disposal of lead pipes. It is 
important to ensure that addressing environmental injustices in the U.S. 
does not create environmental injustice elsewhere in the world. Most 
of the lead scrap from the U.S.—including LSLs—is exported to 
countries with weaker environmental standards for recycling. In 2021, 
50% of lead scrap exports went to India and Mexico for recycling. The 
other half went to more than 40 other countries including China, 
Ecuador, Guatemala, Bangladesh, and Indonesia. These countries have 
much weaker pollution controls for air emissions, occupational 

 
 
exposures, and few resources for enforcement. The removal of old lead 
pipes in the U.S. should not contribute to environmental injustices in 
other countries that have weaker environmental standards. Because 
U.S. standards are more stringent, it is important that EPA require all 
LSLs to be recycled at a U.S. facility.xi 
 
We urge EPA to finalize a strong LCRI that contributes to the Biden-Harris 
vision of a lead-free future by replacing ALL lead service lines in the U.S. in the 
next decade and look forward to working alongside the EPA to make that 
vision a reality. 
 

 
 
ENDNOTES 
 
i The White House, FACT SHEET: The Biden-⁠Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan, 2021. 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-
the-biden-harris-lead-pipe-and-paint-action-plan/ 
ii Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), What’s Great and What Needs Fixing in EPA’s 
Proposed Lead Rule, 2023.  https://www.nrdc.org/bio/erik-d-olson/whats-great-and-what-
needs-fixing-epas-proposed-lead-rule 
iii Natural Resources Defense Council, The Hidden Costs and Dangers of Partial Lead Pipe 
Replacements, 2018. https://www.nrdc.org/bio/cyndi-roper/hidden-costs-dangers-partial-
lead-pipe-
replacements#:~:text=According%20to%20the%20Centers%20for,levels%20for%20some%2
0period%20of 
iv Environmental Defense Fund, Lead Pipes and Environmental Justice, 2020. 
https://www.edf.org/sites/default/files/u4296/LeadPipe_EnvironJustice_AU%20and%20EDF
%20Report.pdf 
v State of Michigan, Lead and Copper Rule Revision Summary, 2018. 
https://www.michigan.gov/egle/-
/media/Project/Websites/egle/Documents/Programs/DWEHD/Community-Water-
Supply/Lead-Copper/lead-copper-rule-summary.pdf  
vi The White House, FACT SHEET: The Biden-Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan, 2021. 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-
the-biden-harris-lead-pipe-and-paint-action-plan/  
vii Healthy Building Network, What to Know When Selecting Water Pipes, 2021. 
https://healthybuilding.net/blog/585-what-to-know-when-selecting-water-pipes 
viii Federal Register, Initiation of Prioritization Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA); 
Request for Comment, December 2023. 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/12/18/2023-27641/initiation-of-
prioritization-under-the-toxic-substances-control-act-tsca-request-for-comment 
ix Environmental Science and Pollution Research, Do estrogenic compounds in drinking water 
migrating from plastic pipe distribution system pose adverse effects to human? An analysis of 
scientific literature, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-016-8032-z 
x Healthy Building Network, Potable Water Piping Product Guidance. 
https://informed.healthybuilding.net/product-guidance/13-water-pipes  
xi Basel Action Network, Lead Pipes Removed in the U.S. May Result in Poisoning Abroad, 
2022. https://www.ban.org/news/2022/4/20/lead-pipes-removed-in-the-us-may-result-in-
poisoning abroad

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0944 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Feb. 5, 2024 
 
 
Administrator Michael S. Regan  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Submitted via: www.regulations.gov 
 
Re: Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
On behalf of Public Citizen’s 500,000 members and supporters across the country, we applaud 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA or agency) for proposing this rule to strengthen the 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) protections against lead exposure 
through drinking water. Both bold and achievable, this proposal is a very important step toward 
eliminating the blight of lead in the country’s drinking water system.  
 
Public Citizen’s founder, Ralph Nader, and his Nader’s Raiders were instrumental in creation of 
consumer protection agencies like the Environmental Protection Agency and passage of its 
seminal regulatory authorities like the Clean Water Act and the Safe Drinking Water Act.1 Our 
organization also has a long history of working to reduce harmful contaminants in drinking water 
like arsenic,2 and to ensure water infrastructure remains a public good and fighting against 
“multinational corporations [that] exploit shrinking fresh water resources for profit.”3 Public 
Citizen appreciates this opportunity to comment on these Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
(LCRI or proposal) since ensuring safe, clean drinking water in Americans’ homes and 
businesses is one of the most essential actions undertaken by the government in support of 
meeting the basic needs of the nation’s populace.  
 
 
1 PUBLIC CITIZEN FOUNDATION, PUBLIC CITIZEN THE SENTINEL OF DEMOCRACY, at 25 (Doyle Printing) (2016). 
http://tinyurl.com/ycy3aa6x  
2 Id. at 166. 
3 Id. at 264. 

 
2 
 
While this proposal will provide significant movement toward getting the lead out of drinking 
water, as discussed below, the proposal should be strengthened in several critical areas. For 
example, the EPA must ensure that all communities’ lead service lines are replaced within the 
10-year window outlined through the basic framework of the LCRI since exemptions to that 
timeline requirement will lead to unconscionable delay and lifelong, irreversible health impacts 
on another generation of Americans. It is also critical that water utilities fully cover the cost of 
replacements. Such a requirement is an equity imperative so that individuals, especially Black, 
Indigenous, People of Color (BIPOC) persons and those living in less advantaged and 
historically underinvested areas of the country who have disproportionately been affected by lead 
pollution, are not made to pay out of their pockets to get the lead out of their water.  
 
 
Background  
 
It is well understood that there are no safe levels of lead exposures for humans, which causes 
negative effects on our bodies’ neurological, developmental, reproductive, cardiovascular, and 
renal systems even at very low levels of exposure.4 Despite lead exposure being completely 
preventable and decades of policies seeking to reduce the threat it poses to humans-- especially 
among vulnerable populations-- detectable levels of lead continue to be found in blood samples 
representing a majority of the nation’s children.5 This is deeply disheartening since children are 
particularly vulnerable to lead’s damaging neurological and developmental impacts because their 
brains and bodies are still growing.6  
 
Though the dangers of lead exposure have been known for many years, over time the body of 
medical research showing the harmful impacts of lead at very low levels of exposure has greatly 
expanded.7 This underscores the need to tackle all remaining sources of lead exposure in 
people’s lives, including from drinking water infrastructure like service lines. The LCRI is 
clearly aligned with the goals encapsulated by the Biden-Harris Administration’s whole-of-
government approach to eliminating the pathways of lead exposure in Americans’ lives, as 
outlined in the Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan.8 
 
 
4 Brief Supporting Petitioners by Amici Curiae Alaska Community Action on Toxics, Alliance of Nurses for 
Healthy Environments, Healthy Babies Bright Futures, Physicians for Social Responsibility, SF Bay Physicians 
for Social Responsibility, and Women for a Healthy Environment in Newburgh Clean Water Project, et al. v. 
United States Environmental Protection Agency, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia 
Circuit at 6-16 (Aug. 15, 2022) http://tinyurl.com/2scbyruf.  
5 New Study Examines Lead Exposure and Related Community Factors Among U.S. Children, Azza AbuDagga, 
PUBLIC CITIZEN (May 1, 2022) http://tinyurl.com/436pb7rc. 
6 Id. 
7 Brief Supporting Petitioners by Amici Curiae Alaska Community Action on Toxics, Alliance of Nurses for 
Healthy Environments, Healthy Babies Bright Futures, Physicians for Social Responsibility, SF Bay Physicians 
for Social Responsibility, and Women for a Healthy Environment in Newburgh Clean Water Project, et al. v. 
United States Environmental Protection Agency, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia 
Circuit at 6-16 (Aug. 15, 2022) http://tinyurl.com/2scbyruf. 
8 Press Release, Environmental Protection Agency, Biden-Harris Administration Announces New Get the Lead 
Out Initiative to Accelerate Removal of Lead Service Lines Nationwide as Part of Investing in America Agenda 
(Nov. 7, 2023) http://tinyurl.com/mr3b79ep  

 
3 
 
The EPA’s charge, as authorized by the Safe Drinking Water Act, is to create standards for 
drinking water systems (National Primary Drinking Water Regulations or NPDWRs), that, 
among other safeguards, require removal of known threats to the “extent feasible.”9 When not 
possible to meet the Maximum Containment Load Goal, treatment options must be undertaken 
toward achieving the health-based standard.  
 
 
The Expanding Evidence of Lead’s Toxicity 
 
The United States government first started taking action toward elimination of lead in consumer 
products in the 1970s, even though lead’s harmful impacts of human health had been known for 
decades prior.10 Recent medical research continues to add to the ever-growing scientific 
understanding that even very low levels of lead concentrations in the human body can be linked 
to health impacts. For example, lead levels “as low as 2.5 μg/dL have been found to produce 
diminished cognitive function and maladaptive behavior in humans.”11 Yet, today there are still 
in excess of 9 million homes that are receiving their water via lead service lines.12 
 
Low concentrations of lead (below 10 micrograms per deciliter) in the bloodstream of children 
have been found to cause neurological effects like lower test scores, compromised attention, 
declining IQ, impaired coordination, and other cognitive deficits.13 Young adults exposed to lead 
were found to engage in violent and delinquent behaviors in higher proportions, and links to 
increased rates of ADHD diagnosis in children have also been shown.14 Nor is lead’s 
neurotoxicity confined to the young, increased risk of diseases that impact the elderly like 
Alzheimer’s and Parkinsons have been linked to lead exposure earlier in life.15  
 
Numerous studies have shown significant permanent adverse health effects on adults from lead 
exposure that go beyond neurological toxicity such as reproductive, pregnancy and fetal health 
impacts.16 Low levels of lead detected in the human body have also been linked to cardiovascular 
problems like hypertension and renal effects like chronic kidney disease.17 
 
 
 
 
9 Maximum Contaminant Level Goals and National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper, 
56 Fed. Reg.  
10 Angelica Rocha and Keith A. Trujillo, Neurotoxicity of low-level lead exposure: History, mechanisms of action, 
and behavioral effects in humans and preclinical models, 73 NEUROTOXICOLOGY 58-80, 59 (2019) 
http://tinyurl.com/kvha3zck.  
11 Id. at 76. 
12 Fact Sheet, EPA’s Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 
(November 2023) http://tinyurl.com/4kw5zv6x.  
13 Angelica Rocha and Keith A. Trujillo, Neurotoxicity of low-level lead exposure: History, mechanisms of action, 
and behavioral effects in humans and preclinical models, 73 NEUROTOXICOLOGY 58-80, 64 (2019) 
http://tinyurl.com/kvha3zck.  
14 Id. 
15 Id. at 64-67. 
16 NATIONAL TOXICOLOGY PROGRAM, NTP MONOGRAPH ON HEALTH EFFECTS OF LOW-LEVEL LEAD (June 2012) 
http://tinyurl.com/kpnwejw5.  
17 Id.  

 
4 
 
Racial Equity Considerations 
 
While there have been high-level instances of lead contamination of drinking water, such as the 
Flint, Michigan tragedy,18 lead service lines exist in communities across the country—from the 
most rural to the most urban. However, despite lead being a ubiquitous threat across America, 
there is a racial justice component to lead abatement policies as disparities based on race have 
been shown to exist regarding adverse health impacts due to lead exposure.19 
 
Given that communities of color disproportionately live in areas with higher all-around lead 
exposure20 (such as from older, more affordable but deteriorating housing) it is important for the 
government to ensure that all sources of lead exposure that can be feasibly addressed are 
eliminated to better address these historical systemic inequities that are currently burdening the 
health of Black and Brown communities. Additionally, given the unfortunate persistence of a 
correlation between BIPOC populations and poverty,21 to achieve an equitable outcome and 
ensure 100 percent of lead service lines are replaced, the cost associated with replacement must 
not be borne by individuals and rather should be paid for by water utilities.  
 
 
Overview of Proposal 
 
Unlike the 2021 revision to the Lead and Copper Rule, which did not take adequate action 
toward the EPA’s goal of totally removing lead from drinking water,22 this proposal would 
require removal of all lead service lines, most within a ten-year timeline. This is a monumental 
step forward as lead pipes running underneath our homes and businesses are a lurking threat, 
exposing millions of people every day to a toxic substance that is endangering both adults as well 
as vulnerable children.  
 
In addition, under this proposal the Lead Action Level—the concentration of lead above which 
additional remediation and information-sharing with the public is required has been reduced 
from 15 micrograms per liter to 10 micrograms per liter. While some organizations have called 
 
18 Nameerah Khan and Katrina J Charles, When Water Quality Crises Drive Change: A Comparative Analysis of 
the Policy Processes Behind Major Water Contamination Events, 15 EXPOSURE AND HEALTH 519-537, 525-27 
(2023) http://tinyurl.com/mpp8mx7e.  
19 Devon C. Payne-Sturges et. al., Disparities in Toxic Chemical Exposures and Associated Neurological 
Outcomes: A Scoping Review and Systemic Evidence Map of the Epidemiological Literature, 131(9) 
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH PERSPECTIVES 096001-1-096001-35, 096001-20 (Sept. 2023) 
http://tinyurl.com/4zrerj8m.  
20 Deniz Yeter, Ellen C. Banks, and Michael Aschner, Disparity in Risk Factor Severity for Early Childhood Lead 
among Predominantly African-American Black Children: The 1999-2010 US NHANES, 17(5) INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL OF ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH AND PUBLIC HEALTH 1552, 2-3 (2020) http://tinyurl.com/4fhuzhhu.  
21 John Creamer, Poverty Rates for Blacks and Hispanics Reached Historic Lows in 2019: Inequalities Persist 
Despite Decline in Poverty for All Major Race and Hispanic Origin Groups, U.S. CENSUS (Sept. 15, 2020) 
http://tinyurl.com/3tfbvfdn.  
22 Maximum Contaminant Level Goals and National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper, 
56 Fed. Reg. 26,460, 26,467 (June 7, 1991) (establishing a “maximum contaminant level goal” of zero for 
lead). 

 
5 
 
for an even lower Lead Action Level threshold23 and we urge the agency to continue to evaluate 
whether a lower action threshold may be appropriate, the newly reduced 10 parts per billion 
proposed Lead Action Level standard is an important move toward a drinking water safeguard 
more closely based on health. This element of the proposal is also a recognition that to achieve a 
future where drinking water lead contamination shrinks closer toward the EPA’s goal of a 
Maximum Contaminant Level of zero, additional action and public disclosures must come into 
play at lower levels of lead concentration in water. 
 
Moreover, this proposal’s requirement for drinking water customer outreach and the provision of 
effective lead-removing filters when there have been multiple instances of the Lead Action Level 
threshold having been surpassed is an important move to protect communities most impacted by 
the scourge of lead in drinking water. Other protections included in the proposal to require water 
systems to better understand and track the location and replacement of lead service lines over 
time and to undertake more representative water sampling methods are most welcome as these 
requirements will help the agency more accurately target and respond to the threat of lead in 
drinking water in specific localities.  
 
 
Needed Strengthening of the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements Proposal 
 
Public Citizen believes that the central elements of the LCRI proposal represent a concerted 
effort from the EPA to better align the Lead and Copper Rule with the irrefutable body of 
science that has clearly demonstrated the irreversible toll that lead wreaks on the human body, 
even at very low doses of exposure, and must be commended. However, Public Citizen urges the 
EPA to finalize a rule that is even more protective of human health than the LCRI as currently 
proposed.   
 
Because no level of lead exposure can be considered safe, it is imperative the EPA strive to 
comprehensively remove all known vectors of lead contamination, like drinking water pipes, as 
soon as possible. It follows from this reasoning that no communities should receive an 
exemption from the proposal’s overarching requirement to replace all lead service lines at least 
within the next decade.  
 
The EPA has known for decades that lead exposure is unsafe at any level and drinking water 
utilities and municipalities have sat on their hands in many cases without addressing the threat. 
To give a longer timeline for replacement of lead service lines threatens further inaction when 
the science is clear that lead is potentially permanently and significantly impacting the health of 
millions of Americans at this very moment. It would be unconscionable to allow citizens of our 
 
23 Brief Supporting Petitioners by Amici Curiae Alaska Community Action on Toxics, Alliance of Nurses for 
Healthy Environments, Healthy Babies Bright Futures, Physicians for Social Responsibility, SF Bay Physicians 
for Social Responsibility, and Women for a Healthy Environment in Newburgh Clean Water Project, et al. v. 
United States Environmental Protection Agency, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia 
Circuit at 6-16 (Aug. 15, 2022), (citing the Comments of Women for a Healthy Environment stating that “EPA 
should adopt a ‘Maximum Contaminant Level’ set at one-third of the current action level.”) 
http://tinyurl.com/2scbyruf. 

 
6 
 
country to be exposed to a known health hazard beyond that already very long window, when 
such exposure is completely preventable.  
 
Equity considerations must be given strong weight in the EPA’s proposal since lead exposure 
and its detrimental health impacts has a disparate impact on communities of color. This racial 
justice lens is especially critical as the agency hopefully reexamines who should pay for line 
replacement—the equitable solution means that water utilities should be required to pay rather 
than homeowners and renters in communities that have few resources to spare.24  
 
It also follows from equity considerations that implementation of this rule be prioritized based on 
putting into place stronger protections for areas that have seen historic and systemic under- and 
dis-investment in water infrastructure such as low-income areas and communities of color. 
Additionally, to ensure the rule is maximally protective of human health, provision of remedial 
protections like filters must be prioritized based on reaching areas where vulnerable persons like 
children or pregnant people are currently drinking water that contains lead, like in schools or 
childcare facilities.   
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Public Citizen commends the EPA for taking seriously its remit to work toward its goal of 
reaching the level of zero lead contamination in the nation’s drinking water. With further 
improvements to the proposal as outlined in this comment and in those of our allied 
organizations, we believe the rule would be more equitable and more protective of human health. 
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to comment on this important revision to strengthen the 
EPA’s Lead and Copper Rule.  
 
Please feel free to reach out with any questions related to this submission. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
/s/ Susan E. Harley 
Managing Director—Congress Watch 
 
 
 
24 Id. at 18 (citing Comments of American Public Health Association to the 2021 LCR (Feb. 11, 2020), 
advocating that “’requir[ing] water systems to pay to achieve full [replacement of lead service lines]’ is 
‘essential to protecting the health of our public.’”

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0767 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Zaccaria, Carly <Carly_Zaccaria@americanchemistry.com>  
Sent: Friday, January 26, 2024 1:44 PM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Subject: ACC LCRI Request for Extension Question 
 
 
Dear Michael Goldberg, 
 
By way of introduction, my name is Carly Zaccaria and I am the water contact at American Chemistry 
Council. I am kindly following up on my voicemail from yesterday to let you know that I plan to file a 
request for extension to the comment period for the proposed LCRI (Docket ID No. EPA‐HQ‐OW‐2022‐
0801) and wanted to inquire about EPA’s willingness to grant an extension to allow ACC and its 
members to fully review the record and provide meaningful comments. If you have any information that 
you are able to share, you are welcome to call or email me. My cell is 412‐605‐9989. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Kind regards,  
Carly  
 
Carly Zaccaria  | American Chemistry Council  
Environment Coordinator, Regulatory & Scientific Affairs 
carly_zaccaria@americanchemistry.com 
700 2nd Street, NE | Washington, DC  20002 
O: (202) 249‐6409      C: (412) 605‐9989 
www.americanchemistry.com 
 
This email and any attachments remain subject to Associational Privilege. 
 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ This message may contain confidential information and is intended 
only for the individual named. If you are not the named addressee do not disseminate, distribute or 
copy this email. Please notify the sender immediately by email if you have received this email by mistake 
and delete this email from your system. E‐mail transmission cannot be guaranteed to be secure or error‐
free as information could be intercepted, corrupted, lost, destroyed, arrive late or incomplete, or 
contain viruses. The sender therefore does not accept liability for any errors or omissions in the contents 
of this message which arise as a result of email transmission. American Chemistry Council, 700 – 2nd 
Street NE, Washington, DC 20002, www.americanchemistry.com  
  
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0929 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
4677 OVERLAND AVE, SAN DIEGO, CA 92123 | (858) 522-6600 | SDCWA.ORG 
  
EPA Docket Center 
WJC West Building Room 3334 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
February 5, 2024 
 
RE: Comments on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements; Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-
OW-2022-0801 
The San Diego County Water Authority (Water Authority) appreciates the opportunity to 
provide input on the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). The Water Authority is a regional wholesale water agency 
that provides a significant amount of the water used in San Diego County, and in partnership 
with its member agencies, sustains a $240 billion economy and quality of life for 3.3 million 
residents.  
The Water Authority’s mission is to provide a safe and reliable water supply to its member 
agencies. We appreciate the EPA’s efforts to protect public health by reducing lead exposure in 
drinking water. To improve the effectiveness of the regulation and consider previous efforts by 
community water systems (CWS) to address lead and copper concerns, we ask the EPA to 
consider the following comments on the proposed rule.  
WAIVER REQUIREMENTS FOR LEAD SAMPLING IN SCHOOLS AND CHILDCARE FACILITIES  
The proposed LCRI includes a provision that allows states to issue waivers to CWS from the 
requirement for lead sampling in schools and childcare facilities during the initial sampling 
period if the facility was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021, but prior to the LCRI 
compliance date. 
California Assembly Bill (AB) 746 required CWS to test lead levels by July 1, 2019, in drinking 
water at all California public K-12 school sites that were constructed before January 1, 2010. 
Additionally, AB 2370 required licensed childcare facilities located in buildings constructed 
before January 1, 2010, to test for lead between January 1, 2020, and January 1, 2023. The 
waiver requirements should be revised to permit sampling conducted in 2017 and beyond, and 
in accordance with AB 746 and AB 2370, to qualify for a waiver during the initial five-year 
sampling cycle in schools and childcare facilities. 
 
 

 
 
4677 OVERLAND AVE, SAN DIEGO, CA 92123 | (858) 522-6600 | SDCWA.ORG 
 
PARTIAL LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT 
The EPA requested comment on whether partial service line replacement should be prohibited 
during planned infrastructure work or with certain types of planned infrastructure work.  
Partial service line replacement should continue to be allowed during emergency or planned 
infrastructure work. Requiring customer-side service line replacement for planned 
infrastructure projects would cause considerable delay as CWS must obtain a property owner’s 
approval, plan the additional work (including possible budget and contractual changes), acquire 
additional materials, and perform the work. Many infrastructure projects are either facilitating 
essential water deliveries or performed as preventative maintenance to avoid future water 
emergencies, and delays to these projects should be avoided to protect water supply reliability. 
The LCRI should allow CWS to use their discretion to determine if the customer-side 
replacement can be incorporated into planned infrastructure work.  
CUSTOMER-SIDE SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT COSTS 
The Water Authority appreciates that there is funding available to assist CWS in their lead 
service line replacement programs; however, the anticipated cost to replace all lead service 
lines is expected to be much higher than the funding that was allocated. Because water 
affordability is a concern for communities nationwide, it is important that rate impacts are 
minimized as a result of implementation of the LCRI. Further, California’s Proposition 218 (Prop. 
218) limits how CWS can set fees, and raising rates to pay for customer-side service line 
replacement at select properties likely violates Prop. 218.  
We acknowledge that the proposed LCRI does not mandate CWS to pay for customer-side 
service line replacement costs. At the same time, we recommend that those costs are not 
shifted onto customers. Rather, we urge the EPA to continue to advocate for additional federal 
funding that can be accessed directly by households at all income levels.    
INCLUSION OF LEAD CONNECTORS IN BASELINE INVENTORY 
Previously, the EPA has recognized the challenges of inventorying lead connectors. Unlike 
service lines, connector materials are often difficult to identify without excavation, which 
disturbs road pavement and potentially customer property. Furthermore, records of lead 
connectors are often limited or non-existent. Including lead connectors in the baseline 
inventory would create an unnecessary additional burden on water systems and introduce 
inconsistencies between the initial Lead and Copper Rule Revisions inventory already underway 
and the baseline LCRI inventory. Therefore, we ask that the EPA remove the requirement that 
lead connectors be included in the LCRI baseline inventory.  
 

 
 
4677 OVERLAND AVE, SAN DIEGO, CA 92123 | (858) 522-6600 | SDCWA.ORG 
CONSUMER NOTICES OF TAP SAMPLING RESULTS 
The EPA requested comment on the proposed determination that water systems can provide 
consumer notices of tap sampling results within three calendar days, or if a longer time frame is 
needed. The Water Authority is concerned that three calendar days will not be sufficient time 
to notify customers of their results in some situations. For example, a CWS could receive 
sampling results on the eve of a three-day holiday weekend which limits the feasibility of 
meeting the notification requirement. We support the requirement to deliver tap sampling 
results that indicate a lead or copper action level exceedance within three calendar days. 
However, we request that the notification requirements be revised to allow CWS seven 
calendar days to deliver tap sampling results that do not indicate an action level exceedance. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this very important rulemaking. If you have any 
questions regarding our comments, please contact Jesica Cleaver, Water Resources Specialist, 
at JCleaver@sdcwa.org.  
Sincerely, 
 
Jeff Stephenson 
Director of Water Resources

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0797 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1352 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
26
Ulrich, Jake
From:
ejern11@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Emily Jernberg <ejern11
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 8:49 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
It’s Ɵme to move our pipes and our health to the 21st century. I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to 
implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. I provide psychotherapy to children and 
young adults, several of them have irreversible brain damage. It limits what they can do in their jobs and in relaƟonships. 
The social and economic cost is huge. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe health issues, including irreversible brain 
damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, we need a robust new Lead & Copper 
Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Dr. Emily Jernberg 
1602 Traver Rd  Ann Arbor, MI 48105-1738 ejern11@gmail.com

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1134 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Public Comment Submission on
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI)
February 5, 2024
The EPA estimates there are 9.2 million lead service lines in the United States, with other
research estimating as many as 12 million lead service lines bringing water to 22 million
people.[1,2] While the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvement (LCRI) requires lead service
lines be replaced within 10 years—barring rule exemptions—many families will still have toxic
lead in their water for many years during the rules implementation and line replacement. Cities
currently eligible for timeline extensions, such as Chicago, will be without lead-free water for as
many as 40 years.[3]
World health experts agree there is no safe level of lead.[4] Even low levels of lead exposure can
cause children and those still in the womb to develop brain and nervous system damage,
learning disabilities, reduced physical growth, and impaired hearing and speech abilities.[5] The
EPA must establish requirements in the proposed rule that will ensure families have access to
safe drinking water as soon as possible with the proactive distribution of filters, not plastic water
bottles.
Mitigating the Distribution of Single-Use Plastic Water Bottles
The EPA should strongly discourage the use of single-use plastic water bottles during the lead
service line replacements, as single-use plastic water bottles have significant environmental
impacts over their lifecycle. Supplying all of the impacted communities with single-use plastic
bottled water for drinking for 6 months would take an estimated 32 billion bottles. The removal of
all lead pipes will take decades and could result in hundreds of billions of water bottles ending
up in landfills and in the surrounding environment.
Single-use plastic bottles can leach dangerous contaminants into the water they hold, resulting
in health consequences for consumers. Many single-use plastic water bottles are made from
polyethylene terephthalate (PET), which can “yield endocrine disruptors under conditions of
common use, particularly with prolonged storage and elevated temperature.”[6] Plastic water
bottles can also break down into microplastics, with recent research from Columbia University
and Rutgers finding at least 240,000 plastic particles, primarily nanoplastics, in the average liter
of bottled water.[7] Over the past several years, scientists have detected the presence of tiny
plastic particles all throughout people’s bodies, including in our hearts, bloodstreams, veins,
lungs, placentas, feces, testes/semen, breast milk, and brains, with more worrying research on
the way.[8]

Plastics are made of fossil fuels.[9] We should not continue or increase our reliance on these
materials, driving ourselves deeper into the climate crisis. Plastic production releases highly
toxic chemicals that contaminate air, soil, and water. This harms primarily low-income, rural, and
BIPOC frontline/fenceline communities, contributing to elevated rates of asthma, cardiovascular
disease, and cancer.[10] Most plastic water bottles, like all plastics, are not recycled.[11] Instead,
they are most commonly sent to landfills or incinerators, are shipped overseas, or are dumped
and open-burned. This plastic poses health risks to communities near these facilities.[12]
Furthermore, a recent EPA memo makes clear that pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act,
single-use plastic water bottles are not eligible for State Revolving Funds (SRF). Both pitchers
and filters are eligible for this funding.[13] That is smart policy and encourages the EPA to take
further steps to mitigate unnecessary plastic pollution.
Strengthened Filter Requirements Needed
We were pleased to see that the proposed LCRI includes language to require water systems
with consistently high levels of lead to make available to customers filters certified to remove
lead from water.[14] However, this language needs to be strengthened with the following
measures to ensure expedient access to clean drinking water.
EPA should require water systems to fund the purchase and distribution of filters to customers
while also providing education materials and training on filter efficacy and maintenance. Proper
distribution and education is critical to ensuring customers can access, trust, and properly use
their filter, as seen in Denver, Colorado where, with advanced distribution and education
measures, the city achieved 80% filter adoption rates.[15]
The EPA needs to minimize the period families must wait for a filter by reducing the time and
number of lead level exceedances required to constitute “consistently high levels of lead” and
expedite filter program implementation. A “filter first” approach will ensure families have access
to clean, safe drinking water in the many years to come as the LCRI is implemented and lead
service lines are replaced.
We recognize that in certain unusual circumstances, such as where a system’s water chemistry
results in the substantial production of nanoparticles of lead that may escape standard point of
use filtration, or where there are ongoing microbial contamination risks in a water system that
could result in growth of microbes in such filters, that alternative methods of ensuring safe water
may be necessary, such as water buffaloes or reusable water bottles.
Recommending Safe Replacement Pipe Materials
Additionally, Plastic Pollution Coalition calls on the EPA to provide recommendations for safe
replacement pipe materials, such as recycled copper and stainless steel, and advise against
dangerous alternatives, such as PVC and CPVC plastic pipes, that introduce another source of
plastic pollution. These materials are an environmental injustice nightmare to produce, as
evidenced by the derailment of a train carrying vinyl chloride a year ago in East Palestine, Ohio,
and can leach dangerous contaminants into the water they carry such as vinyl chloride and
microplastics. Communities need to understand the potential health risks associated with
different water pipe materials so that they do not select alternatives that turn out to be just as
bad, if not worse, as the original option. EPA needs to weigh in on this.
Support for Filtered Not Bottled Water and Plastic Free Pipes

In September of 2023, Plastic Pollution Coalition submitted a letter to EPA Administrator Regan,
signed by 23 leading organizations, calling for the distribution of filtered, not bottled, water, and
the selection of non-toxic, non-plastic pipes during Lead Service Line Replacement. In the
following year, this letter has been adapted to a campaign letter with signatures representing
over 70 groups, including Black Millennials For Flint, Greenpeace, Hip Hop Caucus, Green
Latinos, Safer States, Beyond Plastics, Society of Native Nations and more. There is also a
public petition with 1,800 signatures and counting. We urge the EPA to hear the calls of
impacted communities and public health experts and use the Lead and Copper Rule
Improvement to advance filtered not bottled water and plastic free pipes, and ensure lead pipes
are not replaced with plastic pollution. Thank you for your time and consideration.
1.
United State Environmental Protection Agency - Office of Ground Water and Drinking
Water, Lead Service Lines, Washington D.C. (2024).
2.
Olson, Erik D. and Alexandra Stubblefield, "Lead Pipes are Widespread and Used in
Every State" (Natural Resource Defense Council, July 2021),
https://www.nrdc.org/resources/lead-pipes-are-widespread-and-used-every-state.
3.
United States Environmental Protection Agency - Office of Ground Water and Drinking
Water, Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, Washington D.C., (2024).
4.
World Health Organization, Lead poisoning, (2023).
5.
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention,
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/health-effects.htm (2022).
6.
Sax, Leonard. “Polyethylene Terephthalate May Yield Endocrine Disruptors.”
Environmental Health Perspectives 118, no. 4 (April 2010): 445–48.
https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0901253.
7.
Qian N, Gao X, Lang X, Min W. “Rapid single-particle chemical imaging of nanoplastics
by SRS microscopy,” Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences 121, no.3 (January
2024).
8.
Cirino, Erica and Madison Dennis, “Study Finds Hundreds of Plastic Particles in Bottled
Water” (Plastic Pollution Coalition, January 10, 2024),
https://www.plasticpollutioncoalition.org/blog/2024/1/10/study-finds-hundreds-of-thousan
ds-of-plastic-particles-in-bottled-water
9.
Center for International Environmental Law - Fueling Plastics, Fossils, Plastics, &
Petrochemical Feedstocks, Washington D.C. 2017.
10. Larson, Hillary, “The Deep Injustice of Plastic Pollution” (Sierra Club, November 2021),
https://www.sierraclub.org/articles/2021/11/deep-injustice-plastic-pollution.
11. United States Environmental Protection Agency - Facts and Figures about Materials,
Waste and Recycling, Plastics: Material-Specific Data, Washington D.C., (2023).
12. Geneva Environmental Network - Plastics and Environment Series, Plastics and Human
Health, Geneva, January 2024.
https://www.genevaenvironmentnetwork.org/resources/updates/plastics-and-health/
13. Fox, Radhika. Letter to EPA Regional Water Division Directors. “Implementation of the
Clean Water and Drinking Water State Revolving Fund Provisions of the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law .” United States Environmental Protection Agency. United States
Environmental Protection Agency, March 8, 2022.
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-03/combined_srf-implementation-me
mo_final_03.2022.pdf.
14. United States Environmental Protection Agency - Office of Ground Water and Drinking
Water, Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, Washington D.C., (2024).

15. Wilking C, Nink E, Cradock AL. “Case Study Brief: Denver Water Filter Program,”
Prevention Research Center on Nutrition and Physical Activity at the Harvard T.H. Chan
School of Public Health, Boston 2022.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1331 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
16 W. Lafayette St.
Trenton, NJ 08608
p: (609) 393-0008
f: (609) 360-8478
w: njfuture.org
EPA’s National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead 
and Copper: Improvements (LCRI)
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
February 4, 2023
Contact: Deandrah Cameron, Policy Manager
dcameron@njfuture.org
Michael S Regan Administrator 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Mail Code 28221T
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20460
Dear Administrator Regan: 
New Jersey Future is pleased to submit comments on the National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI), Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–
0801. 
New Jersey Future believes every New Jerseyan deserves to live with a prosperous, fair 
economy, thriving communities, and healthy neighborhoods. As a smart growth organization, we 
promote policies for cost-effective, sustainable water systems in New Jersey and support policies 
promoting access to clean drinking water nationwide. New Jersey Future played a pivotal role in 
crafting the comprehensive New Jersey lead service line replacement statute (P.L. 2021, c.183) 
enacted in 2021 and is proud that our work and partners' work show our collective leadership on 
this public health issue. 
Overview 
New Jersey Future acknowledges the dedication and commitment of the US Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) to protecting the public's health and delivering clean, safe drinking 
water to the nation. However, we offer comments on the equity, efficiency, and cost-
effectiveness of the proposed 10-year goal of total lead service line (LSL) replacement, the 
COMMENTS 

proposed reduction in the lead action level from the current 15 ppb to 10 ppb, requirements, 
treatment, sampling and distribution of lead-certified filters and the requirements for school and 
childcare facilities. 
NJF supports, in addition to recommendations, the following key improvements on EPA’s 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI)
Inventory Validation Requirements
Definitions
●
Building Outlet: EPA should clarify the definition of a service line and clearly 
define the term “outlet” with specific clarification regarding hydrants. 
●
Building Inlet: In some cases, the lead service line portion may extend into the 
property at a minimum of three (3ft) feet after the inlet.
Annual 10% replacement requirement 
●
Water systems with few LSLs but many unknowns will not be able to meet the 
10% replacement per year. Including unknowns in the total count without 
including verification for non-lead as “credit” means water systems will fail to 
meet the requirement. EPA should consider the following equity issues for 
calculating the replacement rates. 
○
Identification and Verification: EPA should consider counting the 
verification of unknowns (not lead) towards the 10% rate. 
○
Replacement: EPA should consider only counting the 10% replacement 
of the water systems' known lead based on the count of known LSLs. 
○
Prior to the establishment of the first year’s replacement rate, EPA should 
allow utilities to use random sampling of the service lines with completely 
(both sides) unknown materials to the 95% confidence (300-400 sites) to 
establish a percentage of lead that would be used for setting a realistic 
10% replacement rate goal.
Verifications, Records, and Inspections 
●
Validation pool: EPA should clarify the requirements for “two points of 
verification” and clearly state whether the verification requires: (a) two points on 
each side or (b) two points total - one on each side to be verified non-lead. 
●
Records: The EPA should clarify what counts as a “record” and what counts as 
an “inspection.” Meter installation records are listed as a record. However, meter 
installation records account for pipe material information during a meter 
replacement—which may be inside and only account for the interior customer 

side. In that case, the EPA should clarify whether other types of inspections 
recorded in a database are also considered records.
●
Filters: EPA should clarify which inventory activities require a post-disturbance 
filter.
●
Minimum % accuracy: EPA should guide random sampling of each type of 
record (or overall set if the type of record is not known) to clarify a minimum 
percent accuracy that is acceptable, less than 100%, and with an obligation to 
replace LSLs whenever they are encountered. 
●
Inspections by emerging methods: EPA should guide how an emerging method 
can be deemed acceptable at the water system level, such as comparing the 
emerging method results against another type of physical verification. If the 
emerging method has no false negative results for lead/galvanized and/or an 
accuracy greater than 90% with a 95% confidence, it can be valid for use by the 
water system. Also, if this guidance is followed and meets acceptance criteria for 
a particular emerging method as a valid inspection tool for the water system, the 
non-lead results from this method can be excluded from the validation pool. 
Lead Service Line Replacements
   Cost-Sharing
●
EPA should encourage states to provide statutory authority for water 
systems to access private property. LSLs are typically jointly owned: the water 
system owns the portion from the water main to the curb stop, and the property 
owner owns the portion from the curb stop to the home. The places nationwide 
with the highest concentrations of LSLs tend to be lower-income communities 
and communities of color, where a majority of residents are renters. As such, 
many residents must rely on absentee property owners to consent to make their 
properties available for work and to coordinate LSL replacements. 
●
In addition, removing the access to private property barriers is essential for 
water systems to comply with the proposed ban on partial replacements.
The ban on partial replacements introduces coordination challenges for the water 
system as they work with paving jurisdictions when access to private property is 
limited. The water systems face difficulties in coordinating the replacement of the 
private portion with these barriers. Without removing the access to private 
property barriers,  the water systems would have to remove the street portion and 
then return and do the customer side later, or consequently, the water system will 
be hemmed in by road opening moratoriums (5 years after paving in many areas). 
The water system may lose the autonomy and cost savings of being able to 

coordinate with other large-scale capital projects or, most importantly, delay 
replacement until the moratorium expires. 
●
EPA should prohibit water systems from charging a customer cost-share. 
To remove the barrier property owners pose to replacing LSLs, we recommend a 
provision prohibiting a customer cost share, enabling all customers to participate 
in the program. Water systems will only achieve the goal of replacing all LSLs 
efficiently and cost-effectively within ten years if it is at no cost to customers. 
Many LSLs will need more funding for private side replacements since many 
families in disadvantaged areas cannot pay for private side replacements. 
Regardless of whether the water system serves an underserved community, an 
urban area with an abundance of absentee landowners, or a more affluent 
neighborhood, investor and government-owned water utilities encounter a high 
percentage of property owners who simply refuse to participate if they are 
required to pay a cost share. Consequently, water utilities waste time on outreach, 
replacing far fewer pipes at a significantly higher cost.
●
EPA should recommend that states allow water systems to use ratepayer 
funds to remove private-side LSLs.
In most states, water systems believe they need to find a way to use the 
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, also known as the Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law, loan money for private-side replacements since they must 
repay the loan with ratepayer funds. A federal or state law may be needed to allow 
water systems to use ratepayer funds to remove private-side LSLs in the interest 
of public health for the greater public good. Without free LSL replacements for 
water customers, the only LSLs remaining will be those in lower-income areas, 
exacerbating equity concerns.
●
EPA should re-evaluate the proposed 10,000 lines per year criterion for LSL 
replacements.                           
Achieving 10,000 LSL replacements per year can only occur under the best 
circumstances. This only happened in one year of the Newark program and under 
the most optimal of conditions, i.e., high level of media attention, an emergency 
declaration due to the high lead levels, city council and mayor aligned and 
supportive of the program, a smaller city that was able to pause their own rules 
and regulations regarding permitting and fees; delay of other priorities and paving 
programs and ignoring moratoriums; funding of the private side from a timely 
settlement with the Port Authority, such that ratepayer funds weren’t used; two 
mild winters allowing for work to progress year-round service lines that are only 
3 feet deep that do not require a trench box/excavation support; and a densely 

populated area with significant contractor capacity. If any of the conditions 
described regarding Newark’s LSL Replacement Program are not met year after 
year, the water system will not achieve this high LSL replacement rate. 
Furthermore, reduction of the barriers discussed above must occur, such as 
mandating replacement, no cost to customers, access to private sides, and 
assurance of funding through the end of the water system’s LSL replacement 
program.                                                                                                                                      
●
EPA should propose 8,000 lines per year as a more realistic replacement 
criterion for time extensions of LSL replacements. 
Under typical circumstances that most cities will face, 8,000 LSL replacements 
per year is a more reasonable and realistic goal. However, it is still very 
challenging to meet even under the most ideal conditions. Cities and towns with 
harsh winters, deeper service lines requiring trench boxes, or less contractor 
capacity would likely be able to meet the 8,000/year target if they also try to 
replace the private side of the line.
●
EPA should consider removing the requirement for utilities to replace the 
utility side of the service line within 45 days of a customer-side replacement.
This requirement undermines the Environmental Justice component of the work 
because wealthier customers can change their own line, report it to the water 
company, and then essentially "jump the line" to the front of the scheduled utility 
side replacements because the water company has a limited time to respond by 
changing the utility side. The scenario could arise where LSL replacements are 
planned in a poorer community first, and wealthier customers begin changing 
their lines. This introduces chaos into the LSL replacement project planning if 
water systems have to continually accommodate customers who just changed their 
side of the service line. 
Disturbances
Definitions
●
EPA defines the replacement of a water meter as a major disturbance 
activity requiring a filter to be provided to the consumer along with 
educational materials and flushing instructions. The EPA should consider 
defining only water meter replacements that connect to service lines made of 
lead or galvanized materials as major disturbances.
The portion of a service line that does not connect to a meter experiences much 
less of a disturbance/vibration. For example, in many locations throughout NJ, the 
water meter is inside the building and only connects to the customer side of the 
service line. Removal and replacing the meter only vibrates the customer side of 

the service line. If the customer side of the service line is not lead or galvanized, 
requiring replacement, and the meter is only connected to the customer side, 
consider reducing this scenario to a minor disturbance that does not include 
providing the customer with a water filter. Similarly, if the curb valve and exterior 
meter are separated from each other by the length of the pipe, then the meter 
replacement would only vibrate the customer side and the short pipe between the 
meter and the curb valve. The utility side beyond the curb valve would not be 
affected. If the only portion of the lead service line is the utility side upstream of 
the curb valve, consider reducing this scenario to a minor disturbance that does 
not include providing the customer with a water filter.
Water Quality and Sampling
●
EPA should specify that electronic notification be provided within three 
business days, not calendar days.
The logistics of reporting a result to a customer by postmarked letter within three 
calendar days will be very challenging within water systems, particularly smaller 
systems with less full-time staff. If the person who handles this procedure goes on 
vacation, the notification will be delayed. If the water system receives the results 
on a Thursday or Friday during a busy time, the notification timing will extend 
beyond three days, especially if post offices are closed for weekend days and/or 
holidays. As an unintended consequence of this three-day requirement, water 
systems will instruct their outside laboratories to only report their results on 
Mondays and Tuesdays. If using an in-house laboratory, the analyses of water 
samples for lead will only be conducted on Mondays and Tuesdays. Both of these 
scenarios will extend the time that samples are analyzed after collection and/or the 
time that the results are reported to the water system staff.
As a replacement for the three-day notification requirement, the EPA should 
consider reducing the hold time between sample collection and sample 
submission to the laboratory and/or sample analysis to provide more timely 
results to consumers. Currently, samples collected from customer taps can be 
held for weeks or months before being delivered to the laboratory in a batch.
Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT)
Sodium Silicate
●
EPA should prohibit the use of sodium silicate as a corrosion control 
treatment option for the control of lead.  
●
Lack of Evidence: No evidence has demonstrated that silicates form insoluble (or 
low solubility) phases with lead to immobilize lead into protective pipe scales. 

The likely benefit of silicates is the resulting boost in pH, which promotes the 
formation of lead carbonate scales or a dense silica scale to form a barrier against 
lead release.
●
Newark, NJ: CDM Smith’s 2019 study for Newark, New Jersey, found a silica 
crust (SiO2) on all three lead service lines examined from a portion of the system 
that had utilized sodium silicate (varying dose range of 8 – 15 mg/L) as its CCT 
for many years (since the mid-1990s). The silica crust was relatively porous and 
did not act as an effective barrier against the outward flux of lead released from 
the pipe as the passivating lead layers (mainly plattnerite and hydrocerussite) 
were found behind the silica crust.
●
Alkalinity: Because silicates are highly alkaline, the primary corrosion protection 
offered by silicates is believed to be the increase in pH that comes from adding 
the chemical, particularly in low alkalinity waters. When pH was controlled for as 
a variable in studies that evaluated sodium silicate as a corrosion inhibitor, most 
studies showed no benefit for sodium silicate beyond its increase in pH (Li, 
Trueman, Dore, & Gagnon, 2021). One exception was a recent study with pipes 
that had an appreciable aluminum-rich layer of the pipe scale overlying lead-rich 
layers. The action of the silicate in that study may have been to make the 
aluminum-rich layer a better barrier and still did not involve any direct interaction 
of the silicate with the lead materials in the pipe or its scale (Mishrra, Wang, 
Sidorkiewicz, & Giammar, 2021). Increased pH is beneficial as it promotes the 
formation of low-solubility lead carbonate mineral phases, as discussed above. 
However, increasing pH using standard chemicals such as lime or sodium 
hydroxide would be more economical. 
●
EPA should consider the findings of the recent studies below to re-evaluate 
the use of sodium silicate as a corrosion control treatment option for lead 
control.  
○
Mishrra et al. (Water Res. 2021) tried to isolate the effect of silicate 
from pH increase in a pipe loop study. Sodium silicate was added to the 
water, and then acid was immediately added to adjust pH to 7.7, the level 
before the sodium silicate addition. Silicate mass balance and scale 
analysis were conducted, and the data showed a reduction in concentration 
for both dissolved and total lead. The authors speculated that the reduced 
lead release may be caused by silicate reacting with lead or aluminum to 
form an amorphous compound or precipitating as amorphous silica within 
the scale layer. Further studies would be needed to confirm these findings. 
If some benefits of silicate were to be confirmed, it would have limited 
applicability as it would be unrealistic in actual water treatment practice to 
lower pH after silicate application.                                                                                         

○
Li et al. (Environ. Sci. Technol. 2021) critically reviewed the data from 
11 peer-reviewed studies on silicate-based corrosion inhibitors, including 
the Mishrra et al., 2021 research mentioned above. The review concluded 
that pH increase resulting from silicate addition appears to be the primary 
mechanism of controlling lead release. Based on current understanding, 
silicate is not an effective corrosion control inhibitor for lead. Including 
the LCRI as an acceptable CCT technology will only lead to continued 
confusion and misunderstanding by water utilities and some consultants. 
Compliance Dates and Timelines 
Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR)
●
EPA should clarify the compliance timelines for the LCRR.                                           
If the final LCRI is delayed beyond October 16, 2024, water systems will need 
time for implementation, including the preparation of the Lead Service Line 
Replacement Program Plan. EPA should consider extending the compliance 
deadline for the LCRR if there is a delay.
●
EPA should restate, in a separate Federal Register action, the delay of 
milestones described in the proposed LCRI.
Schools and Childcare Centers
Lead Action Level
●
EPA should strengthen the requirements for schools and childcare centers, 
including lowering the lead action level to 5 ppb.
EPA should further reduce the action level for lead in drinking water for schools 
and childcare facilities to 5 ppb. The current action level of 15 ppb and 
subsequent proposal for 10 ppb set by the federal LCR and proposed by the LCRI 
is not a health-based standard but rather a technology treatment measure that 
gauges the effectiveness of corrosion control treatment, which minimizes lead 
leaching. Since exposure to small amounts of lead can seriously impact children’s 
health and cognitive development, and current science cannot identify a safe level 
of exposure, lead concentrations in drinking water at schools and childcare 
facilities should be kept as low as reasonably achievable.
Sampling
●
EPA should encourage schools and childcare facilities to do voluntary 
sampling immediately. Children are most vulnerable to lead health effects, so 
timely water sampling and remediation are important. There are many great free 
or reduced-cost water sampling and remediation programs available to schools 
and childcare facilities through voluntary programs, such as those funded by 
EPA’s Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act grant program. 

Starting in 2025, the EPA should require water systems to notify schools and 
childcare facilities of voluntary water sampling programs available to them. To do 
so, the EPA should also require water systems to develop a list of schools and 
childcare facilities served by them with available contact information by October 
16, 2024.
●
EPA should include registered and/or listed childcare facilities in the 
childcare facility sampling requirements.
States regulate childcare facilities in different ways using different nomenclature. 
By only including “licensed” childcare facilities, many childcare facilities are left 
off future sampling lists. No childcare facility should be skipped because it is 
registered instead of licensed, such as church-based childcare facilities in the State 
of Virginia, where the licensing status has to do with curriculum oversight, not 
health oversight. 
Filters
●
EPA should strengthen the filter provisions for schools and childcare 
facilities.
There is no safe level of lead exposure. Though lead exposure poses a risk to 
people of all ages, children are most vulnerable. Even in small doses, infants, 
toddlers, and pre-schoolers up to age six are particularly susceptible, as their 
growing bodies absorb lead much faster than adults. For children, prolonged 
exposure can cause irreversible damage to the brain and nervous system, slowing 
growth and development and prompting behavioral, hearing, and speech 
problems. And the long-term damage is not just physical. Lead exposure can also 
trigger severe learning disabilities, as well as emotional and social health impacts. 
EPA should mandate point-of-use filters to reduce lead and particulate at all 
fixtures intended to supply water for drinking, food preparation, or baby formula 
in schools and childcare facilities.
Deandrah Cameron, MPH
Policy Manager, New Jersey Future

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0810 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 2, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking 
Water Docket, Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 (Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, LCRI) 
 
The East Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD) appreciates the opportunity to comment on 
the above referenced proposal. EBMUD provides water service to 1.4 million residents of the 
eastern part of the San Francisco Bay Area. Our service area covers 332 square miles and 
includes 20 cities and 15 unincorporated areas in Alameda and Contra Costa counties. 
 
Overall, we agree with these regulatory changes and believe they will result in significant public 
health improvements in many parts of the country. Removal of lead service lines, regardless of 
tap sample results, is undoubtedly beneficial and will result in lower exposure to lead for 
consumers. EBMUD removed its lead service lines years ago for this reason. In addition, we 
agree that good operational practices such as informing customers, providing filters during 
disturbance of lead materials, and offering free lead testing, should be required. Such practices, 
which are already implemented at EBMUD, have been demonstrated to reduce consumers’ 
exposure to lead.  
 
However, where lead service lines were removed long ago, one aspect of the new regulations is 
not likely to improve public health and will result in unnecessary expenditures, confusion, and 
distrust of water utilities. The treatment of certain galvanized customer-owned service lines 
(galvanized requiring replacement or GRRs) as equally harmful as lead service lines, with no 
exceptions and in perpetuity, is unwarranted. The LCRI would require complete replacement of 
all GRRs within 10 years, regardless of tap sample results and regardless of how long ago the 
lead service line was removed. EBMUD does not own or have access to customer-side service 
lines, nor do we have legal authority to pay for private plumbing replacement. 
 
Classification of a service line as a GRR has no “sunset”. Even if the public-side lead was 
removed decades ago, and water samples indicate no significant lead release at present, EPA still 
considers the GRR to be a source of lead. In the LCRI preamble EPA states “While one 
stakeholder recommended that galvanized lines that were downstream of an LSL should be 
classified as non-lead after a period of time, stating that these lines eventually stop being a lead 
source, EPA disagrees with this stakeholder because the scientific literature does not support a 
timeline for these GRR service lines to cease contributing lead into drinking water.” 
 

February 2, 2024 
Page 2 
 
 
In the LCRI preamble, EPA cites several published studies documenting elevated lead in 
drinking water resulting from GRRs1,2,3,4. Each of these papers contains a discussion regarding 
possible mechanisms that may have occurred. Most of the case studies cited use orthophosphate 
for corrosion control. Each paper includes language describing how this lead accumulation-and-
release phenomenon is highly variable and water system specific. It does not occur in all cases.  
 
Indeed, EBMUD is conducting a pre-compliance study to better understand the implications of 
the LCRR and LCRI. We estimate that there are about 4,000 customers currently served by 
galvanized lines that were formerly downstream of LSLs (GRRs) in our system. We are using 
the 1st and 5th liter sampling protocol described in the rule proposal, although we are analyzing 
all five one-liter samples. Of the 39 GRR data sets analyzed to date (195 individual samples), 
none has exceeded the detection limit for reporting (DLR) of 5 ppb, and the ninetieth percentile 
(P90) for both the 1st liter set and the 5th liter set is less than 1 ppb (0.40 ppb and 0.22 ppb, 
respectively). For comparison, since 2017, EBMUD has had a program in which any customer 
can have their water tested for lead for free. Upon request, customers are mailed a kit with a 1-L 
bottle, instructions for stagnation and first-draw sampling, and a return mailing address with pre-
paid postage. The service line materials for this pool of results are not tracked. However, since 
94% of EBMUD service lines are copper and 3% are plastic, it is likely that these results are 
from non-lead services. Of the 1,743 samples analyzed to date, the P90 is less than 1 ppb, 
indistinguishable from the GRR samples. Our ongoing study also includes sequential samples 
from galvanized service with lead connectors (pigtails), and analysis of the scale inside extracted 
galvanized service lines, both with and without exposure to upstream lead. We expect the work 
to be completed by mid-2024. 
 
A recent Water Research Foundation study by Edwards et al (2022)5 called Evaluating Key 
Factors that Affect Lead Accumulation and Release of Lead from Galvanized Pipes, was not 
among the references included in the LCRI publication. This study was the basis for an article 
published in the AWWA Water Science in 20236. The authors suggest a decision tree whereby 
utilities can classify their galvanized iron pipes (GIP) as “low risk” or “high risk” of lead release 
based on various factors. The AWS paper includes several case studies and states “A summary of 
case studies reveals that some systems may have no GIP corrosion problems while other systems 
can be classified as having either short- or long-term problems”.  
 
1 McFadden, M., Giani, R., Kwan, P., and Reiber, S.H. (2011). Contributions to drinking water lead from galvanized 
iron corrosion scales. Journal AWWA, 103(4): 76–89. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1551- 8833.2011.tb11437.x  
2 Deshommes, E., Laroche, L., Nour, S.,Cartier, C., and Prevost, M (2010). Source of occurrence of particulate lead 
in tap water. Water Research, 44(12): 3734–3744. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2010.04.019. Pieper, 2017; 
3 Sandvig, A., Kwan, P., Kirmeyer, G., Maynard, B., Mast, D., Trussell, R.R., Trussel, S., Cantor, A., and Prescott, A. 
(2008). Contribution of service line and plumbing fixtures to lead and copper rule compliance issue. AWWA 
Research Foundation, 523. 
4 Wasserstrom, L.W., Miller, S.A., Triantafyllidou, S., Desantis, M.K. (2017). Scale Formation Under Blended 
Phosphate Treatment for a Utility With Lead Pipes. Journal AWWA. 109(11), E464–E478. https://doi.org/10.5942/ 
jawwa.2017.109.0121. 
5 Edwards, M, Mohsin, Parks, Masters, Arnold, Roenfeldt. Evaluating Key Factors that Affect Lead Accumulation 
and Release of Lead from Galvanized Pipes, Water Research Foundation, 2022. 
6 Edwards, M., Arnold, R., Rosenfeldt, B., Masters, S. V., Parks, J., & Tang, M. (2023). Utility considerations in 
developing a galvanized iron water pipe management plan. AWWA Water Science, e1350. https://doi.org/10. 
1002/aws2.1350 

February 2, 2024 
Page 3 
 
 
 
The WRF report details how metal co-occurrence is a way to distinguish sources of lead in 
drinking water. For example, the presence of trace cadmium in water can indicate that galvanized 
pipe is the source of lead because the galvanized coating often uniquely contains a small amount 
of cadmium in addition to zinc and lead. Lead‐tin solder was commonly used to join copper 
pipes and fittings up until 1986. Therefore, the presence of tin in water often indicates that 
corrosion of lead‐tin solder is occurring. The lead from lead pipe can sometimes be distinguished 
by higher levels of lead without co‐occurring cadmium, tin, copper, or zinc. Particulate lead (Pb) 
in galvanized pipes is important: “Profile sampling results at multiple sites reinforced the 
contribution of particulate Pb release to overall Pb in drinking water. The vast majority (92‐
100%) of the Pb in water was particulate, indicating that Pb in scale can be a significant 
contributor to Pb risk. Also, not surprisingly, higher amounts of Pb were detected at elevated 
flow rate, further signifying the importance of particulate Pb release, as the scale can be 
increasingly scoured from pipe walls at higher flow”.  
 
Under the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR), GRRs must be identified, included in the 
inventory, and included in the sample pool for compliance monitoring. This makes sense given 
the potential for lead release from these pipes. The LCRI goes much farther and requires their 
removal regardless of any demonstrated lead release. In cases where the water system does not 
have control over the GRRs (e.g., customer-side services in California), the LCRI requires the 
water system to request permission of the property owner to conduct the replacements. 
Permission must be requested annually, numerous times, using more than one communication 
method, and very specific language must be included about the adverse health effects of lead.  
 
Undoubtedly, when a lead service line is replaced, if it is connected to a galvanized line, that 
galvanized line should be replaced at the same time. However, if the lead service line was 
removed years ago, removal of the galvanized line may or may not be warranted today. Without 
the authority to pay, EBMUD will need to request access/consent for replacement but will 
inform these customers they will need to pay for the replacement. Continued, persistent customer 
notification using alarming language about the health effects of lead, with no corresponding lead 
in their water, is likely to undermine confidence in the safety of the water for no reason. After a 
few rounds of such false alarms, customers may disregard future notifications, even those with 
legitimate warnings about the safety of the water. Excessive and unjustified warnings could also 
cause actual psychological harm, or cause consumers to spend thousands of dollars on home 
filtration systems to deal with an insignificant health risk7.  
 
In contrast to EPA’s statement in the preamble, there is more than “one stakeholder” impacted by 
this never-ending GRR requirement. As EPA noted, many water agencies have already removed 
most or all of their lead service lines. The cities of Tucson and Spokane were listed as examples 
in the preamble; EBMUD and the city of San Francisco can be included in this list; collectively 
 
7 Siddhartha Roy, Kim N. Dietrich, Hernan F. Gomez, and Marc A. Edwards.  Considering Some Negative 
Implications of an Ever-Decreasing U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Blood Lead Threshold 
and “No Safe Level” Health Messaging.  Environ. Sci. Technol. 2023, 57, 35, 12935–12939, Publication Date: 
August 23, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.3c04766 
 

February 2, 2024 
Page 4 
 
 
removing more than 17,000 LSLs decades ago. Presumably many of these early LSL removal 
efforts inadvertently created GRRs. The cost for replacement of GRRs is in the tens of millions 
for EBMUD alone (approximately 4,000 GRRs at $5,000 to $10,000 each). 
 
Water utilities should determine whether their site-specific conditions create this phenomenon. 
As Edwards et. al noted: “This research provides methods for utilities to identify and classify 
their unique scenario using profile sampling, scale analysis, lead isotope ratios, and element co‐
occurrence within water samples and pipe scale.” The decision tree in the WRF report and the 
AWS paper rightfully makes a distinction between “Low Pb Risk” public education and “High Pb 
Risk” public education.  
 
The LCRI should include a regulatory mechanism to allow water utilities with older GRRs to 
conduct a study to determine if their GRRs are a source of lead today. Such studies could include 
a review of historical corrosion control treatment, sequential tap sampling, measurement of co-
occurring metals, measurement of particulate vs. dissolved lead, analysis of scale in excavated 
pipes, or other tools that may become available. If the conclusion of the study is that the 
galvanized pipes are not a source of lead, then the water system should be permitted to cease 
notifying their GRR customers and recommending replacement. 
 
Two additional issue requires comment: First, EPA is proposing to require all consumer notices 
of lead tap sampling results to be delivered within three calendar days after the system learns of 
the results, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead action level. EBMUD’s laboratory, 
and many others, batch the samples and run them once per week for maximum efficiency. The 
batch is often run late in the week. If an individual result is high, the laboratory technician makes 
a phone call to the program manager for follow-up, and the program manager contacts the 
consumer as soon as possible. Batches of samples are often not complete and confirmed until late 
in the day on Friday and therefore special measures (e.g., overtime, supervisor notification, 
outlier reports) are needed to notify customers quickly. Such special measures are warranted in 
the case of high results since there is a potential risk to the consumer. However, for low results, 
such measures are not justified. The three calendar day notification requirement cannot be met 
over holiday weekends without special measures, it is overly burdensome without any public 
health benefit. A more reasonable timeframe such as two weeks should be required for results 
below the Action Level. 
 
And lastly, we recommend that EPA expand the window allowable for waivers from the school 
sampling requirements. Section 141.92 (h) “Alternative school and child care lead sampling 
programs” paragraph 5 says that states may issue waivers only when schools were sampled 
between January 1, 2021 and the compliance date of the LCRI. There is no technical basis for a 
2021 cutoff date for school sampling. EBMUD and most other water system in California 
conducted sampling for all schools in our service area during 2018-2019 using the 3Ts protocol 
and specific instructions provided by our state regulatory agency. Individual school site plans 
were developed, over 7,000 samples were collected and transmitted to the schools, numerous 
endpoint devices were mitigated, and follow-up samples were collected. There have been no 
changes in analytical methods or plumbing codes regarding lead materials since 2018, and 

February 2, 2024 
Page 5 
 
 
therefore there is no technical reason why this large sampling effort should not be considered for 
a waiver under § 141.92 (h).  
 
If you have any questions or need additional information, please contact me at 
susan.teefy@ebmud.com. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Susan Teefy 
Manager of Water Quality

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1860 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 7, 2024 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460 
Re: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
Dear Administer Regen, 
I appreciate the opportunity to comment on the lead portion of the National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations for Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI), Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-
0801. The medical community has stated in various publications that there is no useful purpose for 
lead in the human body, i.e., the body does not need it to function. The contribution of lead from 
drinking water to the total body burden needs to be controlled since it one of the routes of entry 
into the body. The most vulnerable group with the greatest health risk from all sources of lead are 
infants, children, and women of child bearing age (WOCBA). This most vulnerable population 
deserves a health-based protection level from the contributions caused by drinking water to their 
total lead body burden. We, as a society, owe it to current and future generations to not continue 
condemning them to the known lifetime ill effects lead can produce and by controlling this one 
source of lead, we can achieve a level of protection for those at greatest risk. 
The following comments are provided for consideration to further improve the LCR.  
A. Mandating Replacement of Lead and Galvanized Service Lines. The mandate to replace lead 
and some galvanized service lines over a specified timeframe places a financial burden upon 
all water systems (WSs) across the country may not achieve the intended outcome in all 
instances, and may not be fully supported by data based upon Flint Michigan’s Sentinel 
Monitoring and Flint CLEAR monitoring programs [CLEAR (Confirming Lead Elimination 
After Replacement) Program is a study to obtain data over a period of time to help determine 
what impact service line replacement has on lead levels in the home.]. Link: Flint Water - Test 
Results (michigan.gov). Currently there are WSs with lead and galvanized pipe in use in their 
distribution system but the water transiting those waterlines is hopefully not corrosive and may 
contain chemicals that coat the pipe putting a barrier between the lead and the water. This 
barrier protects those consumers with copper water lines where lead solder was used. Why 
require WSs to replace waterlines if the WS can provide verifiable data that the consumer is 
drinking water at the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) maximum level for lead in bottled 
water of 5 parts per billion (ppb) [micrograms/ liter (µgm/L)] or less? Before placing this 
economic burden upon all WSs, which in turn places an economic burden upon the WS 
customers by way of rate increases and tax payers across the country as funds are released at 
the federal level, a revision to the requirement should be made to enable WSs to analyze their 
data, with competent regulatory oversight, and then prioritize identified replacement needs. 
This would allow WSs to address the needs of the most vulnerable: infants, children, and 
WOCBA. 
B. Reviewing the timelines and the cost to implement the changes in the regulation, it is critical 
that the most important protective measure to take is to continue to limit chemical changes in 
a systems water chemistry that increases the corrosivity. When chemistry changes occur that 

Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
2 | P a g e  
 
prompt any coating on the inside of the pipes to slough off and expose lead in the pipes or 
solder, then increases in lead will occur. Flint Michigan appears to not have had a problem 
until the water chemistry was changed causing the lead to leach from all lead sources. 
Replacing lead service lines and certain galvanized service lines is a costly process that will 
reduce the potential for lead exposure to those at greatest risk. However, after reviewing many 
rounds of sampling data from Flint MI, it may not be the sole answer to correcting the problem 
and may provide a false sense of security to the consumers. On Nov 17,2016, a copper service 
line had a lead concentration of 5986 ppb (sample FS 9063) which appears to be the highest 
recorded reading collected during the Sentinel Sampling program. Thus, the push to replace 
all the lead pipes may not protect those with copper service lines unless corrosion inhibitors 
are added to coat the pipes. When the system was providing bottled water to its consumers, it 
was providing water that by FDA regulation shall not contain more than 5 parts per billion 
(ppb) [micrograms/ liter (µgm/L)]. When the consumer began drinking water from the system 
again with the system in compliance with the 90th percentile action level of 15 ppb, then that 
consumer may have been drinking water at or above 15 ppb since there is no maximum lead 
level that can come from a consumer’s faucet. 
C. Deleting the trigger level and changing the action level to 10 parts per billion (ppb) is definitely 
a positive action in protecting those at greatest risk: infants, children, and women of child 
bearing age (WOCBA). However, further clarification on the term “action level” is needed to 
convey to all that it is not a Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) and is not a cutoff level 
between safe and not safe to drink. Over the years the term action level has become 
misinterpreted, misunderstood, and misused. One reason for this misunderstanding could be 
that the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) and other health agencies provide the term and numerical value using a health-based 
determination and one could easily assume that when the EPA uses the action level term for 
lead it is also health- based. A very important action the EPA can undertake is to revise the 
LCR definitions to clearly identify that “15 (10) ppb is only a level that water systems need to 
begin to take specified actions to reduce the risk to their consumers and not a level between 
drink and not to drink. This clarification will hopefully reverse the trend of water system 
officials, government officials, and private entities interpretating it as a quasi MCL, and in 
some cases, stating it is an MCL. This could be accomplished by incorporating the words 
“treatment technique” in the definition and discussion in the applicable LCR and CCR 
sections. The Treatment Technique Action Level definition should specifically state that it is 
only a “treatment technique action level (TTAL) and should not be considered or referenced as 
an MCL. With the clarification must come enforcement requirements with violations attached. 
When entities do not have to be held accountable for misrepresentation, there is no reason to 
achieve accuracy. Failing to make and enforce changes will only continue to perpetuate the 
concept that the proposed 10 ppb is the new quasi MCL and allow misinformation to be spread 
potentially harming the consumer who believes what is written such as a treatment technique 
action level is an MCL. [See the ACTION LEVEL MISINTERPRETATION, 
MISUNDERSTANDING, AND MISUSE section later for examples verifying the 
misunderstanding and demonstrating the need for specific clarification and renaming the action 
level term. 
D. The League of Women Voters - Corpus Christi Area conducted a study (“Potential for Lead 
Contamination in Our Communities’ Drinking Water”) from 2016 – 2021 and developed a 
position statement to establish a health-based, early intervention, “Further Evaluation Level 

Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
3 | P a g e  
 
(FEL)” at 5 ppb for lead. The EPA could adapt this concept into the actions that WSs take 
once their sampling results are received. The FEL allows for early intervention into causation 
of a level above the FDA limit of 5 ppb and would be an excellent public health proactive 
measure. Developing a FEL at 5 ppb in which a LCR regulated water system informs the 
sampled consumer that their result was greater than 5 ppb which is the established maximum 
allowable FDA level for lead in bottled water and not reference the treatment technique action 
level of 15 ppb. The regulated water system would assist the consumer in evaluating the cause 
of the level above 5 ppb such as doing a repeat sample to verify the initial result. This would 
not create an undo economic burden on a regulated water system in that the system could assist 
with any additional resampling and determining if the system or the consumers system was the 
cause for the elevation above 5 ppb. This would allow the consumer to evaluate their lead 
reduction options based upon their perceived risk. For example, if the customer was a WOCBA 
with/without infants or children regularly consuming the tap water from the kitchen faucet and 
ice from the refrigerator ice maker, they may take immediate actions such as flushing, using 
Point of Use (POU) filters on the faucet and ice maker to immediately begin reducing their 
health risk while trying to determine if their service line and internal plumbing was 
contributing the levels above 5 ppb. 
E. Suggest modifying the wording in the education portion of the LCRs (141.85(a)(1)(i), 
“IMPORTANT INFORMATION ABOUT LEAD IN YOUR DRINKING WATER. [INSERT 
NAME OF WATER SYSTEM] found elevated levels of lead ….” The use of the words 
“elevated levels” is definitely open for interpretation. Suggest modifying to read “…found lead 
levels above 5 parts per billion (ppb) which is the FDA maximum limit for lead in bottled 
water, in the drinking water in some homes/buildings.…” If the 15 (10) ppb treatment 
technique action level value is included, an explanation that it is not a health-based level, but 
it is just a level in which specific actions are required by the water system. As required in the 
notification section 40 CFR 141.85(d) each sampled consumer wants to know what is coming 
from their faucet to help them make informed decisions about their health. It could be assumed 
that no one wants to be in that 10% category that may be above the current 15 ppb action level 
and know that the water system has no further responsibility. 
F. Suggest modifying CFR 141.85(b) Delivery of public education materials. Today, most water 
systems are not required to disseminate a paper copy of the Consumer Confidence Report 
which would provide such lead required information. Modifying to allow for distribution via 
social media and/or posting on the system’s internet site would afford consumers the needed 
information electronically for faster distribution. For example, the City of Plano Texas, on their 
internet site provides visual lead sampling result information. Link: Drinking Water Quality 
Information | Plano, TX - Official Website. Regarding the information provided in Consumer 
Confidence Reports, a violation with penalties needs to b established when WSs do not provide 
verifiably correct information regarding lead and other chemical constituents. Currently no WS 
is held accountable when verifiably incorrect is provided on lead to the consumers. 
G. Reference 40 CFR 141.86(86(b)(2) “First draw samples from residential housing must be 
collected from the cold-water kitchen or bathroom sink tap. First draw samples from a 
nonresidential building must be one liter in volume and collected at a tap from which water is 
typically drawn for consumption.” The use of bathrooms/restrooms as sampling points should 
be deleted because from a total body burden perspective, very few infants, children and 
WOCBA or others daily/regularly/typically consume water from these faucets Kitchen and 

Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
4 | P a g e  
 
cafeteria faucets and drinking fountains are typical drinking water locations. Allowing 
bathroom faucets may statistically be relevant but it is not a major source for consumption. For 
example, Naval Air Station Corpus Christi (NASCC) (ID # TX1780017) in 2013 sampled 
about 50% residential structure faucets but by December 2019, only about 15% of LCR 
samples came from residential structures. The LCR sample locations had shifted to faucets in 
industrial/administrative type facilities. From 2013 through 2019, 73 of 200 (36.5%) LCR 
samples collected were from Men’s restrooms and in June 2014, 45% of all the LCR samples 
were from Men’s restrooms. During this same 2013 – 2019 period, only four of 200 (2.0%) 
LCR samples came from Women’s restrooms. This strong bias toward Men’s restroom faucets 
brings into question if NASCC station officials understand who is the group at greatest risk: 
infants, children, and WOCBA. It appears that NASCC was striving for “compliance with the 
letter” of the regulation and missed “the intent of protecting” those at greatest risk, their 
infants, children and WOCBA. 
H. The sampling allowance for schools and child care facilities of 20 percent per year, should be 
modified and accelerated to identify those location where our children are at greater risk. By 
allowing a water system to perform its sample collection in compliance with the LCRs to 
sample mainly just schools and child care facilities in one of their early compliance sampling 
rounds. We need to initially focus on protecting those at greatest risk as soon as possible to 
reduce this potential source of total lead body burden. Priority should be included in the LCRs 
that collection from child care facilities and elementary schools are the first priority followed 
by middle and then high schools. Without setting priorities, a child entering school 
kindergarten could be consuming water with levels above the EPA’s 3Ts (Training, Testing, 
and Taking Action) for reducing lead in drinking water in schools’ level of 5 ppb for four years 
before their school was tested and a possible elevated level identified. 
The following Statements of Fact were used to develop the comments. 
STATEMENTS OF FACT 
1. EPA 815-B-18-007, 3T’s (Training, Testing and Taking Action) for Reducing Lead in 
Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities revised Manual of Oct 2018. 
Appendix D of this document uses 5 parts per billion (ppb) as the concentration from which 
further evaluation for cause should be performed. 
2. 40 CFR 141.85, Public education and supplemental monitoring and mitigation 
requirements, (a)(1)(i). “IMPORTANT INFORMATION ABOUT LEAD IN YOUR 
DRINKING WATER. [INSERT NAME OF WATER SYSTEM] found elevated levels of 
lead in drinking water in some homes/buildings. ….” 
3. 40 CFR part 141, subpart O (141.151 – 141.155 plus Appendix A). Consumer Confidence 
Reports. 
4. 40 CFR 141, Appendix to Subpart Q. (Standard Health Effects Language for Public 
Notification). 
5. 21 CFR Part 165 – Beverages, Subpart B. 
a. 165.110 (a)(2): “The name of the food is “bottled water,” “drinking water,” or…” 
b. 165.110 (4)(iii): “Having consulted with EPA as required by section 410 of the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the Food and Drug Administration has 
determined that bottled water, ….” 

Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
5 | P a g e  
 
c. 165.110 (4)(iii)(A): “The allowable levels for inorganic substances …. Lead 0.005 
milligrams/Liter” 
6. 21 USC 349: Bottled drinking water standards; publication in Federal Register.  (b)(3)(B) 
In the case of contaminants for which a treatment technique is established in a national 
primary drinking water regulation under section 1412 of the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 
U.S.C. 300g–1), the regulation under this subsection shall require that bottled water be 
subject to requirements no less protective of the public health than those applicable to 
water provided by public water systems using the treatment technique required by the 
national primary drinking water regulation. 
7. 40 CFR 141, Subpart O, Consumer Confidence Reports. 141.153 (h)(1) (iii) “In order to 
ensure that tap water is safe to drink, EPA prescribes regulations which limit the amount of certain 
contaminants in water provided by public water systems. FDA regulations establish limits for 
contaminants in bottled water which must provide the same protection for public health.” 
8. U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Interim Reference Level (IRL) for lead. The 
FDA assesses whether the amount of lead in a food product is high enough to raise a 
person’s blood lead level to a point of concern. To do this, the agency calculated a 
maximum daily intake for lead from food, called the Interim Reference Level (IRL). In 
determining the IRL, the FDA takes into account the amount of a particular food a person 
would need to consume daily, as well as other factors, that would result in blood lead levels 
of 5 ug/dL, the level at which the CDC recommends clinical monitoring of lead exposure 
in children. In 2018, the FDA calculated an IRL at 3 µg per day for children and 12.5 µg 
per day for adults. These levels allow for differences across human populations and are set 
nearly ten-times less than the actual amount of lead intake from food that would be required 
to reach the CDC’s blood reference level. The adult level is particularly important for 
women of childbearing age, to protect against possible fetal exposure in women who are 
unaware that they are pregnant, and against infant exposure during nursing. The FDA will 
continue to research and evaluate the health effects and dietary exposure to lead and will 
update the IRL as appropriate. In 2021, the CDC updated its BLRV to 3.5 μg/dL. To align 
with the CDC's updated BLRV, the FDA is updating its interim reference levels (IRLs) for 
lead from food to 2.2 μg/day for children and 8.8 μg/day for females of childbearing age. 
Citation: “Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology Volume 133, August 2022, 105202, 
Brenna M. Flannery , Karlyn B. Middleton, Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc.” 
9. 2018 Edition of the Drinking Water Standards and Health Advisories, EPA 822-F-
18-001, Office of Water, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, March 2018. Lead is 
listed as “B.2 Probable human carcinogen; indicates sufficient evidence in animals and 
inadequate or no evidence in humans.” 
BASIS FOR COMMENTS 
The following provide verifiable examples that were used to develop the some of the comments. 
I. ACTION LEVEL MISINTERPRETATION, MISUNDERSTANDING, AND MISUSE 
A. Action Level Misinterpretation, Misunderstanding, And Misuse. The trigger action level 
term only added to the existing confusion surrounding the “action level” term. Deleting the 
trigger level term and reducing the action level for lead to 10 parts per billion (ppb) is better 
than the 15 ppb level. The term “Action Level” needs further clarification in the standard 

Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
6 | P a g e  
 
to reverse the existing misunderstanding outside of the regulatory community of the term 
“Action Level.” Nowhere in the definition of this term are the words “safe to drink” used. 
The term provides a way for Water Systems (WSs) to limit their cost by meeting specific 
requirements mandated by the LCR regulations. The LCR is mandated by the Safe 
Drinking Water Act but nowhere in the LCR is a concentration linked with the words “safe 
to drink”. The only concentrations used are those that are economic for the WS when the 
Action Level or waiver level at the 90th percentile is not exceeded.  
B. The use of just the term action level at the 90th percentile contaminant level concentration 
of 15 µg/l, aka ppb, has created over the years a misperception among consumers, water 
department personnel, some health department personnel, and even some government 
officials that there is no health risk, read as “SAFE”, to consuming water at 15 ppb. In the 
Consumer Confidence Reports required by the Safe Drinking Water Act, in the Lead and 
Copper Table the table column heading reads: Number of samples over the Action Level of 
15 ppb. Medical journals, media, governmental entities and others in discussing lead, 
reference their data/statements to the EPA federal standard for lead in drinking water of 15 
ppb – implying a health-based standard [de facto MCL]. Over the years the “Action Level” 
of 15 ppb appears to have become a de facto MCL. As referenced in the California Public 
Health Goal documentation, April 2009. Page 26: “Therefore, for all practical purposes 
the standard described in the lead and copper rule is equivalent to an MCL.” Clarification 
of this term must be provided with enforcement and violations attached. The Action Level 
definition must specifically state that it is not health-based and is only a “treatment 
technique action level (TTAL).” The misconception that 15 ppb (changed to 10 ppb under 
these revisions) is “safe” for consumers must not be allowed to continue to be perpetuated 
especially as it pertains to infants, children, and WOCBA. To quote from an EPA internet 
page “Background: Lead in Drinking Water and the LCR: No safe level of lead exposure 
has been identified, and it is especially harmful to children and pregnant women.” 
Link: Proposed Revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule | Ground Water and Drinking Water 
| US EPA  
C. Regulators and experienced environmental professionals hopefully are aware that there is 
no regulatory established Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) for lead but that there is 
a Maximum Contaminant Level Goal (MCLG) of 0. Reference: 40 CFR 141.141. Yet, 
commercial entities advertise the action level of 15 ppb as an MCL. WSs use the 15 ppb 
Action Level as comparisons with an individual customer’s specific faucet results. In Flint 
Michigan, monitoring results posted in the 2017 CLEAR Sampling data tables show the 
background color as red when a result is 16 ppb and above while no background color is 
used for 15 ppb and below. The following are instances where the action level of 15 ppb at 
the 90th percentile level has become a implied/perceived “safe level” to drink and that WSs 
appear to have misconceptions about 15 ppb and the impact upon their customers 
understanding about lead in drinking water. 
1) The City of Flint internet site (as of Feb 4, 2024) provides the following graph in which 
Flint marks its 7th year in compliance with lead standards. Cite: Flint marks 7th year of 
compliance with lead standards - City of Flint. Note that the term “LEVELS ABOVE 
15 PPB REQUIRE ACTION PER FEDERAL STANDARDS” implies to the residents 
that the water is at a safe to drink level. There were 11 of the 15 sampling events in 
which the 90th percentile was above the FDA bottled water 5 ppb maximum level. 

Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
7 | P a g e  
 
When the residents were drinking bottled water supplied by the city, they were at less 
risk than they may be being supplied water from the current water distribution system. 
 
 
2) Pace Analytical internet site. On their “Lead & Copper in Water” page, in “The Lead 
and Copper Rule” tab, the following statement is made: “In 1991, the EPA issued the 
Lead and Copper Rule, which requires public water systems to control water 
corrosivity and to monitor for lead and copper levels in their distribution systems. The 
EPA has set Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) of 1.3 ppm (parts per million) for 
copper and 15 ppb (parts per billion) for lead in drinking water.” This is clearly an 
incorrect statement since there is no MCL just a treatment technique action level. 
However, unless a WS customer is knowledgeable of its inaccuracy, a WS customer 
will probably accept this as a correct statement and perpetuate it in their discussions 
with their consumers. Link: Lead & Copper In Water- Pace Analytical (pacelabs.com) 
3) San Antonio Water System (SAWS) (ID # TX0150018) Internet site. On the SAWS 
Water Quality FAQs page, SAWS responds to the question: Should I be concerned with 
lead in the water? The answer provided was: “In an effort to reduce lead and copper 
levels in public drinking water supplies, the lead and copper rule was adopted by EPA 
on May 7, 1991. If sample monitoring indicates that lead exceeds 15 parts per billion 
(0.015 PPM) in 10 percent or more of the samples taken, then the water system must 
take a prescribed action to minimize lead contamination. Lead is not used in SAWS 
production facilities or distribution system. There is a concentration of 0.0015 PPM 
found in the water or one-tenth of the amount necessary before prescribed action is 
required.  *PPM – parts per million” The SAWS answer causes confusion in it last 
sentence to the reader on the significance of actions to be done if 15 ppb (1/10 th of the 
amount necessary?). This implies that 150 ppb is the necessary amount to get to 15 
ppb. They use the word action and not actions, which indicates that there is only one 
action to take. This is probably a typographical error, at least one would hope so, but 
indicates a lack of knowledge about the health risk of lead and a lack of quality control 
in the releasing of information to the public about the lead drinking water standard. 
Finally, SAWS never addresses the question regarding “should a customer be 
concerned about lead in the water?” From a consumer point of view, the consumer 
wants to know about what is coming from their faucet and not what is in the entire 

Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
8 | P a g e  
 
system that serves more than 724,000 residential connections. Link: Water Quality 
FAQs - San Antonio Water System (saws.org) 
4) In a May 19, 2021, letter from the Corpus Christi Water Utilities Department (ID # 
TX1780003) to one of its consumers who participated in a special lead in water testing 
program, in the Your Results section, the letter stated “Lead results in parts per billion 
(ppb): 1.4.” In the “What Does This Mean?” section, the statement was: “The level of 
lead in your tap water sample was under the federal and state action level of 15 ppb.” 
This response implies that the department is (mistakenly) attempting to establish the 
Action Level as a Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) at 15 ppb in the mind of the 
consumer. A consumer is not interested in the regulations governing the actions a WS 
is obligated when an action level exceedance occurs under the Lead and Copper Rule 
(LCR). Simply put, the citizen consumer sits outside the perimeters of the LCR. The 
ordinary citizen is not equipped to understand the regulatory obligation of a water 
system’s distribution system, which in turn has no remedial obligation to the citizen’s 
household system. A consumer is only interested in what is coming out of their faucet 
and not what actions a water system must take when the 90th percentile concentration 
exceeds 15 ppb. No one want to be in that 10th percentile group where a WS does not 
have to do any further action. In this case, the value was low but there was no 
documentation available for review from any customer who may have exceeded the 15 
ppb level to determine what the water department stated. 
5) U.S. Navy, OPNAV M-5090.1, Environmental Readiness Program Manual. 3 Sep 
2019, page 21-21, paragraph 21-5.1. Defines Action Level (AL) as “the concentration 
of lead or copper in water that is used to determine compliance with the lead and 
copper rule. Under the lead and copper rule, ALs have replaced lead and copper 
MCLs.” The U.S. Navy appears to use the Action Level of 15 ppb as a “safe level” for 
infants and children to drink. Naval Air Station Corpus Christi (NASCC) (ID # 
TX1780017) in an October 4, 2019, Commanding Officers letter (5900 Serial N00/265) 
to NASCC Parents and Staff, the commander informed them of the lead in priority 
areas water monitoring results. There were three monitored fixtures with 
concentrations of 16 ppb and one at 150 ppb. Those fixtures were immediately taken 
out of service. After those four fixtures were replaced and resampled, all fixtures at 15 
ppb (1) and lower (3) were returned to service per U.S. Navy guidance. Thus, it appears 
that the U.S. Navy uses the EPA Action Level of 15 ppb as a safe or not safe to drink 
level for infants and children. NOTE: One fixture that was taken out of service had a 
concentration of 16 ppb and after replacement the monitoring result was 15 ppb and 
placed back into service. A difference of one part per billion in lead between being out 
of service and being in service with a new fixture indicates that this Naval Station 
personnel believe water at 16 ppb is not safe and that water at 15 ppb is safe. 
6) Department of the Navy, Commander Navy Installations Command (CNIC) Instruction 
5090.6 (CINCINST 5090.6 N4 21 AUG 2020, Subject: NAVY SAMPLING AND 
TESTING FOR LEAD IN DRINKING WATER IN PRIORITY AREAS.  
a) This instruction cited a reference (d) of: EPA 815-B-18-007, Training, Testing and 
Taking Action for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care 
Facilities revised Manual of Oct 2018. To quote the instructions Paragraph 3. 
“Action. The testing protocols of this instruction are pursuant to reference (a) 

Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
9 | P a g e  
 
[OPNAVST 5090.1E], exceed Safe Drinking Water requirements in reference (c) 
[42 U.S.C. § 300f-300j] and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Lead and 
Copper Rule regulations, and are based on technical, and not regulatory, guidance 
published by the EPA in reference (d).” 
b) In CINCINST paragraph 3.c.(1)(c) on page 3. it is stated: “Building Manager Point 
of Contact. In the event testing results are above the recommended screening level 
of 15 parts per billion (ppb). Coordination with the building manager is required 
to clean aerators and to perform any other required corrective actions. …” 
c) On page 6 of the CINCINST, greater than 15 ppb is used as the level for further 
actions and not the 5 ppb in the EPA 3T program document. 
d) On page 8 of the CINCINST it is stated (f) Bottled Water. If all other corrective 
actions are impractical, bottled water can be used as a permanent solution.” 
NOTE: If this solution is used, then that specific naval facility will be providing 
water at a maximum 5 ppb, the FDA health-based level and not the Navy 15 ppb 
allow “in service” level. 
e) On page 9 of the CINCINST under Post-Corrective Action Sampling, “Resampling 
and additional corrective actions must continue until results are less than or equal 
to 15 ppb.” 
f) The only place in EPA 815-B-18-007, Oct 2018, a screening level of 15 ppb is 
mentioned is on page 36 in the Note section which discusses the LCR action level 
of 15 ppb. It is stated “The action level for lead is not a health-base standard and is 
based upon EPA’s evaluation of available data on the ability of corrosion control 
to reduce lead levels at the tap. The action level is a screening tool for determining 
when certain treatment technique actions are needed.” The U.S. Navy used the non-
health-based action level of 15 ppb, a level 3 times higher than the FDA bottled 
water health-based level of 5 ppb, as a the “safe” level to protect infants and 
children. The EPA Action Level concept appears to have even confused the U.S. 
Navy into believing the non-health-based 15 ppb level is “safe” to drink. 
II. ESTABLISHMENT OF A HEALTH-BASED “FURTHER EVALUATION LEVEL” AT 
5 PPB [MICROGRAMS / LITER (µgm/L)]. 
Establishment of a health-based, early intervention, “Further Evaluation Level (FEL)” at 5 ppb 
for lead. This FEL would allow an early intervention into the cause of a lead in water issue 
with the goal of preventing further consumption of water containing lead. Currently there is no 
maximum contaminant level (MCL), a health based developed concentration, for lead. The 
EPA’s 3T (Training, Testing, and Taking Action) program for Reducing Lead in Drinking 
Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities, [Revised Manual, Office of Water (4606M) EPA 
815-F-18-017 October 2018] uses 5 ppb as the concentration where a further evaluation for the 
cause of lead in the facilities water should be accomplished. Establishing this level to further 
evaluate will begin to afford protection to those 10% consumers who are not currently 
protected by the LCR requirements. This will also minimize the resource burden on the tens 
of thousands of water systems (WSs) across the United States who can demonstrate through 
their source and system monitoring that the water they deliver at their consumers 
drinking/cooking water faucets is below the proposed Treatment Technique Action Level of 10 

Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
10 | P a g e  
 
ppb. There is an extensive database available that indicates that over 90% of all WSs across 
the country have concentrations of 5 ppb or lower at the 90th percentile level and sometimes at 
the 95th percentile level (States of Arizonia and Missouri compute this value) for lead. The 
basis for this statement comes from data reported by the WSs Consumer Confidence Reports 
(CCRs) and in several instances verified by reviewing various state’s Drinking Water Watch 
(DWW) internet site. 
The establishment of a health-based 5 µgm/L (ppb) as a further evaluation level (FEL) would 
allow WSs to assist their customers in evaluating the source of any elevated level of lead and 
if the source was determined to be the service line, then the WS must include the replacement 
in their operations and maintenance activities. The WS should develop a prioritization ranking 
for replacement with waterlines servicing locations where infants, children and WOCBA reside 
being the top priority. The health-based FEL would be a level that demonstrates the EPA is 
concerned about the lead exposure consumers of a WSs water and would debunk the 
misconception that the proposed treatment technique action level of 10 ppb is “safe to drink.” 
The 5 ppb level currently exists in the LCR and other EPA documents. By establishing it as 
the FEL, it would then comport with other governmental agency lead levels that are health-
based. 
A. The City Corpus Christi Texas Water Utilities Department (ID # TX1780003) from 2005 
through 2020 took 413 LCR required water samples with only 23 sample concentrations 
with lead results > 5 ppb.  Five of 23 locations accounted for 14 of the 23 sample results 
>5 ppb. Site LCR038 had 5 of 6 results >5 ppb and the average concentration from 2005 – 
2017 was 7.4 ppb. If a Further Evaluation Level (FEL) at 5 ppb had been in place, early 
intervention may have prevented the average being 7.4 ppb and may have achieved a level 
below the FDA bottled water limit of 5 ppb. 
B. In 2008, Scottsdale Arizona (ID # AZ0407098) had lead concentrations of 93.7 ppb and 
55.1 ppb at two separate locations in their distribution system out of 50 locations sampled. 
These two results were respectively 18.7 and 11 times the FDA bottled water allowable 
lead level of 5 ppb. The 90th percentile contaminant level was below 15 ppb and thus, no 
further actions were required beyond eventually notifying the individual residences of the 
results. If a FEL had been instituted, those customers who have had assistance in 
determining the causation of such concentrations. 
C. The EPA established a 0.005 mg/L (5 ppb) level for systems at the 90th percentile for 
monitoring waivers for small systems. “Lead levels. To qualify for a full waiver, or a lead 
waiver, the system must demonstrate that the 90th percentile lead level does not exceed 
0.005 mg/L.” Reference: 40 CFR 141.86(g)(2)(i) 
D. The EPA established the 0.005 mg/L (5 ppb) level in reference to continued eligibility for 
waiver renewal: “A system with a full waiver or a lead waiver no longer satisfies the 
materials criteria of paragraph (g)(1)(i) of this section or has a 90th percentile lead level 
greater than 0.005 mg/L.” Reference: 40 CFR 141.86(g)(5)(i) 
E. The EPA established the Practical Quantitation Level, or PQL for lead at 0.005 mg/L (5 
ppb). Reference: 40 CFR 141.89(a)(1)(ii)(A). 
F. The EPA’s 3T (Training, Testing, and Taking Action) program for Reducing Lead in 
Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities, uses 5 ppb, as the concentration 

Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
11 | P a g e  
 
where a further evaluation for the cause of lead in the facilities water should be 
accomplished. Reference: EPA 3T Revised Manual, Office of Water (4606M) EPA 815-
F-18-017 October 2018. 
G. When a WS is required by regulatory agencies or chooses to provide bottled water to its 
customers because of an issue with the water quality or with a distribution system 
disruption, the WS is providing water to those affected customers that can only have 5 ppb 
of lead per liter and not a 10 ppb Treatment Technique Action Level. 
H. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) established a health-based not to exceed 
level of lead in bottled water at 0.005 milligrams/liter (mg/L) [5 parts per billion (ppb)]. 
This level was established after “Having consulted with EPA as required by section 410 of 
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the Food and Drug Administration has 
determined that bottled water, when a composite of analytical units of equal volume from 
a sample is examined by the methods listed in paragraphs (b)(4)(iii)(E) through 
(b)(4)(iii)(F), and (b)(4)(iii)(G) of this section, shall not contain the following chemical 
contaminants in excess of the concentrations specified in paragraphs (b)(4)(iii)(A) through 
(b)(4)(iii)(D) of this section.” Reference: 21 CFR 165.110(b)(4) (iii). 
The FDA uses an “interim reference level (IRL)” in assessing whether the amount of lead 
in a food product, including bottled liquids, is high enough to raise a person’s blood lead 
level (BLL) to a level of concern. To do this, the FDA established a maximum daily intake 
for lead called the IRL. In determining the IRL, the FDA considers the amount a person 
needs to ingest daily, as well as other factors, that would result in the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) 2012 established reference BLL of 5 micrograms/deciliter 
(µg/dl). This is the whole blood lead level at which the CDC recommends clinical 
monitoring of lead exposure in children. The FDA applied a safety factor of 10 to the CDC 
level in their evaluation process which indicated the BLL of concern the FDA used in its 
models would be 0.5 µg/dl. The FDA established the IRL at 3 µg per day for children and 
12.5 µg per day for women of child bearing age (WOCBA) which can also be used as the 
IRL for all adults. These levels were set to yield ten-times less than the amount of daily 
ingestion required to reach the CDC’s blood reference level. [U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration's interim reference levels for dietary lead exposure in children and women 
of childbearing age, Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology, Volume 111, March 2020, 
104579.] 
In April 2021 the U.S. FDA developed an initiative called “Closer to Zero: Action Plan for 
Baby Foods,” to identify actions the agency will take to reduce exposure to toxic elements 
from foods eaten by babies and young children—to as low as possible. The FDA prioritized 
babies and young children because their smaller body sizes and metabolism make them 
more vulnerable to the harmful effects of the contaminants to be considered, one being 
lead. In this process the FDA stated they will develop “Action Levels” in their regulations 
of the contaminants. The FDA stated “Action levels are a level of contamination at which 
a food may be regarded as adulterated within the meaning of section 402(a)(1) of the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. The FDA considers action levels, in addition to 
other factors and scientific evidence, when considering whether to bring enforcement 
action in a particular case.” Link: Closer to Zero: Action Plan for Baby Foods | FDA 
I. According to the additional requirements for a Consumer Confidence Report (CCR):  

Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
12 | P a g e  
 
“(iii) In order to ensure that tap water is safe to drink, EPA prescribes regulations which 
limit the amount of certain contaminants in water provided by public water systems. FDA 
regulations establish limits for contaminants in bottled water which must provide the same 
protection for public health.” Reference: 40 CFR141.153(h)(1)(iii). 
If the FDA bottled water limits must provide the same protection for public health as the 
EPA prescribed regulations which limit the amount of certain contaminants provided by 
public water systems and if the FDA consulted with the EPA on its bottled water limit of 5 
ppb, then by implication, the EPA tacitly acknowledged the 5 ppb as presenting a lower 
risk to health than its Treatment Technique Action Level of 15 (10) ppb, especially to 
infants, children, and pregnant and nursing women, or as the FDA uses women of child 
bearing age (WOCBA). 
SUMMARY COMMENTS. 
WSs along with federal and state environmental regulatory agencies focus on achieving 
compliance with the “letter of the law,” e.g., statute, rule, code and not on the “intent to 
protect” those at greatest risk – infants, children, and WOCBA. Over the years the main 
attention by WSs has been on meeting the regulatory Action Level (AL) number of 15 ppb at 
the 90th percentile contaminant level in order to not have an exceedance and to not have to 
accomplish additional actions. When regulatory agencies do not thoroughly review and verify 
documentation submitted from the WSs, the enforcement of federal and state LCR regulations 
by regulators on WSs can deteriorate to a point where WSs no longer due their due diligence 
on their submissions and information provided to consumers. When a WSs seeks only 
compliance and does not understand the intent to protect, it can arrange its monitoring sites 
and procedures to yield concentrations that will keep it compliant with the LCR requirements. 
If there are no violations with penalties attached, then there is no initiative for WSs to strive to 
meet the intent and do their due diligence in how they set up their program and how they report 
the information to government officials and to their customers. 
I hope the comments promote discussion on how to further improve the LCR requirements that 
will protect those at greatest risk. We want future generations to be able to say that we took actions 
that did not continue to condemn them from the adverse effects of lead. We need enforced 
regulations that provide drinking water that minimizes its contributions to the total body burden to 
all consumers. 
Thank you for your attention to my comments. 
Sincerely, 
 
RONALD L. SCHILLER, CIH (1978 – 2020, Retired)

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1384 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
The Honorable Michael S. Regan, Administrator
Feb 2, 2024
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20460
RE: Ensuring Safe Drinking Water at School - Proposed Lead and Copper Rule
Improvements (Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801)
Dear Administrator Regan,
As medical and public health professionals, we urge you to strengthen the proposed Lead &
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) to ensure safe drinking water for all Americans - especially
for children at schools and child care centers.
Lead contamination of drinking water is a serious, longstanding and widespread public health
threat. Even at low levels, this toxic substance impairs the way that children learn, grow and
behave and is linked to cardiovascular disease in adults. As the EPA’s own website duly notes,
“In children, low levels of [lead] exposure have been linked to damage to the central and
peripheral nervous system, learning disabilities, shorter stature, impaired hearing and impaired
formation and function of blood cells.”
Lead contamination of drinking water is a serious, longstanding and widespread threat to public
health. A key reason this problem persists is that federal policy has only required action when
highly variable testing detects lead. To finally ensure safe drinking water for all Americans, the
EPA must transform that “test and fix” policy to one that prevents lead contamination at every
drinking water tap.
A perfect example of this preventative approach is the LCRI’s requirement that water utilities
replace all lead service lines within 10 years. These 9+ million toxic pipes are the single greatest
source of lead contamination for buildings served by them. We wholeheartedly support turning
President Biden’s goal of eliminating these lead pipes within a decade into an enforceable
reality.
We need similarly bold policies to stop lead from contaminating the water where
America’s children go to learn and play each day. Even low levels of lead can damage
children’s health - including learning disabilities, behavior problems, and more. Yet national
standards have allowed the fountains, faucets, pipes and plumbing in our schools to contain a
significant amount of lead. (Even some post-2014 faucets can cause contamination.) As a
result, lead contamination of schools’ drinking water is now widespread.
Yet for most schools and child care centers, the proposed rule only requires testing (and very
limited testing at that). Even federally regulated schools and child care centers would only have
to remediate taps where tests show lead concentrations at 10 parts per billion (ppb) or more.
These proposed policies will fail to secure safe water for kids and educators. Because lead
testing is highly variable, the water from a fountain or faucet can be “highly hazardous” even if

several samples fail to detect lead. Moreover, the 10 ppb action level means that no remediation
will be required for a huge proportion of taps where some level of lead is detected. This weak
policy is also contrary to EPA’s own 3Ts Guidance, which urges schools to reduce lead levels “to
the lowest possible concentrations.”1
America’s kids and educators deserve better. Just as we must replace every lead service line,
federal policy should aim to prevent lead contamination at every tap at schools. Except where a
school district or child care facility affirmatively opts out, the LCRI should require Community
Water Systems (which serve 90% of schools) to implement one of the following options at
schools and child care facilities:
a) Prevent lead contamination at every tap, including:
1.
Filter first: Install and maintain certified point of use filters certified to remove lead on
every tap used for drinking water, cooking or beverage preparation. As fountains contain
lead and cannot accept filters at the point where water comes out, they should be
replaced by new water stations with filters. A growing number of jurisdictions have
already adopted some version of this “filter first” policy - Including Michigan,
Philadelphia, Portland (OR) and the District of Columbia;
2.
A health-based limit on lead: Limit lead in schools’ water to 1 ppb, as recommended
by the American Academy of Pediatrics.2 Schools and child care centers are particularly
well-situated to meet this low lead concentration because they have full control of their
water delivery systems - all the way to the tap. Taps should be tested after filter
installation to ensure this standard is being met; and
3.
Get the lead out: To stop the cycle of lead contamination at school, new and
replacement taps and plumbing should meet the Q≤1 standard recently adopted by
California, where lead leached into water is less than or equal to 1 ppb; or
b) Test every drinking water tap at least once every 6 months, and then replace taps and install
filters whenever lead concentrations exceed 1 ppb. While not ideal, this much more robust “test
and fix” option would be more effective at reducing the likelihood of lead-contaminated water at
school than the infrequent testing and no required remediation in the proposed rule.
For the roughly 10% of schools and child care facilities that are federally regulated as
Non-Transient Non-Community Water Systems, the EPA can and should simply require the
much more protective Option a) above in the LCRI rule.
Right to Know: To counter the strong likelihood of a false sense of safety from inherently
variable testing, the LCRI should also require all water utilities to regularly communicate
(including online) the following to families, educators and the public regarding schools and child
care facilities: full test results showing any level of lead at each tap; that tests are variable and
can fail to detect lead; that there is no safe level of lead; prevention/remediation measures taken
2 “The science is clear that there is no known safe level of exposure to lead in drinking water,
especially for children,” as EPA notes in the proposed rule. The AAP-recommended 1 ppb is a
measurable, attainable limit for schools that is closest to the Maximum Contaminant Level Goal of
zero.
1 U.S. EPA, 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities (2018) at Module
4, page 36, accessed on January 10, 2024.

at each tap; and any school districts or child care facilities opting out of their Community Water
System’s measures outlined above.
In addition to these requirements for schools and child care centers regulated as NTNCWS,
EPA should also incorporate policy changes that will better prevent lead contamination at all
other schools and child care facilities:
●
Establish a clear preference for awarding grants aimed at prevention - such as replacing
fountains with filter-equipped water stations - rather than funding more testing. Condition
grants on adhering to the Right to Know provisions outlined above.
●
Change the name of EPA’s 3 Ts Guidance to “Preventing Lead Contamination at Every
Tap” and replace its “test-and-fix” recommendations with the prevention-oriented
measures outlined above for LCR-regulated schools.
America’s children and educators need safe drinking water to thrive and be healthy. We urge the
EPA to act more boldly to get the lead out at school.
Sincerely,
(affiliations for identification purposes only)
Ronnie Levin, Instructor
Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health
Linda Birnbaum, PhD
Scientist Emeritus and Former Director, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
Bruce Lanphear, MmD, MPH
Professor, Simon Fraser University
Katie Huffling, DNP, RN, CNM, FAAN
Executive Director, Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments
Brian Schwartz, MD
Professor of Environmental Health and Engineering, Epidemiology, and Medicine
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health
Jessica McGauley-Jacobson,BSN, PHN, LSN
LSN, Minneapolis Public Schools
Katarzyna Kordas, PhD
Associate Professor, University at Buffalo
Lindsay Anderson, RN
Groton, CT

Casey Collier, MD
Chicago, IL
Theresa DeLuca, RN
Melrose, MA
Marsha Ng,PharmD
Clinical Pharmacist
Lorraine Rowe-Conlan, RPh
Pharmacist PHC
Irana Hawkins, PhD, MPH, RDN
Laguna Beach, CA
Alan Peterson, MD
LGH (Retired)
Willow Street, PA
Janet Perlman, MD, MPH
USCF
Sally Rosenfeld, MD
Portland, OR
Kay Rosenthal, RN, PhD
Senior Public Health Nurse, Larimer County (Retired)
Rachael Stalker, FNP-BC
Glen Haven, CO
David Schwartzman, PhD
Chair, Political Policy & Action Committee - DC Statehood Green Party

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0876 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Page 1 
 
Safe Water Engineering, LLC 
 
Elin Betanzo 
4444 2nd Ave  
Detroit, MI 48201 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
I am writing to submit my public comment on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, and 
to provide my perspectives on the LCRI based on my experience in implementing the Michigan Lead and 
Copper Rule. As a member of the National Drinking Water Advisory Committee, I have already 
participated in an advisory session for EPA during the public comment period. I shared several 
perspectives at that meeting, and I am submitting my data analysis here in writing.  
My comments follow, and two attachments, “What Michigan Lead and Copper Rule Compliance Tell Us 
About the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements,” and “January 11, 2023 Benton Harbor 
Corrosion Control Study Letter to EGLE” provide additional analysis.  
 
Comments: 
1. The proactive LSLR requirement is a massive improvement. The requirements and circumstances 
around requirements need to be strengthened to achieve all the intended outcomes. 
 
2. The way to simplify implementation, which is critical for achieving the intended public health 
outcomes, is to make a lead action level exceedance a meaningful intervention for protecting public 
health and providing an incentive for water systems to be as proactive as possible regarding 
corrosion control treatment.  Delivering certified lead reducing filters should be mandatory with 
every lead action level exceedance. For every LALE, EPA should require delivery of filters for two 
sampling periods for every one exceedance. This is the ultimate motivator to get good CCT installed 
and maintained.  Accelerated lead service line replacement (LSLR) is recommended in response to a 
lead action level exceedance, especially if EPA maintains the option for deferring LSLR deadlines in 
the final rule.  
 
3. Using the 90th percentile to measure compliance with the lead action level means there’s minimal 
incentive for water utilities to use corrosion control to minimize lead in all homes. It ensures that, in 

Page 2 
 
Safe Water Engineering, LLC 
 
absence of true OCCT, there will always be up to 10% of households that are at increased risk of 
exposure to lead in drinking water and they will never know who they are. The attached analysis 
shows that 111 Michigan Community Water Systems (CWSs) do not exceed the LAL but still have 
results between 10 and 790 ppb. In most cases residents of these water systems would not get 
improved public health protection under the LCRI. Further analysis is provided in the attachment.  
 
4. Further, Benton Harbor, Michigan had a 90th percentile result of 1 ppb, yet they still had a 
compliance sample at 28 ppb even after all LSLs were removed. Improved CCT will do nothing to 
address the 10% of systems remaining in Benton Harbor with risk of exposure to lead in water 
unless a different measure is used to evaluate a lead action level exceedance. If the maximum lead 
result were measured against the lead action level, we could rely on several provisions of the LCRI to 
achieve a lot of self correcting at PWSs. As long as the 90th percentile is used, it provides an out for 
PWSs to dismiss all valid concerns about lead in water.  
 
5. The requirement to remove all LSLs in 10 years will protect public health if it actually requires all 
public water systems to replace all LSLs in 10 years.  
a. The definition of an LSL must extend into the house, (e.g., from the discharge of the 
corporation fitting to the building plumbing at the first shut-off valve inside the building, or 
18 inches inside the building, whichever is shorter) and connectors goosenecks must be 
considered LSLs.  
b. Strengthen inventory and validation. To be validated as a non-lead service line, there needs 
to be checks on the public side, building side, and inside the building. Goosenecks or 
connectors can be assumed to be present unless there is a control establishing that they 
were never used, or the PWS can validate that there is no lead connector present. See the 
Michigan Distribution System Materials Inventory guidance for more information.  
c. The non-lead validation process must have clear requirements for what to do if one or more 
non-lead services is found to be lead or GRR through the validation process. This should 
trigger re-opening the entire inventory process because it puts all non-lead records in 
question.  
d. Allowing the validation timeline to year 7 will waste LSLR money. If the non-lead data set is 
confirmed to have lead or GRR pipes, the utility would essentially have to start over the LSLR 
program which could effectively double the cost of the program.  
e. Provide an inventory/replacement option where a water utility can commit to, and prove 
they have the resources to, verify every service line as they work through their LSLR 
program to meet the LSLR deadline and avoid the non-lead validation step. There needs to 
be an option to comply as Newark, NJ and Benton Harbor, MI were able to successfully 
remove all LSLs and verify all non-lead service lines. Note that both cities were able to do 
this for all their service lines in less than 3 years.  
 
 
6. Under the proposal, the places with the most lead service lines or high concentrations of these lead 
pipes would potentially have decades of compliance extensions available. Chicago, for example, 
would have 45 to 56 years to remove all of their lead service lines. It is a fundamental injustice that 
communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed extra decades to fix this issue, and it 
is unnecessary to build such extraordinary exceptions into the rule. There should be no extensions 
beyond 10 years; Newark was able to replace 120 lead pipes a day, and there is no reason other 

Page 3 
 
Safe Water Engineering, LLC 
 
cities cannot meet a 10-year deadline. Clearly, no extensions can allow backsliding from the 1991 
Lead and Copper Rule’s requirement that a minimum of 7 percent of lead pipes must be replaced 
annually–a replacement rate EPA long ago determined is feasible. 
 
7. EPA’s mandate states that water systems must replace all lead service lines within their control, but 
EPA’s definition could leave out large numbers of lines and leave them in the ground in perpetuity. 
While the proposed rule is headlined by a requirement for removal of all lead service lines in ten 
years, it actually requires removal only of those service lines that are “under the control of the 
water system unless the replacement would leave in place a partial lead service line.” The rule then 
defines “control” as legal access or physical access without further definition, essentially leaving 
determinations of “control” up to states, water systems and localities to determine whether the 
utility has access. As a result, a water system could “comply” with its requirement to replace all lead 
service lines yet leave vast quantities of lead service lines in the ground by asserting a lack of access 
to any portions of lead service lines under private property. This interpretation is a huge risk, and is 
unnecessary. EPA should affirmatively state that water systems have control over all portions of lead 
service lines, since they generally require or approve use of lead pipes, retain physical access to 
them in an emergency, and ultimately can shut off water through them. 
 
8. The proposed rule fails to mandate that water systems pay for removal of the entire lead service 
line, but it is imperative that the final rule does.  Removal of lead pipes can cost thousands of 
dollars. Putting a disproportionate financial burden on impacted low-wealth homeowners and 
renters by allowing utilities to bill property owners individually will result in mostly wealthy and 
white neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced, particularly when combined with the 
aforementioned “access” loophole. There are enough financing solutions, rate structures, and 
funding streams available that EPA should ensure replacements be made at no direct cost to 
individual consumers. This would achieve more equitable implementation, better protect children’s 
health, and is essential to meet EPA’s statutory mandate to protect public health to the extent 
feasible. 
 
9. Most corrosion control studies should focus on lead in premise plumbing. Only water systems with 
more than 2,500 potential LSLs should focus on CCT for lead service lines. Looking at Michigan data, 
this would apply to up to 14% of CWS with potential LSLs. CCT requirements should focus as much 
as possible on expediting better corrosion control treatment that will reliably achieve all lead 
compliance samples at or below 10 ppb. That may or may not include pipe loop studies. Universal 
distribution of certified lead reducing filters could be allowed at all potential LSL and GRR homes as 
an alternative to pipe loop studies for any water system that is expediting LSLR. This would allow a 
protective option to match the Denver Water approach to addressing lead in drinking water.   
 
10. Corrosion Control studies in the LCRI read more like a paperwork and consultant project that 
focuses more on process than outcomes. The purpose of a corrosion control study must be to 
reduce the lead levels in the public water system.  
a. The LCRI should focus on incentives to get the lead as low as possible rather than focusing 
on CCT study requirements that lengthen the CCT timeline. A max lead level of 10 ppb would 
be an appropriate incentive with the requirement to deliver filters if the max lead is greater 
than 10 ppb. Low lead levels should always be the outcome of the CCT study.  
b. Studies take too long and don’t offer public health protection while they happen. 
c. Requiring filters provides immediate, reliable protection against lead in drinking water. 

Page 4 
 
Safe Water Engineering, LLC 
 
d. The CCT requirements of the LCRI provide huge potential to waste time, money and public 
health protection opportunity.  
e. Rather than focusing on study process, the LCRI should consider leaving the CCT process up 
to PWS to do a study that meets their needs to not have an LALE. Low lead compliance 
sampling results in properly collected samples at appropriately tiered sampling sites should 
be the primary measure of CCT success, not the study methodology. If the treatment 
doesn’t result in low lead levels, the PWS should have to start over. 
f. A memo reviewing the corrosion control study process in Benton Harbor is attached. It 
demonstrates the limitations of corrosion control studies and a wide range of issues that can 
go wrong while a community is waiting for public health protection.   
 
11. If corrosion control is not working to reduce maximum lead compliance sampling results below 10 
ppb there should be a requirement for a third-party review of the CCT study to identify more 
effective strategies for reducing lead levels.  
 
12. After a LALE that triggers filter distribution, the final LCRI could allow an end to filters if 100% 
samples are below a revised PQL of 0.002 mg/L.  
 
13. If a PWC wants to stop corrosion control treatment after all LSLs are removed, they should be 
required to conduct a study to determine whether lead levels will rise if they stop CCT treatment. 
 
14. Consecutive system CCT treatment must be explicitly addressed in final LCRI. These issues are 
described in more detail in the attachment “What Michigan Lead and Copper Rule Compliance Data 
Tell Us About the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements.” 
 
15. There are no copper provisions in the LCRI. To avoid backsliding, the final LCRI should include a 
separate sampling pool of new copper sites, preferably locations after LSLR, to measure the 
adequacy of CCT for controlling copper corrosion.  
 
16. School sampling as appears in the draft LCRI is not scientifically defensible, misleading, and is a 
waste of money and implementation burden with a negative public health result. A filter first 
approach like the one instituted in Michigan is a far more direct approach to providing public health 
protection that should not increase burden on public water systems and primacy agencies. EPA 
should explore an “all of government approach” to ensure certified lead reducing filters are used in 
all school and childcare settings even if it is not through regulating public water systems.  
 
17. Distribution system water quality is most effective for corrosion control if consistency is maintained 
in water quality parameters. More frequency of sampling, more parameters, and setting both a 
lower and upper bound for water quality parameters will help ensure water quality consistency and 
better corrosion control.  
 
18. Right to know reports, public notifications, and public education materials should include language 
that is clear about the possibility of lead exposure from drinking water even when the system as a 
whole is in compliance. Information should include annual messaging about not only the risks of 
contamination from lead service lines but also lead plumbing, which is ubiquitous. It should also 
include information about the effectiveness of lead-certified point of use filters as a way for families 
to reduce lead levels in their drinking water. EPA should forbid messaging that states or suggests 

Page 5 
 
Safe Water Engineering, LLC 
 
that tested lead levels below the action level are "safe," and emphasize that there is no safe level of 
lead exposure. The attachment, ““What Michigan Lead and Copper Rule Compliance Data Tell Us 
About the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” describes how more than 100 Michigan 
CWS have confirmed elevated lead levels even when they are in compliance with the 10 ppb lead 
action level using the 90th percentile measurement. These lead levels go as high as 6,000 ppb even 
while the CWS is in full compliance with the LCRI. If the final LCRI is to continue using the 90th 
percentile for measurement against the lead action level, it is imperative that all public education 
materials be revised to notify all consumers that they are all at risk of exposure to elevated lead at 
any time. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to express my views on this important matter. I trust that you will 
carefully consider the feedback provided by the public during this comment period, as it represents the 
collective voice of concerned citizens who share a common commitment to our drinking water. 
 
Sincerely, 
Elin Betanzo 
President and Founder, Safe Water Engineering, LLC 
 
 
 
Attachments: 
1. “What Michigan Lead and Copper Rule Compliance Data Tell Us About the Proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements.” 
2. “January 11, 2023 Benton Harbor Corrosion Control Study Letter to EGLE.”

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1105 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1116 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024  
  
The Honorable Michael S. Regan   
Administrator   
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency   
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
  
  
Re: 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper:            
 
Improvements (LCRI), Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
  
  
Dear Administrator Regan: 
  
On behalf of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (hereinafter “RWJF”), we are pleased to submit 
comments on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)’s proposed National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI), Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–
0801, published in the Federal Register on December 6, 2023.  
 
RWJF is committed to improving health and health equity in the United States. In partnership with others, 
we are working to develop a Culture of Health rooted in equity that provides every individual with a fair 
and just opportunity to thrive, no matter who they are, where they live, or how much money they have. 
This includes supporting the development of the physical, economic, and social conditions in communities 
that enable all residents to reach their best possible health and wellbeing.   
  
Health is more than an absence of disease. It is a state of physical, mental, and emotional wellbeing. It 
reflects what takes place in our communities, where we live and work, where our children learn and play, 
and where we gather to worship. That is why RWJF focuses on identifying, illuminating, and addressing 
the barriers to health caused by structural racism and other forms of discrimination, including sexism, 
ableism, xenophobia, and prejudice based on sexual orientation.  
  
We rely on evidence to advance health equity. We cultivate leaders who work individually and collectively 
across sectors to address health equity. We promote policies, practices, and systems change to 
dismantle the structural barriers to wellbeing created by racism. We work to amplify voices to shift 
national conversations and attitudes about health and health equity.  
  
Safe, affordable water is fundamental to good health. While most water systems in the U.S. deliver safe 
drinking water, in every state, there are communities that lack access to safe water they can afford. Often, 
these are places where people with lower income, Black, Hispanic, and Indigenous people, and other 
people of color live. A long legacy of discriminatory policies and structural racism, including the lack of 
historic investment in communities of color, has created these inequities. Yet this water crisis can be 
solved. By upgrading our aging infrastructure and making water more affordable, we can make sure 
everyone, everywhere can turn on the tap without a second thought.  

 
2 of 11 
 
  
Our comments on the Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) are grounded in the perspectives and 
expertise of our grantees, who include policy experts, advocates, and organizers with deep expertise in 
public health, lead poisoning prevention, and environmental and water justice. Our comments also are 
based on the findings of RWJF-funded research. This includes a comprehensive 2017 report (known as 
the “10 Policies Report”) by the Health Impact Project, a collaboration of the Pew Charitable Trusts and 
RWJF, on evidence-based policies to prevent and respond to childhood lead exposure, including lead in 
drinking water.i 
  
We highlight here some of the relevant public health and clinical experience of the co-signatories of this 
comment letter: Dr. Richard Besser, RWJF’s president and CEO, and Dr. Julie Morita, RWJF’s executive 
vice president. Dr. Besser worked at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for 13 years, 
including serving as the acting director of the agency in 2009. He practiced as a volunteer pediatrician at 
community clinics across the U.S. for more than 30 years. Dr. Morita is also a pediatrician and helped 
lead the Chicago Department of Public Health for nearly two decades, first as a medical director, then as 
chief medical officer, and ultimately as commissioner where she oversaw the public health needs of 2.7 
million residents in the nation’s third largest city.   
  
RWJF’s Commitment to Water Equity and Reducing Lead Exposure  
  
Building on the water justice efforts sparked by the Flint, Michigan water crisis that began in 2014, RWJF 
has made more than $15 million in grants and investments in the past several years to advance water 
equity and reduce lead exposure. RWJF and our grantees have coordinated with EPA on the Lead 
Accelerator initiative, the more recent Get the Lead Out initiative, and the implementation of the $15 
billion set aside of Bipartisan Infrastructure Law funding for lead service line (LSL) replacement. Some 
examples of these investments include funding to:  
  
• 
The Environmental Policy Innovation Center to support multiple communities in implementing LSL 
replacement programs and to make recommendations for improving the Consumer Confidence 
Reports; 
  
• 
The Natural Resources Defense Council to pursue stronger federal, state, and local lead policies 
as well as policies that advance water affordability; 
  
• 
New Jersey Future, which has helped to galvanize support for some of the most aggressive LSL 
replacement programs in the country; 
  
• 
The Little Village Environmental Justice Organization to advocate for more effective LSL program 
implementation for historically marginalized communities, including entire neighborhoods in 
Chicago that have been disproportionately burdened by lead;  
 
• 
The National Center for Healthy Housing to build local capacity to reduce childhood lead 
exposure in homes and to advance evidence-based lead poisoning prevention efforts through 
policy and systems change. 
  
Recognizing that water is one of many sources of lead exposure, RWJF also has supported the National 
Center for Healthy Housing to support a cohort of cities around the country in advancing policies to 
prevent exposure from lead-based paint hazards. As a member of the Lead Action Funders Network—a 
collaborative of philanthropic organizations committed to reducing childhood lead exposure—we have 
developed several tools and resources for financing lead remediation. We have also funded Altarum 

 
3 of 11 
 
Institute to create the Value of Lead Prevention website, which enables state and community leaders and 
the public to easily calculate the cost of lead exposure in their state and the economic benefits of key 
interventions to reduce lead exposure.  
  
Comments on the LCRI  
  
As outlined here, RWJF’s comment on the LCRI presents research that underscores the importance of 
LSL replacement and key provisions of the LCRI; documents the unequal burden of lead on people with 
lower incomes, Black, Hispanic, and Indigenous people, and other people of color; and makes 
recommendations to strengthen the LCRI.  
  
I. 
The LCRI would have a profoundly positive impact on public health and economic wellbeing.  
II. 
Communities where Black, Hispanic, and Indigenous people and other people of color live are 
disproportionately impacted by LSLs.  
III. 
EPA should strengthen the 2023 Proposed Rule to maximize protections for people and places at 
greatest risk for lead exposure.  
  
I. 
The LCRI would have a profoundly positive impact on public health and economic 
wellbeing.  
  
RWJF strongly supports the Administration’s commitment to replacing all LSLs. If finalized, the LCRI 
would help to realize that goal. The public health impact of the implementation of the LCRI would be 
enormous: more children thriving at home and at school, stronger and more equitable communities, and 
longer, healthier, and more productive lives.   
  
Thousands of studies have concluded that lead has wide-ranging effects on the health of young children 
and significant costs to taxpayers. Even at very low levels, lead exposure affects the brain’s ability to 
control impulses and process information. Children with lead poisoning are more likely to struggle in 
school, drop out, have encounters with the justice system, underperform in the workplace, and earn less 
throughout their lives, independent of other social and economic factors. The cost of these outcomes 
includes billions of dollars in public spending on special education, juvenile justice, and other social 
services.ii 
  
EPA’s 2024 Integrated Science Assessment for Lead found clear and consistent evidence of negative 
health effects of lead exposure among children and adults. Lead exposure is associated with decreased 
attention, increased impulsivity, and increased hyperactivity in children—effects that recent studies 
observed at blood lead levels less than or equal to 5 ug/dL. There is no evidence of a threshold for the 
observed neurodevelopmental effects. Scientists have found negative effects of lead on cognitive function 
in populations of children (ages 4–10) at blood lead levels in the range of 2–8 μg/dL. Studies show that 
cognitive effects and neurodevelopmental effects may persist into adulthood. Lead exposure in adulthood 
can negatively affect cognitive function and harm an array of organ systems, including the cardiovascular 
and renal systems.iii 
  
Although indoor plumbing fixtures and lead solder can contribute to elevated lead levels in drinking water, 
research indicates that LSLs account for the largest share of lead in drinking water.iv Studies show that 
U.S. residences with LSLs are at risk of lead exposure if corrosion control techniques are not effective at 
preventing lead from leaching from pipes and leaded fixtures into drinking water. A robust body of 
academic literature from the U.S. and Canada links lead in drinking water to increases in blood lead 
levels.v For example, one cross-sectional study of 183 children randomly selected from urban areas found 
that an increase in water lead concentrations from background levels to 15 ppb was associated with a 
nearly 14 percent jump in the share of children with estimated blood lead over 10 µg/dL.vi 

 
4 of 11 
 
  
The LCRI will meaningfully contribute to the reduction of lead exposure in the U.S. Key provisions of the 
LCRI that RWJF supports include the following:  
1. Universally mandating the replacement of LSLs over 10 years;  
2. Steady removal of lead connectors and galvanized steel lines, which present a public health 
risk;vii 
3. Reduction of the lead action level, though we believe that the action level should be further 
lowered from 10 ppb to 5 ppb as discussed in section III below;  
4. Improvements to the tap sampling protocols;  
5. Increased transparency between water systems and consumers about lead in tap water;  
6. Continuing to discourage partial LSL replacements, though as discussed in section III below, we 
believe EPA can do more in this rule to ensure the full line is replaced;   
7. The inclusion in the rule’s cost-benefit analysis of recent evidence regarding the effects of lead on 
cardiovascular disease in adults.  
  
II. 
Communities where Black, Hispanic, and Indigenous people and other people of color live 
are disproportionately impacted by lead and LSLs.  
  
Due to systemic factors discussed further below, race and ethnicity are strongly associated with children’s 
risk of exposure to lead.   
  
• 
A national survey found that Black children’s average blood lead levels were well above those of 
non-Hispanic White and Mexican-American children.viii Although the survey did not control for 
social and economic factors, other studies have shown that race and ethnicity are associated with 
elevated blood lead levels in children regardless of family income.   
• 
One study of more than 1 million blood tests from Chicago collected between 1995 and 2013 
found that, after controlling for socioeconomic factors, children from predominantly Black, and to 
a lesser extent Hispanic, neighborhoods had higher rates of lead poisoning than their White 
counterparts, even as blood lead levels fell dramatically citywide.ix 
• 
The Chicago-area Metropolitan Planning Council found that the composition of the communities 
in Illinois with 94 percent of the state’s LSLs was 65 percent Black and Latinx residents, 42 
percent Asian-American and Native American populations, and 30 percent White.x 
  
These disparate impacts by race and ethnicity are a direct consequence of racist policies and practices in 
the water and housing sectors throughout our nation’s history.   
  
• 
During the Jim Crow era, Black and Hispanic people and other people of color were 
disproportionately burdened by degraded water quality and infrastructure disinvestments through 
practices such as redlining, exclusionary zoning, and discriminatory lending practices. These 
practices enabled municipal decisions to restrict services and waterworks access for majority-
Black communities and neighborhoods. During this period, federal waterworks funding and 
services continued to decrease for communities with majority-Black populations and Indigenous 
people, which were already historically excluded from, or severely limited in accessing, federal 
investments.xi 
  
• 
After World War II, communities of color were excluded from water and sewer services through 
“under-bounding,” which was a practice of annexing White neighborhoods within a town’s 
boundaries, and then denying or limiting water and sewer services for adjacent or nearby 
communities of color.xii One study showed that Black and poor White neighborhoods received 

 
5 of 11 
 
town water and sewer services a half century or more after affluent White communities.xiii In 
subsequent decades, some White suburbs created their own private water utilities instead of 
using existing municipal ones, which reduced the revenue and market share of older, public, 
urban systems serving communities of color.    
 
• 
EPA has noted that so-called “disadvantaged communities”[1] have never received their fair share 
of federal investment. Contemporary studies show that smaller municipalities and those with 
larger populations of color are statistically less likely to receive federal water assistance.xiv 
  
III. 
EPA should strengthen the LCRI to maximize protections for people and places at greatest 
risk of lead exposure.  
  
RWJF recommends that EPA strengthen the LCRI in the following ways to better protect children and 
families from lead exposure and to more effectively advance racial and health equity.  
  
1. Require systems to pay for full LSL replacement.   
  
The replacement of LSLs is a matter of public health. Evidence shows that requiring homeowners to pay 
for the portion of the line on their property is both inequitable and a public health risk.xv Therefore, EPA 
should clarify that water systems are expected to replace the full LSL. This will likely save water utilities 
time negotiating with property owners, which will expedite replacements. Finally, EPA should require that 
utilities replace LSLs first in neighborhoods with the greatest risk of lead exposure.   
  
2. Close the “control” loophole.   
  
EPA should not allow water systems to avoid complying with the rule by claiming that they do not have 
control of a property. Clarity on this point would serve as an incentive to water systems to proactively 
uncover and address state and local legal barriers to full LSL replacement. Additionally, EPA could 
condition Safe Drinking State Revolving Fund and other drinking water funding on changes to state and 
local laws and administrative policies to clarify that water systems may replace the part of the LSL on 
private property.   
  
3. Make October 2024 the effective date of all aspects of the LCRI.   
  
EPA proposes that implementation of the LCRI would begin three years after the rule is finalized “unless 
the Administrator determines that an earlier date is practicable.” Given that EPA’s review of the current 
lead and copper rule found that leaving millions of LSLs in place would result in “generations of 
Americans being at risk of significant lead exposure through their drinking water,” RWJF strongly 
recommends that EPA make October 2024 the effective date for compliance with all aspects of the final 
rule.   
 
 
 
 
 
The Foundation’s preference is to use the term “marginalized” when referring to some neighborhoods, schools, institutions, and 
communities that have experienced historical and ongoing exclusion from equitable distribution of resources. However, the term 
“disadvantaged community” is used in this comment letter because that is the term used by EPA in the LCRI. 

 
6 of 11 
 
  
Starting implementation three years after the rule is finalized puts far too many children and families at 
risk of exposure whereas swift implementation would bring meaningful benefits to communities impacted 
by LSLs. The RWJF-funded 10 Policies Report found that removing leaded drinking water service lines 
from the homes of children born in 2018 (one birth cohort and not including the adults in these homes) 
would protect more than 350,000 children and yield $2.7 billion in future benefits for families, federal, 
state, and local governments, and the private sector.xvi 
  
It is not only in the interest of public health but also feasible for water systems to begin implementing the 
LCRI in October 2024. EPA made water systems aware in December 2021 of the agency’s intention to 
require replacement of all LSLs. As EPA notes in the LCRI, several states have already mandated full 
LSL and many cities have completed this work.   
  
Further, moving directly to the implementation of the LCRI will avoid the confusion of temporarily 
implementing some or all the provisions of the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR), which are 
set to take effect in October 2024. The LCRI should replace the LCRR as the LCRI is a strengthened 
version of the LCRR and based on the latest evidence. EPA could include a year or two of “compliance 
assistance” whereby enforcement is phased in. HUD’s Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes 
implemented such an approach when it finalized its sweeping lead safe housing rule.    
  
4. Eliminate the exceptions to the 10-year replacement timeline.   
  
RWJF recommends that the final rule does not permit exceptions to the ten-year LSL replacement 
deadline for communities with a high proportion of LSL relative to their total number of households served 
or a high total number of LSLs. Rather than offering deferred compliance deadlines to water systems in 
these communities, EPA should target grant funding and compliance assistance to enable water systems 
in these communities to complete LSL replacements within ten years. EPA could also incentivize smaller 
water systems to pursue community-led consolidation and regional partnerships to ease compliance with 
the rule’s requirements.   
  
5. Use more inclusive definitions and language that include people who rent their homes.   
  
Most of the informational requirements in the LCRI apply to “customers,” which is generally interpreted by 
EPA and water systems to mean those who receive the water bills. Wherever the LCRI refers to 
customers, it should also include those who reside in the household, regardless of whether they pay the 
water bill. Anyone residing in a home should receive information about lead test results and system-wide 
lead monitoring information. Additionally, when a water system contacts customers for access to a 
property for LSL replacement, household members should also be contacted since a renter may 
encourage the owner to participate. Newark, New Jersey allows adult occupants of a residence, including 
renters, to agree and provide access to LSLs in order to replace them. This is particularly important for 
overcoming the barrier of gaining access to buildings owned by absentee landlords.   
  
6. Strengthen the proposed requirements for schools and childcare centers.   
  
RWJF recommends that community water systems provide water filters to childcare facilities and filtration 
systems to schools while testing protocols are carried out. RWJF is aware of many communities that are 
moving to a “filter first” approach. EPA should consider whether this would be a more cost effective and 
public health protective approach than testing programs. EPA should also require community water 
systems to make public the results of the tests performed in schools.   
  

 
7 of 11 
 
7. Further lower the action level for education, filter provision, and source water monitoring 
from 10 ppb to 5 ppb.   
  
Evidence suggests that every increment of lead exposure matters and earlier action is warranted. For 
example, in the 10 Policies Report, researchers noted that EPA’s Integrated Exposure Uptake and 
Biokinetic model estimates a 0.042 µg/dL change in blood lead per 1 ppb increase in water lead. A 
Canadian study looked at cumulative lead exposure and found that for children between the ages of 1 to 
5, an increase of 1 μg/L in water lead would result in an increase of 35 percent of blood lead after 150 
days of exposure.xvii 
  
There is evidence that utilities can achieve a level of 5 ppb through optimized corrosion control, including 
EPA data cited in the LCRI, which shows that the vast majority of systems serving more than 10,000 
people would meet a 5 parts per billion standard today.xviii Furthermore, technology improvements, 
regional partnerships and consolidation, training, and the LCRI will help reduce levels over the next 
decade, making this lower action level technically feasible. Finally, as EPA points out in the LCRI, this 
level has previously been used as a trigger; the current lead and copper rule already requires optimized 
CCT when 90th percentile lead levels exceed 5 ppb. Thus, water systems already are acting at 5 ppb.   
  
In addition to lowering the action level, EPA should strengthen its oversight and enforcement efforts, 
including by requiring direct electronic reporting of monitoring results and action level exceedances to 
EPA. More rigorous enforcement should also include mandating and enforcing state reporting of 
violations, which audits have found that states vastly underreport to EPA.   
  
8. Strengthen the filter requirements.   
  
RWJF recommends that EPA require water systems to distribute filters for any exceedance of the action 
level instead of the LCRI requirement action after 3 exceedances in five years. Under EPA’s proposal, the 
requirement to distribute filters would not begin until the end of the first five-year cycle, which is 
insufficient to protect public health and could disproportionately burden disadvantaged communities that 
are more likely to experience exceedances. In addition to requiring water systems to annually notify 
households that they have an LSL, galvanized service line requiring replacement, or unknown service 
line, EPA should require water systems to provide filters and instructions for their use to households that 
have an LSL, galvanized service line requiring replacement, lead connector material, or unknown service 
line. This will help protect public health during the many years it will take to replace these materials.  
  
9. Monitor the equitable implementation of the rule.   
  
EPA should collect and report data on the implementation of the rule, including an equity analysis that 
shows the number and percent of replacements in water systems by race, ethnicity, income, and rental 
versus homeownership status. Additionally, EPA should develop a national LSL inventory where all cities 
and states report their respective inventory and progress as well as include the LSL inventory in the EPA 
EJScreen and the Climate Economic Justice Screening Tools.   
  
10. Require lead pipe replacements to be done using copper, or polypropylene when copper is 
not feasible, as new pipe materials.   
  
Plastic pipes can potentially contaminate drinking water by leaching— when pollutants seep from 
groundwater or soils through the walls of plastic pipesxix—and can release toxic chemicals into drinking 
water when exposed to wildfire temperatures.xx 
  
 

 
8 of 11 
 
Going Further: Addressing the Financing Needs of Disadvantaged Communities 
 
RWJF recommends that EPA create an ongoing source of long-term, non-competitive grants to facilitate 
implementation of the LCRI so that the lowest income customers do not have to choose between 
affordable drinking water and quality drinking water. This recommendation is a critical aspect of equitable 
implementation that RWJF believes is important for EPA to proactively address. 
 
As with most aspects of water infrastructure, it is disadvantaged communities within larger cities and 
smaller communities that will be most significantly impacted by the changes outlined in the LCRI. While 
larger cities can finance compliance with the LCRI through rate structures that are predominantly paid by 
higher-income households, disadvantaged communities do not have the economic base to implement 
similar programs. 
 
To support utilities serving disadvantaged communities in covering the cost of full LSL replacement, EPA 
could require states to account for the extent and cost of LSL replacement separately, broken down by 
population categories, which EPA has done for wastewater needs assessments. This would enable EPA 
and states to target funding for replacement costs to the smallest and poorest communities. Such funding 
could be made available through the Safe Drinking Water Act’s programs for Small and Disadvantaged 
Communities or Lead Reduction Project Program for disadvantaged communitiesxxi, a new funding 
mechanism, or by allowing states to use repayments to their Drinking Water State Revolving Funds (SRF) 
or their principal forgiveness funds. 
 
Recognizing that it may take time to set up a new funding mechanism for disadvantaged communities, 
RWJF recommends that EPA take immediate steps to modernize its SRF program—the principal source 
of funding for LSL replacement—so that it advances the Administration’s Justice 40 objectives. Many of 
RWJF’s grantee partners have experienced barriers in accessing SRF funding. While an exhaustive 
discussion of SRF reform is beyond the scope of this comment letter, RWJF makes the following high-
level recommendations to help achieve equitable implementation of the LCRI: 
 
• 
EPA should continue to promote state adoption of the definition of “disadvantaged community” 
developed by EPA and that advances Justice 40 objectives; 
• 
Prioritize loan forgiveness for disadvantaged communities; 
• 
Reduce the complexity of the application process; 
• 
Make the Intended Use Plans process more transparent, accessible, and inclusive; 
• 
Ensure that all project predevelopment expenses are recoverable through SRF; and 
• 
Ensure that environmental finance centers have the necessary financing experience to guide 
communities through the development of a full financing package given that many communities 
will likely need to activate several sources of public and private funding. 
 
We encourage EPA to work with disadvantaged communities to elevate and address these and other 
challenges to access SRF. 
 
Conclusion  
  
Where you live should not determine whether you have safe water to drink. We appreciate the opportunity 
to submit comments on the LCRI and urge EPA to move forward with a strong rule that maximizes the 
protections for the populations and places that are at greatest risk of exposure. The proposed rule goes a 
long way toward strengthening drinking water protections for children and families and promoting more 
equitable outcomes for those who have long been unjustly burdened by lead. With more aggressive 

 
9 of 11 
 
implementation timelines, elimination of loopholes and exceptions, and the other improvements noted 
above, the Administration can achieve its goal of replacing all LSLs in 10 years.   
  
Sincerely,  
   
 
  
Richard E. Besser, M.D.  
 
 
 
Julie Morita, M.D.  
President & CEO 
 
 
 
 
Executive Vice President  
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation 
 
 
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
10 of 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i Health Impact Project, a collaboration of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and The Pew Charitable Trusts, 
"Ten Policies to Prevent and Respond to Childhood Lead Exposure: An Assessment of the Risks Communities Face 
and Key Federal, State, and Local Solutions," accessed August 30, 2017, http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-
analysis/reports/2017/08/10-policies-to-prevent-and-respond-to-childhood-lead-exposure, published August 30, 2017. 
ii Health Impact Project, a collaboration of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and The Pew Charitable Trusts, 
"Ten Policies to Prevent and Respond to Childhood Lead Exposure: An Assessment of the Risks Communities Face 
and Key Federal, State, and Local Solutions," accessed August 30, 2017, http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-
analysis/reports/2017/08/10-policies-to-prevent-and-respond-to-childhood-lead-exposure, published August 30, 2017.  
iii U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Integrated Science Assessment (ISA) for Lead (Final Report)” (2024), 
https://assessments.epa.gov/isa/document/&deid=359536.    
iv Sandvig, Anne et al., “Contribution of Service Line and Plumbing Fixtures to Lead and Copper Rule Compliance 
Issues” (Denver: AWWA and EPA, 2008), https://archive.epa.gov/region03/dclead/web/pdf/91229.pdf. 
v Triantafyllidou, Simoni, and Marc Edwards, “Lead (Pb) in Tap Water and in Blood: Implications for Lead Exposure in 
the United States,” Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology 42, no. 13 (2012): 1297–1352, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2011.556556; Brown, Mary J, and Stephen Margolis, “Lead in Drinking Water and 
Human Blood Lead Levels in the United States,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 61 (2012), 
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/other/su6104.pdf; Edwards, Marc, Simoni Triantafyllidou, and Dana Best, “Elevated 
Blood Lead in Young Children Due to Lead-Contaminated Drinking Water,” Environmental Science and Technology 
43, no. 5 (2009), http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es802789w; Ngueta, Gerard et al., “Use of a Cumulative Exposure Index to 
Estimate the Impact of Tap Water Lead Concentration on Blood Lead Levels in 1- to 5-Year-Old Children (Montreal, 
Canada),” Environmental Health Perspectives 124 (2016): 388–95, http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1409144. 
vi Lanphear, Bruce P et al., “Environmental Exposures to Lead and Urban Children’s Blood Lead Levels,” 
Environmental Research 76, no. 2 (1998): 120–30, https://doi.org/10.1006/enrs.1997.3801.   
vii Deshommes, Elise, Shokoufeh Nour, and Michèle Prévost, “Bioaccessibility of Pb particles from tap water: Results 
from field and laboratory,” Water Quality Technology Conference and Exposition 2010 (2010): 3087-3113. 
viii Wheeler, William, and Mary J Brown, “Blood Lead Levels in Children Aged 1-5 Years—United States, 1999— 
2010,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 62, no. 13 (2013): 245–48, 
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6213a3.htm. 
ix Sampson, Robert J, and Alix S Winter, “The Racial Ecology of Lead Poisoning: Toxic Inequality in Chicago 
Neighborhoods, 1995-2013,” Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race 13, no. 2 (2016): 261–83, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1742058X16000151; Lanphear, Bruce, Michael Weitzman, and Shirley Eberly, “Racial 
Differences in Urban Children's Environmental Exposures to Lead,” American Journal of Public Health 86 (1996): 
1460-1463. 
x Williams, Justin and Tara Jagadeesh. ”Data Points: The environmental injustice of lead lines in Illinois.” Data Points 
(blog). Metropolitan Planning Council, November 10, 2020. https://www.metroplanning.org/news/9960/Data-Points-
the-environmental-injustice-of-lead-lines-in-Illinois.  

 
11 of 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xi DigDeep, “Closing the Water Access Gap in the United States” (2019), accessed January 25, 2024, 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5e80f1a64ed7dc3408525fb9/t/6092ddcc499e1b6a6a07ba3a/1620237782228/
Dig-Deep_Closing-the-Water-Access-Gap-in-the-United-States_DIGITAL_compressed.pdf. 
xii Parnall, Allan M, "The Persistence of Political Segregation" (2004); Leker, Hannah G, and Jacqueline M Gibson, 
"Relationship Between Race and Community Water and Sewer Services in North Carolina" (2018). 
xiii Troesken, Werner, Limits of Jim Crow (2002). Environmental Policy Innovation Center and the Natural Resources 
Defense Council, “A Fairer Funding Stream: How Reforming The Clean Water State Revolving Fund Can Equitably 
Improve Water Infrastructure Across The Country” (2022), accessed January 23, 2024, 
https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/clean-water-state-revolving-fund-infrastructure-report.pdf. 
xiv Environmental Policy Innovation Center and the Natural Resources Defense Council, “A Fairer Funding Stream: 
How Reforming The Clean Water State Revolving Fund Can Equitably Improve Water Infrastructure Across The 
Country” (2022), accessed January 23, 2024, https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/clean-water-state-revolving-fund-
infrastructure-report.pdf. 
xv Baehler, Karen J et al., “Full Lead Service Line Replacement: A Case Study of Equity in Environmental 
Remediation,” Sustainability 14, no. 1 (2022): 352, https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010352. 
xvi Health Impact Project, a collaboration of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and The Pew Charitable Trusts, 
"Ten policies to prevent and respond to childhood lead exposure," accessed August 30, 2017, 
http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/reports/2017/08/10-policies-to-prevent-and-respond-to-childhood-
lead-exposure, published August 30, 2017. 
xvii Ngueta, Gerard et al., “Use of a cumulative exposure index to estimate the impact of tap water lead concentration 
on blood lead levels in 1- to 5-year-old children (Montreal, Canada),” Environmental Health Perspectives 124 (2016): 
388–395, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1409144. 
xviii National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI). U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency. Volume 88. 88 FR 84878. Page 84941, Exhibit 5. December 6, 2023; Prévost. Michèle, and Élise 
Deshommes, “Calculation of Reference Water Levels for Lead Service Line Replacement”; Triantafyllidou, Simoni et 
al., "Low Contribution of Pb02-Coated Lead Service Lines to Water Lead Contamination at the Tap" in “10 policies to 
prevent and respond to childhood lead exposure,” Pew Charitable Trusts (2017), available at: 
https://www.pewtrusts.org/-/media/assets/2017/08/hip_childhood_lead_poisoning_report.pdf. 
xix Liu, Ze-Hua, Hua Yin, and Zhi Dang, "Do estrogenic compounds in drinking water migrating from plastic pipe 
distribution system pose adverse effects to human? An analysis of scientific literature," Environmental Science and 
Pollution Research. 24 (2017): 2126–2134, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-016-8032-z. 
xx Water Research Foundation, Impact of Hydrocarbons on PE/PVC Pipes and Pipe Gaskets, October 17, 2007, 
https://www.waterrf.org/research/projects/impact-hydrocarbons-pepvc-pipes-and-pipe-gaskets; U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, "Addressing Contamination of Drinking Water Distribution Systems from Volatile Organic 
Compounds After Wildfires," accessed September 2021, https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-
09/addressing-contamination-of-drinking-water-distribution-systems-from-volatile-organic-compounds-after-
wildfires_508.pdf. 
xxi  Safe Drinking Water Act. Pub. L. No. 93-523, § 1459A & 1459B, 88 Stat. 1660.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0730 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Page 1 of 2 
 
 
 
National Ground Water Association 
Comments on: 
Environmental Protection Agency Proposed Regulation on 
“National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements (LCRI)” 
Published on: December 6, 2023 
Comments Due:  February 5, 2024 
Document Citation: 88 FR 84878 
Code of Federal Regulations Reference: 40 CFR 141; 40 CFR 142 
Agency/Docket Numbers: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01-OW 
Summary 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) proposes revisions to the National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulation (NPDWR) for lead and copper under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act 
(SDWA). EPA proposes to require water systems to replace lead service lines, remove the lead trigger 
level, reduce the lead action level to 0.010 mg/L, and strengthen tap sampling procedures, among other 
changes that would improve public health protection and simplify the rule relative to the 2021 Lead and 
Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR). This proposed rule provides improvements in the additional following 
areas: corrosion control treatment, public education and consumer awareness, requirements for small 
systems, and sampling in schools and childcare facilities. This proposed rule aims to address potential 
disproportionate impacts of lead in drinking water in communities, including through proposed lead 
service line replacement and public education, among other aspects of the proposed rule. 
Submit Comments to Federal eRulemaking Portal: https://www.regulations.gov/ 
Electronic Link: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/12/06/2023-26148/national-primary-
drinking-water-regulations-for-lead-and-copper-improvements-lcri 
National Ground Water Association Comments 
NGWA supports the EPA proposal to allow small systems to choose corrosion control, point of use 
devices or replacement of lead-bearing plumbing materials. Even though there is flexibility for small 
systems to decide what path to take for lead protection, the rule is complex necessitating assistance to 
support small systems to comply. 

 
 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Small water systems will need significant assistance in implementing the lead and copper rule in all 
major aspects. Assistance should be provided to prepare public notices, consumer notices of testing 
results within 3 days, 24-hour notice of replacement notification, communication strategies, education 
materials, recurring public education tasks, identifying and contacting consumers most at risk, 
compliance reporting, health care contact information, outreach activities and consumer confidence 
reports as well as inventorying lead service lines and regular monitoring. 
The preamble cites an EPA “Lead Service Line Replacement Accelerators” initiative to provide targeted 
technical assistance services through identification of “best practices“ to help underserved communities 
access funds from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) and replace lead pipes that pose risks to the 
health of children and families. Best practices for small water systems should be explained and offered in 
the simplest and most direct ways possible. 
The preamble indicates that Federal funds are available to support equity including BIL funds that 
require that States provide 49 percent of their LSLR and General Supplemental capitalization grant 
amounts as additional subsidization in the form of principal forgiveness and/or grants to disadvantaged 
communities. This support should include planning for design and construction as well as for notification 
and education processes to ensure that small systems are not in violation of the regulation due to 
capacity constraints. 
Basis for National Ground Water Association Interests in this Proposed Rule 
The National Ground Water Association is the largest organization of water well contractors, scientists 
and engineers, manufacturers and distributors of services and equipment supporting the prudent 
development of groundwater. 
A concise summary of the position of the National Ground Water Association on groundwater 
protection related to sources of contamination is:  
• 
A coordinated approach by all levels of government is needed to effectively protect and manage 
groundwater quality. 
• 
Control of potential and active sources of contamination should be a national objective, 
reducing the need for remediation of groundwater.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this proposed rule. 
 
For further information, please contact: 
Charles Job 
Regulatory Affairs Manager 
National Ground Water Association 
202-660-0060 
cjob@ngwa.org

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1120 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
CITY OF BALTIMORE 
 
BRANDON M. SCOTT, Mayor 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 
 
Richard J. Luna, Interim Director 
Abel Wolman Municipal Building, 6th Floor 
200 N. Holliday Street 
Baltimore, Maryland 21202
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
 
RE:  
Docket ID EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
City of Baltimore written comments 
 
 
Below for consideration is the City of Baltimore Department of Public Works’ (DPW’s) comments regarding the 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements guidelines. 
 
1. Part III, Section A: EPA proposes requiring mandatory full-service line replacement of lead and galvanized 
service lines under the control of the water system regardless of the water lead level. 
 
Comment: We agree that the most conservative solution to preventing lead in drinking water is to remove all lead 
pipe; however, this solution comes at significant financial cost which has yet to be determined. If costs to replace 
lead pipe is passed onto the consumer without any financial support or resources, then that will be problematic 
for residents within the Baltimore region.  As a lower cost alternative, we recommend that lead and/or galvanized 
pipe replacement be mandated based on the lead level in the water. Lead or service line replacement should be 
required after sampling results indicate lead levels have exceeded a health-based threshold. That type of analysis 
should be considered prior to passing on costs for replacements directly to the property owner.    
 
2. Part III, Section A: EPA is proposing to lower the lead action level from 15 µg/L to 10 µg/L.  
 
Comment: EPA’s proposed lead action level is arbitrary and will result in unreasonable mandates for water 
systems throughout the country. As stated in EPA’s Lead and Copper Rule Revision, Part III, Section A.1, “The 
trigger level [10 µg/L] is not a health-based standard. EPA’s proposed 10 µg/L as a reasonable concentration that 
is below the action level and above the Practical Quantification Level of 5 µg/L at which to require water 
systems to take a progressive set of actions to reduce lead levels prior to an action level exceedance and to have a 
plan in place to rapidly respond if there is an action level exceedance.” Lead action levels should be health-based.  
 
3. Exhibit I: All systems must review records for information on connector materials and include lead connectors in 
the baseline inventory by the compliance date. 
 
Comment: DPW has spent significant resources over the previous 2-3 years developing our lead and galvanized 
pipe inventory, which was based on EPA’s Lead and Copper Replacement Requirement guidelines. Under LCRI, 
EPA is proposing to mandate expanding the inventory to include connector materials, which will put additional 
unknown financial burdens on DPW and other water systems. This in turn could potentially result in increased 
costs for customers. We propose that water systems update their lead/galvanized pipe inventory as information 
becomes available with no set deadline, to ensure financial resources can be fully secured to complete those 
requirements. 
 
4. Exhibit I: Systems conducting partial service line replacement must offer to replace the remaining portion of the 
service line not under their control (within 45 days for emergencies). 
 
Comment: The word “Offering” suggests that the system owner is responsible for the cost to replace the 
privately-owned portion of the service line, which is unreasonable and financially problematic. In addition to the 
financial burden borne by the system owner, the owner: 
 
a. 
Can be exposed to warranty issues and associated future repairs/costs. 
b. Allot significant staff resources to coordinate with individual property owners, which will result in 
program management/construction delays of other critical improvement projects. 
 

Page 2 of 2 
 
Federal funding that has been made available for systems owners to comply with the LCRR/LCRI requirements 
includes various restrictions/requirements such as minority/business enterprise goals, Davis-Bacon wage rates, 
Build America supplies, which precludes any type of public-private partnership (PPP). The City of Baltimore 
DPW considered a PPP model to expedite lead/galvanized service lines replacement, minimize costs and avoid 
warranty liability; however, based on discussions with state regulators and reviewing the funding requirements, it 
is apparent that the PPP model is impossible and DPW is constrained to complete the work as a typical large 
capital program. We recommend the following: 
 
a. 
Replace the work “Offering” with “Inform”. 
b. Remove the requirement for the system owner to be responsible for replacing lead/galvanized 
service lines on private property. All water improvement work on private property has been and 
should remain the responsibility of the property owner. The system owner can provide pipe 
replacement alternatives for the property owner to consider, if needed.  
c. 
Remove the restrictions/requirements for federal funding of the LCRR/LCRI.  
 
5. Exhibit I: Water systems must deliver consumer notice of lead and copper tap sampling results to consumers 
whose tap was sampled as soon as practicable but no later than 3 days after receiving the results. 
 
Comments: The LCRR/LCRI guidelines will significantly expand the number of samples that are collected and 
analyzed by the City of Baltimore DPW; therefore, the 3-day notification requirement will result in unreasonable 
staffing/notification resources for DPW and other system owners. We recommend that system owners should 
notify consumers as soon as practicable, but no later than 30 days after receiving the results.   
 
Please contact me with any questions or concerns. 
 
 
 
Best regards, 
 
 
 
 
Paul Sayan, P.E. 
 
Acting Bureau Head  
 
Bureau of Water & Wastewater 
 
Baltimore City Department of Public Works

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0771 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Document ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
 
 
Recipient: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)  
From: Austin Magness, Graduate Student  
Subject: Support for the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements 
Date: January 29th, 2024 
 
Executive Summary: 
This memo is intended to outline my support for the current proposed revisions to the National Drinking 
Water Regulation (NPDWR) for lead and copper and to provide additional policy options. The current 
proposal requires water systems to replace lead service lines, remove lead trigger levels, reduce the lead 
action level to 0.010 mg/L, and strengthen tap sampling procedures as well as other changes that would 
benefit human health. As previously outlined by the EPA, there are no “safe” levels of lead in drinking 
water. The EPA’s desire to pursue clean drinking water is admirable and should be pursued relentlessly 
for the betterment of all. A more effective policy addition would be to require schools and childcare 
facilities to participate in the sampling program to determine if there is any lead present in their drinking 
water. In combination, I would recommend a standardized testing requirement for uniformity. Adding 
these two additional requirements would further enhance this proposed rule to better protect our youth 
across the U.S.  
Background:  
Currently, only 24 states and the District of Columbia require their schools to test for lead or have 
programs to conduct such testing according to a recent study conducted by the University of California 
and Harvard University (PRC, 2023). This accounts for less than 50% of the United States and is 
concerning as the study highlighted that 44% of schools that were tested had one or more water 
samples with a lead concentration at or above the state’s action level (PRC, 2023). According to the same 
report, only seven states and the District of Columbia require water tests in schools (PRC, 2023). 
According to the EPA, lead in drinking water is harmful, especially for children. With that understanding, I 
find that requiring further sampling in schools and childcare facilities is imperative to ensure the 
protection of early childhood health. Using the information above, alternative policy solutions will be 
explored.  
Additional Policy Considerations:  
I. 
Sampling Program Requirement for schools and Childcare facilities 
An additional revision in the NPDWR that should be included is the requirement that all schools and 
childcare facilities recognized by the U.S. Department of Education participate in a lead water sampling 

program where the facility obtains its water source from a public system. This would set a national 
requirement for each state to implement a sampling program that would monitor and track lead in 
drinking water in consultation with the EPA for compliance. Currently, the EPA offers its three T’s toolkit 
to assist those who wish to start a lead sampling program (EPA, 2018). This could be used as a 
framework for a national program for each state to build off of.  
II. 
Standardized lead testing requirements for uniformity 
Currently, there are no standardized lead testing practices in each of the 24 states including the District 
of Columbia. Each state has its method of performing the tests with different labs analyzing the results. 
An alternative solution would be to establish a national standard established by the EPA on how to 
perform water tests, while additionally creating a national database to house the results for public 
access and transparency. Further study and discussion would need to occur before determining who 
should handle the analysis portion of the testing.   
Conclusion 
The current revision to the NPDWR is warranted and is vital to ensure safe drinking water throughout the 
country. The policy alternatives that I have offered in this memo allow for enhanced testing in schools 
and daycare facilities throughout the country to protect the health of our youth. As the EPA outlined, 
lead in drinking water is dangerous, especially for children, which highlights the importance of placing a 
priority on testing within schools and daycare facilities. The policy option of enacting a standardized 
testing method would also offer uniformity to the system and would lead to more transparency with the 
public while we pursue avenues to correct issues as they arise.  
References 
Early adopters: State approaches to testing school drinking water for lead in the United States. 
Prevention Research Center on Nutrition and Physical Activity. (2023, January 11). 
https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/prc/projects/early-adopters/  
Environmental Protection Agency. (n.d.). EPA. https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-
drinking-water/basic-information-about-lead-drinking-water  
3TS for reducing lead in drinking water - EPA. (2018). 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/202108/3ts_checklist_establishing_a_progra
m_508.pdf

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0960 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Aquarion Water Company Ÿ 600 Lindley Street Ÿ Bridgeport, CT 06606
aquarionwater.com
 
 
 
 
 
The Honorable Michael Regan  
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
RE: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
Aquarion Water Company provides the following comments on EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI), as described in the Federal Register / Vol. 88, No. 233 / Wednesday, December 6, 
2023 / Proposed Rules. 
 
Aquarion Water Company is an investor-owned water utility that serves a population of more than 
700,000 people in 72 cities and towns in Connecticut, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire.  
 
It should first be stated that we recognize and respect the significant effort that has been put forth by 
EPA and other contributors to develop the proposed LCRI regulation. We appreciate the opportunity to 
offer comments on the regulation. Our goal is to provide meaningful input to the regulatory process to 
assist in making the final regulation effective for protecting public health. 
 
Aquarion offers the following comment on the EPA’s proposed LCRI. 
 
1. Timely decision on compliance deadlines - The proposed LCRI moves out the compliance 
deadline for numerous requirements within the LCRR (e.g. related to service line 
disturbances, compliance monitoring plans, school and childcare sampling).  We support 
EPA’s approach of deferring compliance with many aspects of the LCRR until the compliance 
date of LCRI.  However, until the LCRI is finalized, water systems have no assurance of this 
later deadline.  We believe all stakeholders would benefit from a timely confirmation by 
EPA that the final LCRI will move the compliance date for these aspects of the LCRR to the 
compliance date of the LCRI. 
 
2. Calculation of compliance with replacement rate - The proposed LCRI specifies that the 
calculation of the number of lead service lines to be replaced each year be based on the sum 
of the number of services lines that are lead, galvanized requiring replacement (GRR), and of 
unknown material (unknowns). For water systems that initially have a high number of 
unknowns in their inventory, that calculation might result in a requirement to replace more 
than 10% of the actual lead and GRR service lines per year, particularly in the early years.  
While this will have the benefit of expediting the replacement of lead and GRR service lines, 
with the proposed 3-year rolling average replacement calculation, replacing more than 10% 
for several early years will create the risk of non-compliance in later years.   We recommend 
that EPA revise this requirement by instead requiring a cumulative annual average of 10% 
beginning in year three for replacement of LSLs. 

Aquarion Water Company Ÿ 600 Lindley Street Ÿ Bridgeport, CT 06606
aquarionwater.com
 
3. Service line disturbance requirements – customer meter replacements - The LCRI proposes 
to maintain the requirement for water systems to provide pitcher filters or point-of-use 
devices and filter replacement cartridges to last six months when a lead, GRR, or unknown 
service line is disturbed, including when an inline meter is replaced.  Considering that the 
replacement of most customer meters involves simply closing a valve on each side of the 
meter setting, leaving the service line pressurized, we recommend that EPA not require the 
provision of a filter/device when a utility replaces a customer meter if the service line is 
not drained during the process. 
4. Service line disturbance requirements – water main breaks - EPA is proposing to retain the 
requirement that following operations that cause the water to be shut off to a lead, GRR, 
or unknown service line, water systems must provide customers with flushing instructions 
before the affected line is returned to service.  Depending on the allowed/required 
methods of communication, this requirement will cause delays in returning service to 
customers after system shutdowns, such as a shutdown to repair a main break. Consider 
that this would require utilities to provide these instructions to customer at all times of day 
and night before a repaired water main could be placed back into service.    We recommend 
that EPA clarify the acceptable methods of communicating the instructions, specifically if 
methods like door hangers, a reverse911 phone call, and/or email are acceptable. 
5. Replacement of customer-owned service line on customer’s private property - The 
proposed LCRI would require water systems to replace all lead and GRR service lines, and 
any lead connectors encountered, that are “under control of” the water system. EPA is 
proposing to treat a service line as under the system's control wherever a water system has 
adequate access; however, EPA is not proposing to delineate the prerequisites or elements 
of “access” that a system would need to conduct full-service line or connector replacement 
because of the wide variation of relevant State and local laws and water tariff agreements, 
as well as the potential for these to change over time. We recommend that EPA clarify that 
one of the prerequisites of “access” be customer consent, independent of all other 
prerequisites/elements.  Asking a utility to choose between trying to perform construction 
on a non-consenting customer’s property versus accepting a violation from its regulator is 
simply not reasonable.  Both options will result in disputes that will waste resources, both 
money and time, and the former option will create an adversarial relationship between the 
utility and impacted customers. 
 
6. 
Sample reporting requirements - EPA is requesting data, analyses, and comments on the 
feasibility of requiring systems to deliver all consumer notices of lead and copper tap 
sampling results within three days of the utility receiving the results, regardless of whether 
the results exceed the lead or copper action level.  A three-day requirement will place an 
undue burden on water systems. We recommend EPA instead consider a five-business day 
requirement and limit this requirement to samples that exceed the Action Level, retaining 
the current 30-day notification for all other samples. 
 
7. 
Fire services and other non-potable service lines – We recommend that EPA remove fire 
service and other non-potable service lines from the inventory and replacement 
requirements if a utility can show that the utility has appropriate administrative safeguards 
(e.g. customer communications) to prevent potable uses off these types of service lines.  
This would allow utilities to focus attention and resources on service lines from which 
customers are drinking the water.  
 

Aquarion Water Company Ÿ 600 Lindley Street Ÿ Bridgeport, CT 06606
aquarionwater.com
 
8. Cost of replacing portion of service line not owned by the water system - EPA proposes to 
remove from the LCRI any statements from the LCR and LCRR that address how a water 
system should or should not cover the cost of replacing services lines under the control of the 
system, as well as statements about whether a water system is or is not responsible for the 
cost of full service line replacement. We would like to emphasize the value and importance 
of federal funding (particularly grant funding) to cover the cost of the customer-owned 
portion of lead and GRR service lines, especially in economically challenged service areas of 
water systems. 
9. Customer requesting sampling – Under the LCRR, systems are required to offer to sample the 
tap water for lead for any customer who requests it when there is a system-wide lead action 
level exceedance. We recommend that this requirement be limited to customers who have 
lead, GRR, or unknown service lines. 
The health and safety of the communities we serve is of the utmost importance and we hope to work 
together to ensure the safe removal of lead. We respectfully request that EPA take our comments under 
consideration when finalizing the regulation. Thank you for the opportunity to provide our comments. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Aquarion Water Company 
 
 
 
John P. Walsh, P.E. 
Vice President, Operations (MA & NH), Water Quality, and Environmental Management

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1101 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Thank you for the opportunity to provide public comment on the EPA’s revised Lead and Copper 
Rule. I completed the EJ Griot Program hosted by Black Millennials for Flint and am the Lead 
Free Baltimore Community Organizer. I have a Masters in Environmental Health from the Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. I am a resident of Baltimore, MD and provide these 
comments as a concerned community member, whose neighborhood is undergoing the Lead 
Service Line Inventory process as mandated by the EPA. 
There is no safe level of lead in drinking water is safe.1,2 The EPA should decrease the 
current level of remediation from 10 ppb to 5 ppb.
Lead exposure has lifelong ramifications for youth, posing cognitive and behavioral 
challenges.2,3 Due to the longterm health and wellbeing ramification of lead exposure on youth, 
the EPA should mandate testing for lead in all public schools and childcare facilities and 
enforce water filtration with a level of remediation of at most 5 ppb. 
Lead exposure to adults also has alarming health ramifications, including increased risk of 
diabetes, high blood pressure, kidney disease, and other health challenges.4  Throughout the 
United States, Black people suffer from a higher incidence of high blood pressure and diabetes. 
5,6 Health interventions for these diseases often focus on lifestyle change. The lead and copper 
rule presents an opportunity to address the systemic factors at play in the onset of disease. 
Black people, particularly Black children are known to have the highest blood lead levels in the 
United States compared with other racial groups.7,8 This positions lead poisoning at the crux of 
environmental and health injustice. 
Climate change is now, and will worsen within the next decade. Salt water intrusion is a 
pressing issue in coastal cities, as salt water is five times more corrosive to lead pipes than 
freshwater.9 In 2023, the city of New Orleans was at risk of salt water corroding pipes during the 
water scare, with the county just to the south of New Orleans, Plaquemines Parish, losing 
                                               
1 There is no safe threshold for lead exposure: Α literature review. Link found here: 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27837574/
2 Lead poisoning. Link found here: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/lead-poisoning-and-
health#:~:text=There%20is%20no%20known%20safe,and%20learning%20problems%20(1).
3 Basic Information about Lead in Drinking Water. Link found here: https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-
and-drinking-water/basic-information-about-lead-drinking-water
4 Lead, Diabetes, Hypertension, and Renal Function: The Normative Aging Study. Link found here: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1247478/
5 Diabetes and African Americans. Link found here: https://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/diabetes-and-african-
americans
6 Heart Disease and African Americans. Link found here: https://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/heart-disease-
and-african-americans
7 Disparity in Risk Factor Severity for Early Childhood Blood Lead among Predominantly African-
American Black Children: The 1999 to 2010 US NHANES. Link found here: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7084658/
8 Exploring persistent racial/ethnic disparities in lead exposure among American children aged 1-5 years: 
results from NHANES 1999-2016. Link found here: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33394180/
9 The Effects of Saltwater on Metals. Link found here: https://sciencing.com/effects-saltwater-metals-
8632636.html

drinking water access for months due to saltwater intrusion.10 Therefore lead pipe 
replacement should be prioritized in cities at most risk for saltwater intrusion as a form 
of climate resilience.
Within cities, localities, and townships, there are a plethora of rules, regulations and guardrails 
that water utility provides have. The EPA in it its proposed rule, should require that water 
utility providers pay the full costs of removing the entire lead service line while not 
passing on costs to consumers, especially low-income consumers, via direct or indirect 
fees. If costs are offset onto consumers, there is a risk that water will become unaffordable to 
consumers. Water affordability is already an issue amongst many low-income consumers, with 
17% of U.S. households facing water affordability challenges.11
The lead and copper law, as well as any supplemental guidance and enforcement, are 
extremely critical for renters, as renters do not have personal agency over all of their housing
conditions. Currently, if a renter finds out their rental has a lead service line, they cannot replace 
the service lines without permission from the homeowner. If a homeowner was to replace a lead 
service line, there are also no protections in place to ensure that the cost of replacement does 
not result in increased rent costs for the renter. This is a pressing issue as their is a lack of 
affordable housing affordability, especially in large metropolitan cities.12 The EPA must 
establish safeguards for renters to ensure there is equitable access to lead service line 
replacement.
In the interim, while residents await lead service line replacement, if a home is found to have 
lead above the 5ppb, there should be  a mandated water filtration program for the duration 
of the lead service line replacement process. This should be paid for by water utility 
providers for low-income consumers. 
To support in the funding of lead service line replacement and water filtration programs, there 
should be established long-term, non-competitive grants earmarked explicitly for lead service 
line replacement. This is critical funding as certain local and state agencies, especially in rural 
communities, currently lack adequate funding for lead service line replacement. 
                                               
10 Drinking water concerns continue in Plaquemines Parish. Link found here: 
https://lailluminator.com/2023/11/04/water-plaquemines/
11 17 Percent of U.S. Households Face Growing Water Affordability Challenge. Link found here: 
https://today.duke.edu/2023/05/17-percent-us-households-face-growing-water-affordability-challenge
12 The Affordable Housing Crisis Grows While Efforts to Increase Supply Fall Short. Link found here: 
https://www.gao.gov/blog/affordable-housing-crisis-grows-while-efforts-increase-supply-fall-short

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0948 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0871 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0940 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
841 N. Broadway, Room 409  ●  Zeidler Municipal Building  ●  Milwaukee, WI 53202  ●  milwaukee.gov/water
     
February 5, 2024
MILWAUKEE WATER WORKS COMMENTS ON U.S. EPA’S PROPOSED 
LEAD AND COPPER RULE IMPROVEMENTS (LCRI) REGULATION 
Published on: December 6, 2023
Comments Due: February 5, 2024
Document Citation: 88 FR 84878
Code of Federal Regulations Reference: 40 CFR 141; 40 CFR 142
Agency/Docket Numbers: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01-OW
Milwaukee Water Works (MWW) herein submits formal comments on the proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) intended to revise the National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulation (NPDWR) under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA). MWW 
supports the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) ongoing efforts to reduce exposure to 
lead in our communities and improve long-term public health, and appreciates the opportunity 
to provide comments that could assist in making the finalized rule as impactful as it can be. 
10-year Timeline
MWW supports the proposed 10-year timeline for replacing all lead service lines in a 
municipality, and applauds the EPA's work to incentivize the replacement of remaining lead 
service lines. 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law funding will allow Milwaukee to make significant progress 
towards this goal. However, when BIL funding is exhausted, the costs to complete this work 
within the 10-year goal will be borne by our customers and city taxpayers, leading to rate 
increases and limiting the city's ability to invest in other urgent priorities.  
Milwaukee Water Works urges the EPA to work with Congress to allocate additional funding to 
replace lead service lines and ensure that the 10-year rule is not an unfunded mandate. 
Sampling Protocol
The maximum contaminant level goal for lead is 0 µg/L because there is no safe level of lead 
exposure. The EPA has previously set the action level above the MCLG because the EPA 
recognizes that it is not feasible to reach the MCLG in all circumstances, even with the best 
available technology or treatment approaches. MWW supports the proposed Action level 
change from 15 µg/L to 10µg/L. Changing the sampling protocol in concert with the action level 
is problematic, as there is not sufficient data of first and fifth liter sampling across the country 

Page 2
to demonstrate that this new action level is achievable for most utilities. Many utilities would 
likely be in violation of the new action level, raising the question of what actions a utility would 
be required to take to mitigate lead risks, when a separate provision of these rules already 
requires expedited replacement of lead service lines.
MWW supports the change in the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) from sampling the 
first liter to sampling the fifth liter, to better represent the water in the lead service line. MWW 
has been collecting first liter samples, in compliance with the original Lead and Copper Rule, 
for decades. While we recognize the value in continuing to collect this data and sharing it with 
customers to help them make informed decisions about their water and internal plumbing, 
MWW requests that the 90th percentile determination is made solely based on fifth liter 
sampling results for homes with a lead service line. The fifth liter results will better demonstrate 
the effectiveness of a utility’s corrosion control treatment at preventing lead leaching from 
utility-owned pipes. The first liter results are helpful for homeowners and residents to 
understand their risk of lead exposure from internal plumbing and fixtures, but are not always 
representative of the water system overall.
Customer Notification of Results
MWW makes efforts to notify customers of their lead results as soon as possible after the 
testing has been completed, but assigning a deadline of three calendar days for all samples 
regardless of concentration, as is proposed in the LCRI, is sometimes not practical. A real 
world example is if the lab sends a large batch of results to the utility late on a Friday before a 
holiday weekend. There may not be sufficient staff present to contact a dozen or more 
customers in that moment, but prioritizing the immediate contact of any customers with results 
above the action level can and must be done. MWW recommends requiring utilities to reach 
out to customers when results are above the action level within three days either electronically 
(e.g. email or text message), by phone, or hand delivery. Sending a letter in the mail is not the 
most effective method of delivering such urgent news. MWW does still recommend requiring a 
letter for confirmation and follow-up, but the timeline for this step is less critical and urgent than 
the initial contact with the customer.
While it is still important to inform customers as soon as possible of results below the action 
level, it would be more practical to allow seven days for notification in these situations. All 
modes of communication identified in the LCRI (electronic, phone, hand delivery, or mailed 
letter) should be allowed for notifying customers of results below the action level. This would 
provide the flexibility needed for utilities to prioritize notifications of the highest results during 
periods of limited staffing, holiday weekends, or unrelated emergencies, while still developing 
systems to notify all customers of results within a week at the most. Utilities should make all 
reasonable efforts to send all results within three days, but allowing a slightly longer time frame
only for samples below the action level in the regulation acknowledges the limitations that will 
occasionally exist and appropriately prioritizes resources.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1351 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
10
Ulrich, Jake
From:
bentle.johnson@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Bentley Johnson 
<bentle.johnson@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 3:34 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
Here in Michigan we unfortunately know the tragic legacy of not maintaining and replacing our drinking water 
infrastructure. From Flint, to Benton Harbor, to schools in Detroit, many of our families have been exposed to dangerous 
levels of lead in our water. The state of Michigan took acƟon over the last few years, but we need federal acƟon to 
complement state eﬀorts. 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you! 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Bentley Johnson 
448 Manor Dr  Ann Arbor, MI 48105-1127 
bentle.johnson@gmail.com

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0728 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 | P a g e
Comments on Lead and Copper Rule Improvements
Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Gree&ngs;
As a public works professional who has been responsible for drinking water for over 30 years and as a life 
member of the American Water Works Associa&on, my comments are not based on the Corrosion 
Control or water sampling aspects but on the inventory and opera&onal aspects of the LCRI.  I am 
presently employed overseeing the distribu&on and maintenance of water to an Illinois community with 
over 75,000 customers, with that experience I make the following comments, and sugges&ons:
I have tried to note the correct subsec&ons and know that I have made some errors; so please bear with 
me.
141.84  3 ii
Many u&li&es are not part of a local government and do not know of a change of property ownership.  
Many lease proper&es do not change the billing for water and sewer so the requirement to oﬀer full-
service line replacement to any new tenant/occupant is unreasonable.  Why don’t you just mandate that 
prior to change of ownership of any property, all service lines to proper&es must be lead-free (adhering 
to the latest lead-free rules)?
141.84 g (i) Par&al Service Line Replacements
To require a dielectric coupling when performing a temporary emergency par&al service line repair is an 
addi&onal undue burden/cost on a u&lity as this temporary emergency repair must become a complete 
service line replacement within 45 days.  There does not appear to be a beneﬁt for this addi&onal 
expense for the short dura&on that it is in place.  Please consider removing this requirement.
Par&al Service Line Replacements
The requirement to oﬀer to sample a property with a par&al service line replacement seems to be an 
addi&onal undue burden upon the u&lity.  Most everyone agrees that disturbing a lead service line will 
disturb and poten&ally dislodge sediment or scale containing lead thus increasing lead levels to some 
degree – what would proving that this disturbance or elevated increase may s&ll be occurring do when it 
is expected?  Especially if the service line is to be replaced under the regula&on with 45 days.  Also, when 
the u&lity is required to provide a ﬁlter pitcher, ﬂushing and use instruc&ons.

2 | P a g e
Full-Service line replacement
The requirement to oﬀer sampling to a property within three to six months aEer a total lead service line 
replacement is again an undue addi&onal burden upon the u&lity.  Again, most agree that the 
disturbance of a lead service line or even the replacement of a lead service line will poten&ally displace 
scale or sediment within a plumbing system eleva&ng lead levels in the water.  So, to sample and ﬁnd the 
expected increased lead aEer a total/full lead service line replacement serves no purpose- what else is to 
be done? The u&lity is not replacing any lead ﬁxtures or galvanized or lead piping within the property’s 
internal plumbing system so what is the beneﬁt of causing addi&onal confusion?  Studies seem to show 
no evidence of any speciﬁc period where increased lead levels will diminish within x number of days or 
months so what is the point or beneﬁt of this – the u&lity will have already described the suggested 
ﬂushing procedures and provided a ﬁlter pitcher kit.
I believe it is a fact that internal galvanized lines and leaded ﬁxtures will leach back lead residue even 
aEer a total lead service line replacement so what is the purpose of this addi&onal burden and expense?
141.84 5 
It is unclear to me what are the dates for the program year – October to September, January to 
December – please make this clearer.
141.85 (3) Content- (i) Persons served by a conﬁrmed lead service line or galvanized requiring 
replacement service line;
(D) allows a customer to request to have their tap water sampled…
How many &mes can a customer request sampling? Is this sampling per year, per month or once or?? 
What if the property changes ownership?
Shouldn’t this sampling be directed to those services with ‘lead status unknown”?    The addi&onal 
burden and expense for to u&li&es to sample known/conﬁrmed service lines seems to be money lost 
that could be put to replacements or other public educa&on eﬀorts.  If everyone agrees lead is bad why 
sample known/conﬁrmed lead services – especially when it is going to be replaced?  
141.85 (g) No&ﬁca&on due to a disturbance to a service line that is known to or may poten&ally contain 
lead
Why use the diﬀerent terminology ‘may poten&ally contain lead’ these service lines are referred 
elsewhere as unknowns or lead status unknown- please make the document more consistent.
The disturbance of a lead, galvanized requiring replacement (GRR) or lead status unknown from a 
replacement of an inline meter, meter seLer or connector adds addi&onal burdens to u&li&es working to 
update, repair or replace their metering systems.  So, a community upgrading their AMR system would 
need to provide ﬁlter pitcher kits or point of use devices?  What about a private plumber changing the 
service side valve or connector?  This regula&on fails to reﬂect that most internal repairs or disturbances 

3 | P a g e
are caused by private contractors and not the u&lity.  Does this language require the u&lity to provide
these devices if private work is done to disturb the service, say by shuMng down to internal plumbing?  
How would a u&lity monitor the private work – are they expected to - especially if the u&lity is not &ed 
or linked to the permiMng agency?  
Other disturbances to the service line could be from private sewer work which is being performed. Many 
water- sewer services were oEen placed side by side with liLle to no separa&on between the u&li&es, as 
was the prac&ce 40-100 years ago for water and sewers to be placed in the same trench.
What about a private contractor installing electric or cable or irriga&on or some other item using a 
vibratory boring device or other disturbing technologies- even excava&ng for private sidewalk or 
walkways on private or public property require the use of compac&ng equipment- does this cons&tute a 
disturbance and require ac&on by a u&lity?  How far away can disturbing work be from a service line 
before it is considered non-disturbing?  If a community resurfaces or reconstructs the roadway or curb 
and guLer using vibratory equipment that is over a lead, galvanized or lead status unknown- what is the 
u&lity who may not be party or aﬃliated with the work obligated to do?
What about when the property fails to pay the water bill and the water service is shut oﬀ then returned 
to service once paid- what is the u&lity obligated to do?
If there is a water main break or valve repair on the main the main is shutdown- eﬀec&vely shuMng oﬀ 
the water to a property – if there are conﬁrmed or lead status unknown proper&es- what is the u&lity 
obligated do?  Provide a ﬁlter pitcher kit to those proper&es with conﬁrmed lead services, to both 
conﬁrmed, GRR. and lead status unknown or to all involved proper&es- what does this rule obligate 
u&li&es to do?
So, the main ques&on on this area- is the u&lity required to provide ﬁlter pitchers, no&ce and ﬂushing 
instruc&ons only when the u&lity disturbs the know lead service line or GRR or is there an expecta&on to 
provide these items and take mi&ga&on steps whenever a known lead service line or GRR is disturbed?
If a known lead service line or GRR is disturbed, the u&lity is being required to provide no&ce, ﬂushing 
instruc&ons and a ﬁlter pitcher- how many &mes does a u&lity have to do this? Just once, or any&me the 
service line is disturbed?
Thank you for taking my comments, ques&ons, and concerns on the LCRI.
RespecOully,
MaL Overeem
Glenview, Illinois

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0963 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1310 L St. NW, Suite 900 • Washington, D.C. 20005 • (202) 906-8000 • clasp.org 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
US Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE: RIN 2040AG16 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
Dear Administrator Regan,  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments and input to the US Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) proposed “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements” (LCRI).  We are pleased to see the EPA take robust and much needed action around 
updating the rule. This proposal will pave the way for significant improvements in the health and well-
being of many across our country, and finally address decades of harm that has impacted families across 
generations.  
The Center for Law and Social Policy (CLASP) is a national, nonpartisan nonprofit advancing anti-
poverty policy solutions that disrupt structural and systemic racism and sexism and remove barriers 
blocking people from economic security and opportunity. We work at the federal and state levels, 
supporting policy and practice that makes a difference in the lives of people living in conditions of 
poverty. CLASP works to develop and implement federal, state, and local policies (in legislation, 
regulation, and implementation) that reduce poverty, improve the lives of people with low incomes, and 
create pathways to economic security for everyone. That includes directly addressing the barriers 
people face because of race, ethnicity, gender, disability, and immigration status. Through high-quality 
analysis grounded in data and on-the-ground experience, effective advocacy, a strong public voice, and 
hands-on technical assistance, CLASP develops and promotes new ideas, mobilizes others, and provides 
guidance to government leaders and advocates to help them implement strategies that improve the 
lives of people across America. CLASP works to amplify the voices of directly impacted workers and 
families and help public officials design and implement effective programs. 
CLASP does not frequently weigh in on environmental issues, but we feel compelled to 
comment on this issue because of the significant impact of lead exposure to children’s health. Lead is a 
potent neurotoxin and is particularly dangerous for the brain development of infants and young 
children. Health experts agree that any amount of lead exposure is unsafe for human health.1 Yet, up to 
22 million Americans and possibly more drink tap water served by lead pipes.2 Moreover, replacing lead 
pipes is an equity issue, as lead exposure does not impact all households evenly, with Black children and 
children living in high poverty communities particularly at risk.3 In 2021 the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention published a study indicating that non-Hispanic Black children were at particular risk, as 
well as children living in areas with higher-than-average poverty rates.4 But lead pipes remain 
disproportionately concentrated in low-income communities and communities of color, in part due to 
decades of federal home ownership policies that have concentrated families of color in low-income 

 
 
 
 
1310 L St. NW, Suite 900 • Washington, D.C. 20005 • (202) 906-8000 • clasp.org 
communities.56 People in these communities are more likely to live in older housing where lead 
pipelines can still be found.7 For example, a 2020 Illinois study found that 65 percent of Black residents 
lived in areas that contained 94 percent of the state’s lead service lines, while only 30 percent of white 
residents lived in those communities.8 Unlike their higher-income counterparts, residents in these 
communities cannot afford to replace the lines themselves; and in most places, landlords are not 
required to replace lead service lines or even notify renters about them.9 These factors have combined 
to create lasting disproportionate exposures to environmental health hazards for families with low 
incomes and people of color.10  
 
For these reasons, CLASP believes that a strong lead and copper rule is critical to address this 
public health crisis so everyone can access safer drinking water. CLASP would also like to make the 
following recommendations to help strengthen this proposed rule:  
  
• 
Require water utilities to cover the full cost of lead service line replacement, so we’re not 
putting that financial burden on low-income homeowners. Water systems are not required to 
pay for full lead service line replacement, potentially leaving significant cost burdens on 
individual households, and making it more difficult to reach the 100 percent replacement rate 
required under the new rule. This raises environmental justice concerns because low-income 
homeowners are often unable to afford to pay for lead pipe removal, and landlords often refuse 
to do so, meaning that too often, lower-income people continue to drink water contaminated 
by lead pipes.11 
• 
Protect renters whose landlords are unlikely to pay the cost of lead pipe replacement. In the 
rule’s current form, water systems are not held responsible for replacing pipes if the property 
owner or landlord is unable or unwilling to pay. Water systems will be allowed to claim they 
don’t “control” service lines, for example, when they require property owners to pay a 
substantial sum for full replacement and the homeowners or landlords are unable or unwilling 
to pay. Under the proposal, no replacement is required at these homes. While renters are 
entitled to notice of lead paint in homes, only a few localities have similar protections related to 
lead water pipes. 
• 
Schools and childcare centers must be meaningfully addressed. Child care centers and other 
child care settings, such as child care homes and child care offered in other community settings, 
are deeply under resourced and need additional support and funding to meaningfully address 
the issue of lead pipes in their systems. We encourage the EPA to make bolder investments and 
provide additional guidance for child care centers to help facilitate the replacement of lead 
pipes at these facilities. The EPA should minimize the burden on child care settings and schools 
so that we can maximize the impact of the lead and copper pipe rule. 
• 
Remove loopholes that prolong the replacement of lead pipes. We don’t want another 
generation of kids to be harmed by lead pipes that are contaminating their tap water. The 

 
 
 
 
1310 L St. NW, Suite 900 • Washington, D.C. 20005 • (202) 906-8000 • clasp.org 
proposal includes two provisions allowing extensions of the deadline. The first is available to 
about three to seven systems nationally with more than 80,000 to 100,000 lead service lines—
so a city like Chicago could get 40 to 50 years to replace its lead pipes.12 A second provision 
would allow around 600 to more than 2,100 water systems across the country that have a 
relatively high percentage of lead pipes to get extensions for as much as an additional decade or 
more. These provisions must be fixed; we cannot allow more generations of kids to continue 
drinking leaded water.  
• 
Encourage states, localities, and tribal governments to prioritize job quality and equitable 
workforce practices.  It’s critical that public dollars be used to create family sustaining jobs that 
are accessible to workers traditionally underrepresented in the infrastructure trades, including 
women, workers of color, and individuals with barriers to employment.  Where possible the EPA 
should encourage the use of project labor agreements, community benefits agreements, local 
hiring, and economically targeted hiring practices to increase job quality and promote equity 
and access to publicly funded jobs.  We recommend the EPA study the example of Newark, New 
Jersey’s lead pipe replacement program that models many of these recommendations.13  
The EPA’s proposed rule demonstrates a strong commitment to address the clean drinking 
water crisis in this country and ensuring that everyone has the right to safe drinking water regardless of 
their race, income, or zip code. With these additional recommendations to help strengthen the rule, we 
can ensure that tens of millions of Americans who are drinking water from systems that have significant 
lead contamination issues are finally able to see some relief. If you have any additional questions and 
would like to connect further, please contact Priya Pandey at ppandey@clasp.org.  
Best,  
 
Priya Pandey, Policy Analyst  
Center for Law and Social Policy 
 
 
1 United States Environmental Protection Agency, Basic Information about Lead in Drinking Water, 2024, 
https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/basic-information-about-lead-drinking-water 
2 Erin Fitzgerald, EPA Announces Mandate to Replace All Lead Pipes Within 10 Years, Earth Justice, 2023, 
https://earthjustice.org/press/2023/epa-announces-mandate-to-replace-all-lead-pipes-within-10-years 
3 Alisha Lockett, How Lead Poisoning Disproportionately Affects Black Communities, Healthline, 2022, 
https://www.healthline.com/health/lead-poisoning-black-communities. 
4 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, CDC National Childhood Blood Lead Surveillance Data, 2022, 
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/data/national.htm. 
 

 
 
 
 
1310 L St. NW, Suite 900 • Washington, D.C. 20005 • (202) 906-8000 • clasp.org 
 
5 Karp RJ. Redlining and Lead Poisoning: Causes and Consequences. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 
2023;34(1):431-446. doi: 10.1353/hpu.2023.0028. PMID: 37464504. 
6 Angela Guyadeen, Equal and Equitable Access to Lead Pipe Removal Needed in New Rule, National 
Resource Defense Council, 2023, https://www.nrdc.org/bio/angela-guyadeen/equal-and-equitable-access-
lead-pipe-removal-needed-new-rule 
7 Sarah Vogel, New report reveals environmental justice issues with lead pipe replacement – and a path 
forward, Environmental Defense Fund, 2020, https://www.edf.org/media/new-report-reveals-environmental-
justice-issues-lead-pipe-replacement-and-path-forward 
8 Adina Keeling, Evanston’s Lead Pipes called an Environmental Justice Concern, The Pulitzer Center, 2022, 
https://pulitzercenter.org/stories/evanstons-lead-pipes-called-environmental-justice-concern 
9 Baehler KJ, McGraw M, Aquino MJ, Heslin R, McCormick L, Neltner T. Full Lead Service Line Replacement: A 
Case Study of Equity in Environmental Remediation. Sustainability. 2022; 14(1):352. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010352 
10 Marie Lynn Miranda, Aaron Lilienfeld, Joshua Tootoo, Mercedes A. Bravo; Segregation and Childhood Blood 
Lead Levels in North Carolina. Pediatrics September 2023; 152 (3): e2022058661. 10.1542/peds.2022-
058661 
11 Baehler KJ, McGraw M, Aquino MJ, Heslin R, McCormick L, Neltner T. Full Lead Service Line Replacement: A 
Case Study of Equity in Environmental Remediation. Sustainability. 2022; 14(1):352. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010352 
12 Chakena D. Perry, EPA Wants Lead Pipes Out in a Decade: Chicagoans Could Wait 40+ Years, National, 
Resource Defense Council, 2023, https://www.nrdc.org/bio/chakena-d-perry/epa-wants-lead-pipes-out-
decade-chicagoans-could-wait-40-years 
13 Maureen Cunningham, Echoing Newark: How American Cities Can Replicate Newark’s Success in 
Replacing Over 23,000 Lead Pipes in Under Three Years, Environmental Policy Innovation Center, 2022, 
https://www.policyinnovation.org/blog/echoing-newark-how-american-cities-can-replicate-newarks-
success-in-replacing-over-23000-lead-pipes-in-under-three-years

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0803 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 2, 2024 
 
Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Mail Code: 4607M 
Washington, DC 20460 
Re: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, NEIWPCC Comments in response to the Proposed 
Lead and Coper Rule Improvements  
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
The New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission (NEIWPCC) appreciates the 
opportunity to comment on behalf of the States of the Northeast1 on the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulation for lead and copper, hereafter referred to as the Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI).  NEIWPCC requests EPA to consider the comments of our member 
states.  
 
NEIWPCC was established by an act of the United States Congress which ratified the New 
England Interstate Water Pollution Control Compact in 1947.  NEIWPCC is a regional 
commission that helps Northeast states preserve and advance water quality.2  We engage and 
convene water quality professionals and other interested parties from New England and New 
York to collaborate on drinking water, wastewater, and environmental science challenges 
across shared regions and ecosystems.   
NEIWPCC commends EPA’s effort to strengthen existing protections for lead service lines 
(LSLs).  We all agree that lead is a public health issue which needs to be addressed.  We also 
know that there are other sources of lead.  For example, lead has been found in paint, tin-lead 
solder, and telecom lines3 to name a few.  In addition, structures built before 1940 which 
constitutes a large proportion of homes in the northeast4 are expected to have lead present 
throughout the home.  The multiple sources of lead exposure compel us to holistically assess 
 
1 These comments are made by NEIWPCC on behalf of all NEIWPCC member states (the six New England states 
and New York). Our individual member states may also provide comment letters with additional noteworthy guidance and advice to consider. 
Nothing in these NEIWPCC comments is intended to limit any individual state comments. 
2 NEIWPCC member states include the six New England states and the State of New York.   
3 New York battles telecom firms over lead-sheathed lines 
4 U.S.Census Bureau’s 2019 American Community Survey 

 
–2– 
the issue. Therefore, we ask that EPA work towards making this rule a component of a more 
comprehensive effort to remediate lead present in all forms in our communities.    
Personnel Capacity 
In recent years, our member states have addressed lead public health concerns through 
several mechanisms.  Some examples include: 
1. New York enacted the “Lead Pipe Right to Know Act.” The act requires water utilities 
across the state to publicly share how many LSLs are present in their distribution 
system and where those lines are located. It also requires the New York State 
Department of Health to make an inventory of these LSLs publicly available, including 
interactive maps, to aid with replacement efforts.  From New York’s perspective, this 
will allow communities to have an informed conversation regarding LSL replacement5.  
 
2. Rhode Island enacted the “Lead Poisoning Prevention Act.” The act creates a 
replacement program for public and private LSLs, requiring they be replaced within 10 
years. The act also requires a lead risk assessment to be conducted for any home built 
prior to 2011 as part of any property transaction6. Additionally, the state passed 
legislation establishing a statewide rental registry for lead conformance certificates and 
stronger penalties for landlords found to have violated lead safety laws. Rhode Island 
hopes these actions will strengthen protections for renters and reduce the occurrence 
of childhood lead poisoning7.   
While our member states appreciate the steps EPA is taking to replace LSLs, a bigger issue for 
the states is the personnel needed to execute both the state and federal initiatives. Frankly, 
the states are having difficulties filling their current positions.  With the addition of the new 
rules, the states will need to significantly expand their staff to comply.   
Compounding this shortfall, our member states are also struggling to retain the staff they 
have. Some of the difficulties include the private sector luring trained personnel from public 
sector jobs. As a result, local and state agencies are constantly losing trained personnel.  We 
ask that EPA consider the cost impact of personnel challenges in developing the final rule. 
 
Cost 
The EPA “estimates the proposed rule would cost between $2.1 and 3.6 billion per year”, with 
costs “primarily associated with identifying and replacing [LSLs], making lead filters available, 
and changes in water treatment8.” Based on a review of the cost to comply with the more 
 
5 New York Lead Pipe Right to Know Act  
6 Lead Poisoning Prevention Act becomes law  
7 Attorney General Neronha issues guidance to Rhode Island landlords about new lead poisoning prevention laws 
8 Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements Information Webinar 

 
–3– 
stringent rule, it has become apparent that the proposed funds will fall short of the cost 
burden.    
The State of New York has replaced approximately 3,500 service lines to date and has found 
the average cost to range between $5,000-10,000 per line. With roughly half a million lines 
remaining, they estimate it could cost between $2.5-5 billion to replace all remaining service 
lines in their state alone. These estimates do not take into consideration rising cost associated 
with inflation, procurement, workforce constraints, and rising contractor costs. This is 
consistent with American Water Works Association’s (AWWA) estimated average cost to 
replace a single LSL as more than $10,0009. Currently, EPA estimates there are 9.2 million LSLs 
across the country10, meaning the total cost to replace all LSLs could exceed $90 billion. EPA 
has allocated $36 billion over a 10-year period which is $54 billion less than AWWA’s estimate 
without considering inflation.   
 
Currently $15 billion has been allocated for “[LSL] replacement projects and associated 
activities directly connected to the identification of and planning for the replacement of 
[LSLs]”. Additionally, there will be $11.7 billion in funding available through the Drinking Water 
State Revolving Loan Fund (DWSRF)11.  Systems are already facing significant challenges 
relating to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, cybersecurity, and other infrastructure 
upgrade investments. As these initiatives are also supported by DWSRF, the available funding 
for LSL replacement could be significantly impacted. In addition, the DWSRF has earmarked 
funds for special projects which further reduces the overall availability of funds. Our states 
appreciate the funds that have been made available through BIL and DWSRF, and we ask the 
EPA to evaluate increasing the financing necessary to support this rule.   
 
Communication 
Effective communication and education will be vital to the success of the rule. Our states 
appreciate the acknowledgment of the difficulties in communicating with private entities and 
have found it to be an extremely challenging endeavor. Cooperation from homeowners has 
been difficult. Many are worried about negative effects on property values and disruptions in 
services. While EPA is proposing strategies for communication, these efforts will take time and 
demand an increase in personnel to perform outreach, tracking, and responding to public 
inquiries. We ask that EPA consider allowing state agencies, with input from their local 
stakeholders, to determine and propose a “reasonable effort” strategy.  It should be noted 
that the strategy in a rural community will differ from a strategy in a city or suburb.  We 
understand that this will require the states to determine the most effective means of 
engagement with the local populace and develop a communication tracking mechanism. 
 
9AWWA Final Report - Considerations when Costing Lead Service Line Identification and Replacement (2022) 
10 EPA 7th Report to Congress - Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment (2023) 
11 Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements Information Webinar 

 
–4– 
Additionally, the lower lead action levels and change in sampling technique, notably the 
collection of a fifth liter sample, will likely increase the number of exceedances.   Concurrently, 
the frequency of exceedance communications will also increase.  We ask the EPA to consider 
developing resources and materials for states and water systems to streamline 
communication, ensure consistent messaging, and possibly reduce the burden on drinking 
water systems. 
Corrosion Control 
 
EPA is also proposing “to further streamline the rule by deferring the optimal corrosion control 
treatment and re-optimized optimal corrosion control treatment processes for systems that 
can remove 100 percent of LSLs within five years of the date the system is triggered into the 
corrosion control treatment steps12.”  Tin-lead solder can leach from homes which contain 
copper piping.  This has the potential to increase lead concentration should the drinking water 
system eliminate/reduce their corrosion control measures. States are concerned that EPA has 
not fully evaluated this potential contamination source.  To truly eliminate lead exposure, 
consideration of issues like the presence of tin-lead solder in homes must be addressed. 
Accordingly, our member states would ask the EPA to acknowledge and address the potential 
release of lead from solder, specifically in private home plumbing, in the final rule. 
 
Disposal  
 
The estimated 9.2 million LSLs which still need to be replaced will likely generate millions of 
tons of waste which will need to be properly disposed.  “In April 2014, Flint, MI switched its 
drinking water source from water treated in Detroit to Flint River water without applying 
corrosion control. This caused lead and other metals to leach into drinking water.” The metals 
of concern included Pb, Cu, Zn, and Cd, and levels were found to decrease after LSL removal 
over long-term period13. This trend suggests that LSLs will likely leach metals of concern after 
removal. 
 
Our states are very concerned that the waste generated from the replacement of LSLs be 
appropriately disposed and managed.  For example, if the LSL waste is landfilled, metal-laden 
leachate can be generated.  Leachate will generate metal-laden sludge which can be 
reintroduced into the environment.  Accordingly, our member states would ask the EPA to 
acknowledge and address the potential legacy impact from LSL disposal in the final rule.  
       
 
12 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements – pg. 84880 
13 C. Rockey, Nicole, et al. “Impact of Service Line Replacement on Lead, Cadmium, and Other Drinking Water Quality Parameters in Flint, 
Michigan.” Environmental Science: Water Research & Technology, Royal Society of Chemistry, 12 Mar. 2021. - This study analyzed a suite of 
metals from water samples collected in homes from Flint, MI that had their LSLs replaced. 
 

 
–5– 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide these comments, and we thank you for your 
consideration.   
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Susan J. Sullivan 
Executive Director 
 
CC:  NEIWPCC Executive Committee & Commissioners  
 
NEIWPCC Health Commissioner

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0848 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
EPA Docket Center
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Mail Code 4607M
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20460
Subject:
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
State of Colorado Safe Drinking Water Program Comments Concerning National
Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements Proposed
Rule
The Safe Drinking Water Program in the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment
(Colorado) is pleased to provide comments on proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI).
Colorado adopts and enforces regulations and provides assistance to public drinking water systems to
ensure that they provide safe drinking water to the public.
In general, Colorado supports the proposed LCRI and EPA’s efforts to reduce complexity in the rule
while enhancing public health protection. Colorado appreciates EPA’s improvements to the rule
involving mandatory lead service line removal and lowering the lead action level. Removing lead lines
is necessary to protect consumers from one of the leading contributors of lead exposure in drinking
water. Colorado encourages EPA to review the feedback and concerns from states and stakeholders in
order to further strengthen the public health protections for lead exposure from drinking water while
recognizing opportunities to reduce some of the burden, costs, and environmental impacts associated
with certain aspects of the LCRI.
Colorado’s comments and recommendations support a final rule that furthers the goal of reducing lead
in tap water while simplifying and clarifying what remains a complex and challenging rule for public
drinking water systems to comply with, and for state agencies to oversee. Colorado is providing
comments regarding the proposed LCRI, including but not limited to:
1.
Colorado is supportive of the lowered lead action level to 0.010 mg/L from the current 0.015
mg/L level, and the removal of the lead trigger level to improve health protection and reduce
rule complexity while improving public health protection.
2.
Colorado generally supports the proposal to allow accelerated lead service line replacement
within five years in lieu of implementing optimal corrosion control treatment. However,
Colorado believes that stronger safeguards need to be implemented to reduce lead exposure
during this five-year timeframe, such as offers to provide pitcher filters to taps with known or
suspected lead service lines, and implementation of an effective, but not necessarily optimal,
corrosion control treatment.
3.
Colorado previously commented in 2021 that EPA should add a provision to the Lead and Copper
Rule Revisions that allowed for an approach similar to that taken by Denver Water under its
variance approved by EPA. The variance took a holistic approach toward lead exposure
reduction, which EPA noted at the time of issuance as a model for the nation.The variance
approach involves:
○
Inventorying and removing lead service lines, including prioritizing Environmental
Justice in the effort,

○
Implementing corrosion control treatment, though it is not optimal, it is not
detrimental to the environment,
○
Educating the public, and
○
Providing filters to all taps with known or suspected lead service lines.
This approach is better for public health, the environment, environmental justice, and cost
effectiveness compared to moving forward with optimal corrosion control treatment in some
cases. This option should be considered again by EPA as it finalizes the Lead and Copper Rule
Improvements, especially since the proposed expedited five-year lead service line removal
provisions may be unattainable for large systems with many lead service lines.
4.
Based on previous statements from EPA indicating there would be no changes to the service line
inventory requirements, Colorado has concerns that the proposed requirement to document
connector materials places an undue burden on water systems that have been diligently
working on the existing inventory requirements for the last few years. Colorado recommends
that including connector materials in the inventory be optional, especially since the proposed
rule sets forth no new requirements to remove lead-containing connectors. Colorado views this
proposed change as an added cost and complexity for water systems and states to identify and
track connector materials, with little to no public health benefit over the existing
requirements.
5.
Additionally, Colorado believes that EPA’s proposal to reduce the time frame to notify
consumers of their individual lead tap results from 30 days to three (3) calendar days is
unwarranted with no added health benefit except in cases where elevated lead is found.
Considering weekends, holidays, and water system resources, Colorado believes the proposed
deadline will be impossible for many water systems to comply with and challenging for states
to oversee, resulting in many violations being issued and needing to be tracked to resolution.
We recommend that EPA consider a longer time frame.
6.
Finally, based on feedback from water systems across the state, Colorado understands that
service line and interior plumbing materials are not easily or legally accessible to water system
personnel in many instances. Colorado encourages EPA to consider utilizing lead plumbing
disclosures to renters and home buyers similar to the process by which lead-containing paint is
disclosed. This would help increase customer engagement, improve risk communications, and
allow for more efficient confirmation and replacement of lead plumbing materials. EPA should
deploy these mechanisms in its “whole of government” approach to reducing lead exposure.
Colorado’s specific comments in response to the proposed LCRI Section IX Request for Comment (FR
pages 85035 to 85038) are provided in the enclosed Attachment A. Colorado has also collaborated with
members of the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators (ASDWA) on providing input and is
supportive of ASDWA’s comments.
Colorado thanks you for the opportunity to provide these additional comments on this very important
subject.
Sincerely,
Nicole Rowan, P.E.
Director, Water Quality Control Division
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment
Attachments:
Digitally signed by Nicole Rowan 
Date: 2024.02.04 08:04:33 -07'00'

●
Attachment A: Colorado’s Response to Request for Comments from EPA
cc:
Regulations.gov Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801

Attachment A: Colorado’s Response to Request for Comments from EPA
Row
#
Location in Federal Register
Request for Comment
Colorado Comments
IX. Request for Comment General Matters
1
Whether the proposed revisions to the LCRR treatment
technique are effective to prevent known or anticipated
adverse health effects to the extent feasible in accordance
with the SDWA.
Colorado supports this statement.
2
Whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the
complexity of the regulatory approach used to address lead in
drinking water consistent with the statutory standard for a
treatment technique rule in section 1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA.
Specifically, EPA requests comment on ways that the proposed
LCRI could be simplified and ways that burden, including
paperwork burden, could be reduced without affecting the
ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse
health effects.
Colorado supports simplifications to the rule via removal of
the lead trigger level of 10 ppb and lowering of the lead
action level to 10 ppb.
Colorado is concerned that the "Distribution System and
Site Assessment" requirements following an individual
result above the action level are still overly complex and
burdensome to implement for systems and states. With the
lower action level and improved sampling method, there
will be a large increase in the number of sites subject to
these requirements. Tracking each high lead result for
proper follow-up will require substantial resources from
primacy agencies.
In Colorado, the majority of lead Action Level Exceedances
(ALEs) occur at systems without lead service lines. At
non-LSL sites, since the result is likely due to premise
plumbing and outside the jurisdiction of the water system,
Distribution System and Site Assessment requirements
could be best addressed within additional content
requirements of the consumer notification of lead tap
results (e.g. must include an offer to re-sample at no cost,
and explanation that switching to “lead-free” faucets can
substantially reduce lead levels in tap water). This would
be more efficient and not present an increase to public
health risk.
Colorado proposes confirmation lead sampling be utilized
to determine if a Distribution System and Site Assessment
is triggered. The results of the original and confirmation
sample can be used to rule out common sampling issues by
customers prior to additional actions.
Colorado additionally proposes that once triggered, then
the following actions be required:
-Customer notice of results and education with information
about the filters.
-If present, removal of the lead service line within 120
days or on a state-approved schedule.
-For systems serving more than 50,000 people, a Water
1

quality Parameter and corrosion treatment assessment.
Colorado’s proposal is based on the likelihood that smaller
systems with water quality and corrosion issues will
already exceed the lead action level based on five or ten
tap samples, versus a large system that takes additional
samples during the monitoring period and where localized
water quality issues can be improved through adjustments
to water age and corrosion treatment.
Additionally, Colorado recommends that EPA provide more
clarification, and flexibility for states, on the validation
steps required for non-lead service lines. This adds
complexity to the rule and substantial additional
requirements for systems and states. Colorado
recommends that EPA provide further clarifications and
examples of what sites should be included in the validation
pool. Additionally, Colorado recommends that if a water
system used a statistical method that is at least as
stringent as EPA’s, or an evidence based, state-specific
verification method, they should be allowed to meet this
requirement without further investigation.
3
Whether the proposed requirements of the rule are
enforceable and promote compliance without the need for
State or Federal enforcement action. EPA also solicits
comment on ways the rule could be modified to better
promote compliance.
Colorado agrees that the rule is enforceable, but as with
any additional requirement placed on water systems,
additional non-compliance and enforcement actions will
occur. Unless thorough and complete guidance and forms
are available to primacy agencies and water systems at the
effective date of LCRI, states and water systems will be
unprepared for the compliance challenges the LCRI
presents.
IX. Request for Comment Service Line Replacement
4
All aspects of the proposed scope of the replacement
requirements, including the criteria used to define a full
service line replacement (e.g., cutting the pipe at abandoned
properties, replacing the entire service line) and which lead
sources are subject to replacement under the mandatory
program. EPA is seeking comment on whether to prohibit
reconnection of any disconnected LSL or GRR service line. EPA
is requesting comment on whether the Agency should include
lead connectors or galvanized service lines that are or were
downstream of a lead connector as part of mandatory
replacement
EPA should not include lead connectors as part of
mandatory replacement. Colorado agrees with EPA that it
is not feasible or practical to physically verify all
connectors, and that many connectors will be replaced
through the requirement to replace them as encountered
during infrastructure work.
5
Whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent
should be more than four times (e.g., five, six, or seven
times).
Colorado agrees that four attempts to obtain property
owner consent is sufficient.
6
Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets “control”
for the purposes of the mandatory replacement provision
(i.e., require systems to conduct full service line replacement
in situations where the system has access to conduct the full
replacement).
Colorado supports the interpretation. Colorado supports
ASDWA’s comment that EPA should provide further
clarification on what “under the control” means as water
systems may falsely interpret this as ownership.
2

7
The proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement
deadlines. EPA is seeking comment on whether it is feasible
for systems across the nation to complete service line
replacement in a shorter timeframe than ten years, such as in
six, seven, or eight years.
Colorado supports the ten year replacement deadline and
does not support a shorter time frame.
8
EPA is seeking comment on the rate construct approach,
including how to calculate compliance with a given service
line replacement deadline and average annual rate calculated
across a rolling three-year period.
The rate construct calculations may be confusing for water
systems and states to implement. Colorado recommends
EPA provide more information on this calculation in
implementation guidance prior to the compliance date of
the rule.
9
EPA also seeks comment on whether systems should be
required to meet a minimum replacement rate in the first
three years after the compliance date to give States an
opportunity to enforce replacement rate progress sooner than
three years after the compliance date.
Colorado does not support a minimum replacement rate in
the first three years unless it has allowances for systems
who are engaged in planning and bidding on contractors
within the first two years.
10
EPA also seeks comment on the complexity of the rate
construct.
Colorado has concerns that the replacement rate may
cause systems with presumed lead or unknowns to be
identified as non-compliant if the systems are unable to
find and replace actual lead service lines upon further
investigation that indicates a majority being non-lead
lines.
11
EPA is taking comment on whether States, as a condition of
primacy, or EPA when it is directly implementing the program,
should be required to set initial shortened deadlines by a
certain timeframe, such as no later than 60 days after the
compliance date.
Colorado does not support this requirement. Colorado
believes there are too many variables for states to consider
to determine what is “feasible” and to set shorter
timeframes within 60 days of the compliance date. This
should not be a condition of primacy.
12
The overall approach and basis to offer deferred service line
replacement to systems with a high proportion of LSLs and
GRR service lines in their distribution system relative to their
total number of households served. EPA is requesting
comment on its proposed threshold of 0.039 average annual
number of replacements per household served, which is used
to calculate the number of years that systems can defer.
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
item.
13
Whether to require the State, as a condition of primacy, to
approve the use of the deferred deadline provision where the
water system qualifies for it and/or whether to require the
State, as a condition of primacy, to assess whether it would be
feasible for a system to meet the 10-year deadline or a
shorter deadline even if the system meets the regulatory
criteria for the deferred deadline.
Colorado does not support making this a condition of
primacy. This appears to add complexity for states by
trying to demonstrate how they would do this before the
rule goes into effect and states have little experience with
it. There appears to be little or no benefit for this.
14
Whether there are additional data on service line replacement
rates achieved by systems in proactive programs (i.e.,
excluding programs that only replace service lines in
coordination with main replacement or emergency repair).
Colorado supports the ability for states to approve a water
system’s holistic lead reduction program (e.g. EPA-granted
Dever Water Variance) when optimal treatment for lead
service lines is detrimental to the environment or there are
serious wastewater implications (e.g. orthophosphate) and
where an expedited lead service line replacement program
of five years is infeasible due to the number of lead service
lines present. This holistic approach should encompass at a
minimum: implementation of corrosion control treatment
3

that reduces lead levels, ongoing public education, free
pitcher filter availability, lead service line inventory and
replacement that prioritizes Environmental Justice during
the replacement period, and no-cost sampling upon
request. Colorado believes holistic approaches will better
protect public health while lead service lines are still
present in a system. Necessary oversight of such programs
could be guaranteed through additional 142 requirements.
15
The proposed use of a maximum threshold of 10,000 annual
service line replacements for systems with atypically high
numbers of LSLs and GRR service lines as well as seeking
comment on the alternate threshold of 8,000 annual service
line replacements. EPA is also seeking feedback on other
thresholds and supporting data.
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
item.
16
EPA is also seeking feedback on if there’s data available that
would inform if the maximum threshold for annual service line
replacement could increase after ten years, such as if
replacement rates could double.
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
item.
17
Whether systems conducting deferred service line
replacement should be subject to any additional requirements
beyond those for systems that are not replacing service lines
in accordance with a deferred deadline.
Colorado believes that requiring a statement in CCR (for
community water systems) or an annual notice provided via
direct delivery (for non-community systems) about
deferred service line replacement would be appropriate to
keep customers informed.
18
The requirement for systems to install a dielectric coupling
when conducting a partial replacement of an LSL or GRR to
separate the remaining LSL or GRR service line and the
replaced service line unless the replaced service line is made
of plastic and other recommended risk mitigation activities.
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
item.
19
The proposed requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service
line replacement unless it is conducted in accordance with
emergency or planned infrastructure work (excluding planned
infrastructure work solely for the purposes of replacing lead
and GRR service lines as part of a service line replacement
program).
Colorado does not support this requirement. This ban could
be infeasible at times. See additional comments below.
20
EPA is seeking comment on whether partial service line
replacement should be prohibited during “planned
infrastructure work” or with certain types of planned
infrastructure work.
Colorado does not support prohibition of partial service
line replacements during planned infrastructure work.
Doing LSLR during infrastructure work such as main
replacements is an efficient and cost-effective way to
replace at least a portion of the SL and since this is
planned work, allows adequate time for homeowner
outreach. If a homeowner declines, the system should still
be able to replace their portion of the line, especially if
damaged. The inference is that if the line is damaged, the
system would need to replace it with a lead line. The
proposed rule has other protective measures in place such
as requiring the addition of dielectric couplings during
partial replacements, additional flushing and risk
mitigation requirements, annual notification of
lead/GRR/unknown service lines, and notification after
change of ownership to reduce lead exposure after a
4

partial replacement. Disallowing partial replacements
during planned infrastructure work will ultimately leave
more lead service lines in place and could be technically
infeasible in some circumstances leaving systems with no
options to comply and states in a bad position as well in
terms of oversight.
21
The ability of the market to correct for potential shortages in
workers and materials to conduct service line replacement, as
well to provide sufficient quantities of filters to comply with
the service line replacement and other relevant provisions in
the proposal.
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
item.
22
The extent to which property owner consent, if required by
State or local law or water tariff agreement, might
complicate full service line replacement and whether there
are additional measures EPA can take to facilitate access
through the LCRI.
Colorado believes that obtaining property owner consent
for access for service line verification and replacements is
a significant complicating factor for full service line
replacement. Throughout the majority of Colorado, there
are no existing local laws or water tariff agreements that
allow water systems to access private property to verify or
replace service lines. This leaves a lot of unknowns and the
potential for lead service lines to be left in the ground.
Colorado encourages the federal government to consider
expanding real estate disclosures about potential lead
hazards to include service line material information
through authorities available to the US Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD). This could help
increase participation in service line identification and
replacement, and improve risk communications.
IX. Request for Comment Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper
23
Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of
the proposed sites should be included in Tier 3, if additional
sites should be included, or if some should be included in a
different, lower priority tier, such as Tier 4. Specifically,
comment on whether sites served by galvanized service lines
or containing galvanized premise plumbing that are identified
as ever being downstream of an LSL or lead connector should
be included in the same tier as other sites with a current lead
connector (e.g., copper service line downstream of a lead
connector).
Colorado agrees that sites with a lead connector and a
non-lead service line should be Tier 3. Colorado supports
ASDWA’s comment regarding galvanized lines.
24
Comment and available data, such as modeling or sampling
data, that inform lead corrosion rates over time.
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
item.
25
Comment on the applicability of alternate sampling protocols
to assess CCT performance, increase customer participation,
and other relevant factors.
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
item.
26
Comment on the proposed updated definition of wide-mouth
bottles that is “bottles that are one liter in volume with a
mouth, whose outer diameter measures at least 55 mm wide,”
and specifically on the availability of qualifying bottles.
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
item.
5

27
Comment and any relevant data on the number and tiering of
samples used to calculate the 90th percentile lead and/or
copper levels for systems with LSLs for purposes of assessing
CCT efficacy. Specifically, whether samples from non-LSL sites
that have higher lead concentrations than samples from LSL
sites should be included and whether these higher values
should replace lower values from LSL sites in the 90th
percentile calculation.
Colorado believes that samples from non-lead service line
sites that have higher lead concentrations than samples
from lead service line sites should be included in the 90th
percentile calculation. Using the highest samples
regardless of tier level will simplify States’ process of
picking which samples to use based on tiers while still
ensuring the best public health protection.
28
Comment on whether State authority to specify sampling
locations when a system is conducting reduced monitoring
should apply regardless of the number of taps meeting sample
site criteria.
Colorado supports ASDWA’s comment, and appreciates
having the authority to specify sampling locations when a
system is conducting reduced monitoring, regardless of the
number of taps meeting sample site criteria.
IX. Request for Comment Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan
29
EPA is proposing a threshold of systems serving greater than
50,000 persons to host the inventory and plan online, which is
the required threshold under the LCRR. EPA is seeking
comment on the size threshold at which systems must host
their publicly accessible inventory, inventory summary data,
replacement summary data, and service line replacement plan
online, and whether it should be lowered relative to the LCRR
requirements.
Colorado believes that setting the threshold at systems
serving greater than 10,000 persons (large and medium
systems) could be feasible if it is clear that inventories
could be made available online via an online file sharing
service such as Google Drive instead of a website. EPA
should provide states the authority to require online
posting of the inventory information at their discretion.
30
EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the
accuracy of non-lead service lines in their inventory that were
categorized using methods other than records review or visual
inspection of at least two points along the line. EPA is
requesting comment on the number of validations required,
the proposed 95 percent confidence level approach used to
develop the number of validations required, the criteria for
which methods used to categorize non-lead service lines
should be included in the validation pool (including whether
non-lead lines categorized based on records should be subject
to validation), and the seven-year timeline for systems on a
10-year replacement deadline to complete the validation
requirements.
Colorado recommends that EPA provide additional
information and clarification on this requirement, and
allow states the authority to determine what sites need
validation since the LCRR allows for verification using
resources or information provided or required by the state.
Specifically, Colorado recommends EPA provide
clarification on:
- Whether this applies to lines that were determined to be
non-lead by way of a predictive/statistical method (e.g.,
20% verified or enough to reach 95% confidence level).
Colorado supports ASDWA’s recommendation that if a water
system used a statistical method that is at least as
stringent as EPA’s, they should be allowed to meet this
requirement without further investigation.
- If a service line was determined to be non-lead based on
being built after the lead ban, are systems required to
validate those lines?
- What about state-specific decisions for material
classification that were made under the LCRR based on
state-specific circumstances? The LCRR allows for using
"Any resource, information, or identification method
provided or required by the State to assess service line
materials." This should still apply under the LCRI and
service line materials verified using these should be
excluded from the verification pool.
Colorado recommends the EPA not require systems to
include sites that were classified non-lead based on
records in the validation pool. This would be a large
burden for systems. Colorado recommends EPA provide
6

guidance on steps systems should take if they determine
through field evidence that records are not accurate. It is
unlikely that a service line with a record indicating
non-lead material would have later been replaced with
lead.
31
Comment on establishing a deadline for systems to identify all
unknown service lines prior to their service line replacement
deadlines.
Colorado recommends that EPA keep a single deadline for
identifying all unknown service lines and for completing
LSLR, with the understanding that if an unknown is
identified as lead or GRR, systems may have a tight
timeframe to replace it. EPA should provide additional
information and clarification on this in guidance.
32
Comment on a requirement for systems to update their
service line replacement plans if there are any changes, such
as changes to laws and policies applicable to full service line
replacement.
Colorado supports this requirement. However, Colorado
does not expect that this will impact many water systems
in our state.
Colorado notes that the LCRI preamble says States would
be required to identify any State laws that pertain to a
water system's access to conduct full LSLR and notify water
systems in writing by the LCRI compliance date. States
must also notify systems within six months of the
enactment of any new or revised State law impacting
access to full service line replacement. Colorado does not
support this action if required in the final rule, unless
available State guidance can be utilized in lieu of direct
notification.
IX. Request for Comment Lead Action and Trigger Levels
33
EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of
0.010 mg/L, as well as comment and supporting data on
alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, with regards to
generally effective corrosion control treatment and
identifying systems most at risk of elevated levels of lead in
drinking water.
Colorado supports lowering the lead action level to 0.010
mg/L, but recommends the lead action level not be
lowered any further at this time. The proposed lower
action level of 0.010 mg/L represents a significant public
health improvement and reduction in rule complexity by
removing the trigger level. However, this will significantly
increase the number of action level exceedances that
occur, and the number of systems required to install OCCT,
which will be orthophosphate in the majority of cases. In
Colorado, the majority of lead action level exceedances
occur at water systems without lead service lines. For
feasibility of rule administration and compliance, and from
an environmental perspective, Colorado is concerned about
lowering the lead action level further.
34
EPA is also seeking comment on the use of the action level to
determine when additional public education is required, and
the use of the same action level for public education as for
the CCT provisions.
Colorado supports the using the same lead action level to
determine when public education is required and for CCT
provisions.
35
EPA is seeking public comment, data, and information on the
anticipated benefits and tradeoffs, including for public health
and administrative burden on systems and States, if more
small and medium systems are required to conduct a detailed
OCCT demonstration and take other actions if they exceed the
proposed action level of 0.010 mg/L or other lower values,
Colorado believes detailed OCCT demonstration efforts by
more small and medium systems will have few benefits
with the requirements to remove lead service lines over
the next 10 years of LCRI.
7

while water systems are simultaneously required to
mandatory conduct full service line replacement.
IX. Request for Comment Corrosion Control
36
The proposed determination that the CTT treatment
technique is feasible and prevents known or anticipated
adverse health effects to the extent feasible.
Colorado supports this statement, and believes that
collaboration between states and EPA in developing
guidance and training on CCT is critical and should be
prioritized by the Agency. Colorado encourages EPA to
consider an approach that allows states the ability to
approve a water system’s holistic lead reduction program
(e.g. EPA-granted Dever Water Variance) when optimal
treatment for lead service lines is detrimental to the
environment or there are serious wastewater implications
(e.g. orthophosphate) and where an expedited lead service
line replacement program of five years is infeasible due to
the number of lead service lines present (see details in
Row 14 above). Should EPA not want to include this option
within the rule directly, Colorado recommends EPA
consider granting a path forward for states and the water
system with approval from the EPA Regional Administrator.
37
Comment on whether it would be more appropriate to require
water systems to re-optimize again following an action level
exceedance regardless of meeting their optimal water quality
parameters and to provide the State with the authority to
waive this requirement.
Colorado supports ASDWA’s comment on requiring
re-optimization following an action level exceedance,
regardless of if a system is meeting optimal water quality
parameters or has previously re-optimized treatment.
38
The proposed option for a water system to delay OCCT until
after the system has replaced all of its LSLs and GRR service
lines, while the system achieves at least 20 percent removal
per year and must have no LSLs, GRR service lines, or lead
status unknown service lines remaining at the end of the
five-year period.
Colorado supports this option, especially since there are
concerns about phosphate as a downstream contaminant in
Colorado. However, Colorado recommends that stronger
safeguards should be implemented to reduce lead exposure
during this five-year timeframe, such as offers to provide
pitcher filters to taps with known or suspected lead service
lines, and implementation of an effective, but not
necessarily optimal, corrosion control treatment.
Otherwise, the proposed option could allow for lead
exposure without adequate protections for up to five
years. Colorado recommends EPA consider an approach
similar to that taken by Denver Water under its variance
approved by EPA. The variance approach involves
inventorying and removing lead service lines, implementing
corrosion control treatment, though it is not optimal,
educating the public, and providing filters to all taps with
known or suspected lead service lines. It is also possible
that lead will remain in the system through other media
such as solder, internal plumbing, and fixtures.
39
The treatment recommendation and CCT study process can
take multiple years to complete. For systems with existing
corrosion control, the system may be able to alter the existing
treatment (e.g., increase pH and/or orthophosphate dose)
without a new CCT study on a much faster timeframe rather
than waiting for study results that may recommend that same
change. EPA is requesting comment on whether there are
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
item.
8

situations and/or conditions where existing treatment
modifications may achieve similar lead reductions rather than
delaying new treatment for two-and-a-half years while a study
is underway.
IX. Request for Comment: Compliance Alternatives for a Lead Action Level Exceedance for Small Community Water Systems
and Non-Transient, Non-Community Water Systems
40
EPA is proposing that small system flexibilities be limited to
CWSs serving 3,300 persons and fewer and all NTNCWSs for
the remaining compliance alternatives of point-of-use devices
and plumbing replacement. EPA is seeking comment on
whether the Agency should allow systems serving up to 10,000
persons (or another threshold) to be eligible to use the small
system compliance flexibility provision.
Colorado supports ASDWA’s comment on small system
flexibilities and believes there are very few cases where
POUs would be a viable long-term option for a system that
doesn’t control their distribution system.
41
EPA is also seeking information, data, and analysis on whether
point-of-use devices and plumbing replacement are as
effective as OCCT at systems serving up to 10,000 persons (or
another threshold).
Colorado supports ASDWA’s comment that POU devices and
plumbing replacement are not as effective as OCCT for
systems serving up to 10,000 persons
42
EPA is requesting comment on the ability and practicality of
point-of-use devices to address multiple contaminants.
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
item.
IX. Request for Comment Public Education
43
The proposed determination that the public education
treatment technique is feasible and prevents known or
anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible.
Colorado agrees with the proposed determination.
44
Comment and supporting data on the capacity of water
systems to conduct some or all of the required public
education activities in 30 days, or another period of time that
is less than 30 or 60 days, after the end of the tap sampling
period in which a systemwide lead action level exceedance
occurs.
Colorado recommends EPA leave the deadline as 60 days
after the end of the monitoring period. The majority of
Colorado systems do not complete public education
requirements within 30 days. Colorado is uncertain
whether a shorter timeframe could be feasible but since
Tier 1 public notice is required following a lead action
level exceedance, Colorado feels there are adequate risk
communication measures in place and shortening the
public education deadline does not add additional public
health benefits.
45
Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination
that water systems are capable of providing consumer notices
of individual tap sampling results within three calendar days
of obtaining those results, regardless of whether the results
exceed the lead or copper action level, or if a longer time
frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar
days, 14 calendar days).
A three day timeframe is very tight and could be difficult
for many systems (especially small and rural systems) to
comply with, especially if it involves a weekend or holiday
or both. If a system has a lead ALE, they will be doing T1
PN already, which is resource intensive and eats into time
available to provide notice of tap sample results.
Notification of results below the action level within three
(3) days creates a false sense of urgency as well. The
shortened time frame creates additional complexity and
places a burden on states overseeing this requirement.
Because many systems will be unable to comply with the
three-day requirement, states will likely see an increased
workload with issuing violations for failure to comply, and
working with systems to return to compliance, with much
of this effort involving low lead test results.
9

Colorado recommends EPA allow at least ten (10) calendar
days to provide consumer notice of individual tap results.
46
Whether the proposed requirement for water systems to offer
lead sampling to consumers with LSLs, GRR service lines, or
unknown service lines in the notice of service line material is
effective at reducing adverse health effects.
Colorado agrees with ASDWA’s comment on offering lead
sampling. However, Colorado believes that reducing
adverse health effects at known lead and GRR sites may be
better done through notification/education about LSLR.
47
EPA is also requesting comment on the requirement for water
systems to deliver consumer-initiated test results within three
days of obtaining those results.
See above. Colorado recommends the EPA allow at least
ten (10) calendar days.
48
Whether the types and timing of outreach activities proposed
for systems failing to meet the mandatory service line
replacement rate are appropriate and whether other activities
should be considered.
ASDWA comments that the number of meetings or events
should be tailored to the demographics of the customers
and community and, for instance, one town hall meeting
would not be sufficient to reach enough customers for a
larger system. Colorado agrees with ASDWA’s comment on
types of outreach activities.
49
Whether EPA should require systems to annually notify
consumers if they are served by a lead connector, in addition
to notifications for sites with lead, GRR, or lead status
unknown service lines.
Colorado does not agree that customers must be notified
about lead connectors, since there is no requirement to
actively remove lead connectors in the LCRI. There are
also issues with notification pertaining to known lead
connectors and presumed lead connectors which would
make ongoing communication incorrect for many years.
Colorado supports a recommendation that systems
communicate about lead connectors accurately when their
presence is known.
50
Whether EPA should require additional public education
requirements to further encourage swift service line
replacement faster than the 10-year replacement deadline.
For example, should water systems that have LSLs, GRR
service lines, or unknown service lines five years after the
compliance date for the LCRI be required to increase the
frequency of the notification of service line materials from
annual to once every six months?
EPA should not require additional public education
requirements to encourage faster LSLR. The effectiveness
of this approach is uncertain. Requiring more frequent
public education after a certain time within the allowed
time frame for replacement creates mistrust and a false
sense that the system is in the wrong. States have the
ability to set shorter LSLR deadlines for systems if possible,
so if a shorter replacement time frame is feasible, then
the state can specify that.
51
EPA is seeking information and data on when a system
provides translated materials to consumers with limited
English proficiency, what resources are used to translate
materials (e.g., State resources, community organizations),
and what barriers water systems may face in providing
accurate translated materials.
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
topic, but encourages EPA to develop translated templates
and provide the necessary tools and resources for states
and water systems.
52
Whether the Agency should require States, as a condition of
primacy, to provide translation support to water systems that
are unable to do so for public education materials to
consumers with limited English proficiency.
Colorado supports ASDWA’s comment that EPA should not
make this a condition of primacy. Many states do not have
the resources for this and this burden should not fall on the
state. The requirements to implement provisions of the
Safe Drinking Water Act should always be the responsibility
of the water systems. States are responsible for overseeing
and enforcing the requirements, not meeting them. Some
states may choose to do this, and Colorado has helped
systems with this on many occasions, but this kind of
provision would fundamentally change the Safe Drinking
10

Water Act and create some potentially unforeseen
consequences in terms of liability and other issues. This
could also become a slippery slope if applied to other
provisions in the Safe Drinking Water Act that systems fail
to do.
53
EPA is also requesting comment on additional ways to
streamline public education and associated certification
requirements (e.g., combine deadlines for systems to conduct
public education or submit information to the State).
The due dates for the public education and associated
certification requirements do not align. Colorado
recommends that EPA work with ASDWA to identify ways to
streamline deadlines for states and PWSs in the final rule.
IX. Request for Comment Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances
54
Whether water systems should be required to take additional
actions when the system exceeds the lead action level
multiple times and if so, what actions are appropriate and
feasible, and when these additional actions should be
required under the LCRI.
Colorado recommends that EPA require re-optimization
after multiple action level exceedances, regardless of if
they previously re-optimized.
55
Whether EPA should use three action level exceedances in a
five-year period for identifying systems with multiple action
level exceedances where additional action is warranted and,
whether additional actions should be required sooner, or later,
than the five-year period, or whether EPA should use a
modified metric (number of consecutive action level
exceedances in a set time period) or a different metric
entirely (i.e., based on one or more factors other than the
number of action level exceedances in a set time period).
Colorado agrees with ASDWA’s comment on the use of three
action level exceedances in a five-year period.
56
The proposed public education activities after a system
exceeds the lead action level multiple times. EPA is
specifically seeking any information, data, or analysis on
whether the proposed public education activities support
preventing adverse health effects in this situation.
Colorado agrees the proposed public education activities
support preventing adverse health effects.
57
EPA is also requesting comment on whether systems should be
required to conduct more than one (e.g., two or three) of the
public education activities proposed.
Colorado supports ASDWA’s comments on public education
activities and suggests that EPA require at least two
activities. Most other public notices and public education
require various methods to be used to maximize the
number of people reached.
58
Whether EPA should require water systems to make filters
certified to reduce lead and replacement cartridges, along
with instructions for use, available to all consumers within 60
days of a system having multiple action level exceedances and
whether there are any supporting or contrary data on whether
the proposed filter requirement would be protective of public
health.
Colorado supports making filters available to all customers
regardless of service line or interior plumbing materials
since lead can come from faucets and fixtures. EPA needs
to clarify if systems must incur the cost of providing filters
to customers or not.
59
The proposed requirements for systems to develop a filter
plan and submit to the State after the system has multiple
action level exceedances for the first time, and whether EPA
should require systems to take additional actions to facilitate
filter distribution.
Colorado requests that EPA provide guidance for states on
reviewing a filter plan and what is acceptable, and
guidance for systems on approaches to developing a filter
plan.
11

60
Alternative requirements for systems with multiple action
level exceedances to provide filters to their consumers, such
as requiring water systems to provide filters and replacement
cartridges to consumers served by an LSL, GRR service line, or
unknown service line or to all consumers, or to require
systems to consult with the State upon meeting the criteria
for multiple action level exceedances, after which the State
determines the appropriate action to reduce lead exposure.
Colorado supports making filters available to all customers
once re-optimization is deemed ineffective. States should
be given the ability to allow systems to limit distribution of
filters in unique situations. An example is a town in
Colorado that continually exceeds the lead action level
because of two multi-family condo buildings but single
family homes have consistently tested well below the
action level.
61
An additional provision providing discretion to States to allow
systems with multiple action level exceedances to discontinue
the proposed required actions sooner if the system takes
actions (e.g., installs optimized or re-optimized CCT,
completes mandatory service line replacement) and is at or
below the lead action level for two consecutive monitoring
periods.
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
item.
62
Whether, in addition to the proposed requirements, EPA
should provide States discretion to determine appropriate
action following a multiple action level exceedance that is
tailored to meet specific system needs.
Colorado agrees that EPA should provide states discretion
to determine appropriate actions in addition to what is
outlined in the federal regulation.
IX. Request for Comment Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities
63
Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples
and/or to sample more frequently in schools and child care
facilities.
Colorado does not recommend additional sampling or
sampling more frequently in schools and child care
facilities. Many schools and child care facilities have been
sampled and lead remediated already under state laws.
Because there is still no provision to remediate high lead in
schools and child care facilities under the proposed LCRI,
requiring additional or more frequent sampling isn't
necessarily more protective of public health.
64
The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to
community water systems from the requirement for lead
sampling in schools and child care facilities during the
five-year period after the LCRI compliance date if the facility
was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021 but prior to the
LCRI compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the
waiver requirements of § 141.92(h).
Colorado supports this provision.
65
Whether or not to allow States to waive the requirements of §
141.92 for CWSs in schools and child care facilities that use
and maintain filters certified to reduce lead, and if so,
whether the waiver should only be allowed where schools and
child care facilities are required by State or local law to
install POU devices and maintain them.
Colorado supports ASDWA’s comments to not create this
additional waiver as it would add a significant burden to
states and water systems.
66
The minimum requirements for States to provide a waiver
(e.g., should the waiver be limited to locations where the
filter use is required by State or local law; should the waiver
be limited to locations where State or local law requires
periodic sampling or testing to ensure proper filter use).
Colorado has no specific comment or feedback on this
topic.
12

67
Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and child
care facility sampling results publicly available, and if so, how
frequently and in what manner.
Colorado recommends the sampling results be made
publicly available. This aligns with requirements to make
routine tap sampling results publicly available. There is
also no requirement in the proposed LCRI for the results to
be provided to parents so this would allow them to see the
results. Colorado supports ASDWA’s comment that the
responsibility of sharing and delivering these results should
not fall upon the water system, but instead the school or
child care facility. EPA could also add language about
specific results being available upon request of the school
or child care facility.
IX. Request for Comment Reporting and Recordkeeping
68
EPA is requesting comment on the expansion of the inventory
reporting to include lead connectors and non-lead service
lines.
Colorado supports ASDWA’s comment regarding optional
inclusion of lead connectors and non-lead service lines in
inventory reporting. Colorado has concerns that this
proposed requirement runs counter to previous statements
from EPA that there would be no changes to the service
line inventory requirements, and creates an undue burden
for water systems that have been diligently working on the
existing inventory requirements for the last few years. The
LCRR requirement to remove a lead connector when
encountered during infrastructure work ensures that
connectors will still be replaced over time. Colorado views
this change as an added cost to systems and states to
identify and track with little public health benefit over the
existing requirements.
69
EPA has heard concern over the ability of States to review all
required site sample plans and provide approvals in time for
the first tap monitoring period, and is requesting comment on
whether EPA should consider a phased approach or alternate
approach to reduce the burden on States following the rule
compliance date.
Colorado supports ASDWA’s comment on using a phased
approach for the review of site sampling plans to reduce
the burden on states following the rule compliance date.
Requesting information, reviewing, and correcting issues
with sampling plans is time and resource intensive.
Colorado’s sample plan verification effort spanned several
years. These efforts will be further complicated by new
tier levels and the requirement to inventory connectors.
70
EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be
required to maintain records related to distribution system
and site assessments conducted by water systems.
Colorado supports ASDWA’s comment on maintaining
records related to distribution system and site
assessments.
71
EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be
required to maintain documentation of determinations of
more stringent implementation, including but not limited to
conditions or approvals related to reduced compliance
monitoring and additional information required to conduct a
review or designate OCCT.
Colorado supports this requirement.
IX. Request for Comment Compliance Dates
13

72
Whether it is practicable for water systems to implement
notification and risk mitigation provisions after full and partial
service line replacement (§ 141.84(h)), notification of a
service line disturbance (§ 141.85(g)), and associated
reporting requirements (§141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) upon the
effective date of the LCRI.
Colorado believes this is practicable, but recommends EPA
provide guidance and templates for all of these situations.
73
Whether earlier alternative compliance dates for LCRI are
practicable such that water systems transition directly from
LCR to LCRI in less than three years (i.e., one or two years)
based on the assumption that water systems would comply
with the LCR until the LCRI compliance date.
Colorado supports the three year transition time and does
not believe a one or two year time frame is feasible for
states. The amount of time and resources needed for
Colorado to adopt LCRR (which we did in 2023) and go
through the stakeholder process, develop resources and
figure out implementation needs has been significant and
states will need the three years to do this successfully.
74
Whether there are other LCRR provisions besides the initial
inventory and notifications of service line material for which
the October 16, 2024 compliance date should be retained.
Colorado supports ASDWA’s comment to use the compliance
date specified under the LCRR for requiring risk mitigation
measures after LSLR or disturbance. Many systems are
already replacing LSLs and risk mitigation measures, as
specified in the LCRR, are necessary to protect public
health.
IX. Request for Comment Consumer Confidence Report
75
EPA is requesting comment on the proposed requirement for
systems to provide an informational statement in the CCR
about the school sampling requirements with the information
that consumers can contact the school or child care facility
about any potential sampling results.
Colorado supports this requirement, and recommends EPA
create guidance or talking points for schools and child care
facilities to help field questions about sampling results and
what they mean.
IX. Request for Comment Definitions
76
EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed
definitions, and specifically the following: b. EPA is proposing
to define a two-foot maximum length of connectors. EPA
proposes that “connectors” that exceed two feet in length be
treated as a service line. EPA is requesting comment on the
defined length of a connector
Colorado supports EPA’s efforts to define what constitutes a
“connector”, but the current definition of a connector
needs to be further clarified to explicitly state that
anything over the defined length is considered a lead
service line. This will have a significant impact on what is
classified as a “galvanized requiring replacement” service
line. Additionally, the rule should specify which connectors
(i.e., only the connection to main) are required to be
included in the inventory.
Questions from within Preamble
77
A system’s existing authority to access the service line and
complete the full service line replacement might provide the
system with the legal authority to conduct the service line
replacement over the objection of the property owner or
resident. However, as some stakeholders noted, requiring
service line replacement at properties where customers
object to their replacement could create potential safety
concerns for utility staff. EPA is seeking comment on whether
the proposed LCRI should either allow systems to treat those
service lines as not under the control of the system and forego
replacement of the lines or require systems to conduct full
service line replacement in situations where the system has
legal access to conduct the full replacement but property
In situations where replacement could create potential
safety concerns for utility staff, the rule should allow
systems to treat those service lines as not under the
control of the system and forego replacement of the lines.
It is unreasonable to require utility staff to risk their safety
in situations such as this, and many water systems do not
have the legal resources to address situations where a
system has legal access to conduct the full replacement
but property owners or residents deny physical access.
14

owners or residents deny physical access.
78
While EPA is not proposing to establish a maximum stagnation
time in the LCRI because the Agency is concerned about
samples being invalidated solely because the sample result it
high, EPA is seeking comment and data, including modeling
and sampling data, on potential maximum stagnation times,
and specifically how stagnation times inform corrosion rates.
Colorado has no specific comment or data on this topic.
79
EPA is seeking comment about the potential inclusion of
samples from lower-priority tiers (i.e., Tiers 3 through 5) that
have a higher lead or copper concentration than samples from
Tier 1 and 2 sites for calculation of the 90th percentile for
systems that do not have a sufficient number of samples from
Tier 1 and 2 sites. Additionally, EPA is seeking comment on
whether to require systems to use samples with the highest
lead and copper concentration regardless of sampling tiers,
such as including samples from lower-priority tiers ( i.e., Tier
3 through 5) in the 90th percentile calculation for systems
that are collecting compliance samples from all Tier 1 and 2
sites.
Colorado believes that samples from non-lead service line
sites that have higher lead concentrations than samples
from lead service line sites should be included in the 90th
percentile calculation. Using the highest samples
regardless of tier level will simplify States’ process of
picking which samples to use based on tiers while still
ensuring the best public health protection.
80
A deadline for inventory completion that precedes the
deadline for mandatory service line replacement could reduce
the possibility of non-compliance with the replacement
deadline, but it would not have the advantages of a
consolidated deadline as described above. EPA seeks comment
on its rationale for the consolidated deadline approach as
compared to an earlier deadline for identifying unknown
service lines.
Colorado recommends that EPA keep deadlines the same
with the understanding that if an unknown is identified as
lead or GRR, systems may have a tight timeframe to
replace it. EPA should provide additional information and
clarification on this in guidance.
81
While water systems are required to notify consumers of
disturbances resulting from water main replacement under
these proposed requirements, EPA is also requesting comment
on whether to require distribution of filters for this type of
disturbance.
The amount of potholing many systems will have to do
might make it costly to distribute filters to every site.
Additionally, disturbances occur in many other forms not
related to water system activities as well, and it is
impossible to provide filters to every site for these types of
disturbances. Colorado does not recommend this change
unless EPA has supporting data demonstrating a significant
health benefit.
15

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0804 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Autodesk, Inc.  The Landmark @ One Market, 1 Market Street, Suite 400, San Francisco, CA  94105 
Phone +1 415 507 5000 autodesk.com
February 2, 2024 
 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460 
Docket ID: EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
Submitted Electronically 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
I am writing on behalf of Autodesk, a leading technology provider dedicated to solving 
water challenges with hydraulic modeling and cloud technologies that drive efficiency and 
sustainability across all phases of the water asset lifecycle. We would like to express our 
support for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) and commend the 
EPA's commitment to eliminating lead contamination of drinking water. 
 
Autodesk understands that water utilities are under-resourced and struggle to respond to 
the many competing demands and challenges of providing safe drinking water to their 
communities. New digital technologies offer a tremendous opportunity to leverage 
innovative solutions to improve compliance efforts and enhance overall water 
management practices. 
 
We urge the EPA to fully embrace the potential of technology in addressing this public 
health challenge by providing proactive guidance that water providers are encouraged to 
adopt digital solutions to help them comply with the new requirements. By incorporating 
these solutions into planning and operational processes, utilities can not only meet the 
regulatory requirements more efficiently but also proactively identify and address 
potential problems to prevent future water quality issues. 
 
Below are a few specific examples of how technology can support utilities in meeting the 
new requirements, though it must be noted that there are many additional solutions on 
the market.  
 
1. Comprehensive risk analysis and rehabilitation tools that take into account the 
entire network and all the utility-owned assets. To best use taxpayer resources, 
replacement plans for lead pipes on the service lines should be incorporated into 
the overall capital plan for the utility. 

 
   
Autodesk, Inc.  Address, City, State, Postal code, Country 
Phone +1 000 000 0000  Fax +1 000 000 0000 autodesk.com
2. Intelligence tools that automate important compliance reporting for water quality, 
allowing faster and more informed decision making for operators and more 
reliable and consistent data for regulators. 
3. Hydraulic modeling software for clean water pressure networks with highly 
accurate simulations to better understand impacts of planned and unplanned 
outages and assist operators in managing water availability to customers during 
lead pipe abatement.  
 
Autodesk supports this rulemaking, and we believe that leveraging technology is 
paramount to achieving the desired outcomes. We encourage the EPA to actively support 
and promote the adoption of advanced water management technologies by water 
providers as part of the implementation of this rule and throughout its other programs. 
 
Thank you for considering our input. Autodesk stands ready to partner and support your 
efforts to improve our nation's drinking water quality. For questions regarding this 
submission, please contact Kelsey Moran, Government Affairs and Public Policy at 
kelsey.moran@autodesk.com. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Nicolas Mangon 
Vice President 
Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (AEC) Industry Strategy 
Autodesk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
   
Autodesk, Inc.  Address, City, State, Postal code, Country 
Phone +1 000 000 0000  Fax +1 000 000 0000 autodesk.com

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2255 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Amanda Rinehart <AmandaRinehart@mariettaoh.net>  
Sent: Monday, February 12, 2024 12:19 PM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Cc: 'Duerk, Nina' <Nina.Duerk@strand.com>; Steve Wetz <SteveWetz@mariettaoh.net>; Steve Eddy 
<steveeddy@mariettaoh.net> 
Subject: City of Marietta, Ohio LCRI Comments 
 
 
Good Afternoon, 
 
My name is Amanda Rinehart and I am the Project Manager for The City of Marietta. Nina 
Duerk with Strand Associates our engineering consultant reached out on February 6, 2024 in 
regards to us submitting our comments late. To reiterate her email we recently experienced 
some staff turnover that has delayed our submission. I understand EPA is not obligated to 
consider our late comments. However, I hope this provides more perspective into smaller 
communities and their concerns with the Lead Copper Rule Improvement. Please feel free to 
reach out to me with any questions. The City of Marietta is committed to providing clean drinking 
water to our residents by a new Reverse Osmosis Water Treatment Plant and by the removal of 
lead service lines.  
 
 
Thank you, 
 
Amanda Rinehart 
Project Manager  
304 Putnam Street Marietta, Ohio 45750  
AmandaRinehart@mariettaoh.net 
O: 740.373.5495 M: 740.236.2612 
 
 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1126 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
US Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
        National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
        Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
The Illinois State Conference of NAACP Branches (Illinois State Conference) submits the following 
comments regarding EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”).  
 
The Illinois State Conference provides leadership for local branches, youth councils, and college chapters 
for environmental and climate justice needs in Illinois. The NAACP and its Center for Environmental and 
Climate Justice have a longstanding interest in ensuring that issues of community engagement and 
environmental justice centers around Black and frontline communities that are most impacted. 
 
The Illinois State Conference applauds EPA for proposing stronger regulations to protect communities 
from lead in drinking water.  Lead in drinking water has been a historically prevalent issue in Black 
communities.  It poses extreme risks to the health of young people, mothers, and their families.  
 
According to new research, Illinois is the second largest state to have the most lead pipes with more than 
one million still in service – Chicago alone has 400,000, according to the EPA survey released in early 
April 2023.  Florida emerged as the state with the most lead service lines in the nation, beating out Illinois 
with 1,159,300 lead pipes. 
 
As reported in Illinois, as of January 14, 2022, there were 3,852,509 service lines reported and 686,000 
known lead service lines—the number may be higher.  Children can suffer from intellectual development, 
increased attention-related behavior problems, and reduced growth and hearing loss.  The effects of 
childhood lead exposure linger for a lifetime, with cost that accrue to the state, meaning, “the people.”  
 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) reported that $22,000 is saved for every lead service 
line that is removed, a dollar figure that only accounts for adult cardiovascular deaths attributable to lead 
exposure.  Because of the known lead service lines mentioned above, the real number in Illinois may be 
higher because the composition of some 45 percent of service lines statewide is unknown—our state could 
save a staggering $15.1 billion due to reduced cardiovascular deaths alone. 
 
For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong elements of the proposed 
LCRI, such as the requirement for the removal of all lead service lines in ten years, the requirements for 

water systems to sample both the first and fifth liter of water passing through lead pipes and a lower action 
level; but also ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes which undermine their goals and ensure 
that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened. 
 
 
Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule does not leave Black 
communities in Illinois behind: 
 
Removing the Exceptions to the 10-year Lead Pipe Removal Mandate 
It is a fundamental injustice to communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed 40 
or more years to fix this issue. 
 
Mandate That Water Systems Fully Pay for the Removal of Lead Service Lines 
Removal can cost thousands of dollars, and putting the financial burden on impacted communities 
will result in mostly wealthy and white neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced.  
 
Removal and replacement do not make up major proportions of utility budgets, and utilities 
should expect to maximize the use of available federal water infrastructure funds and other non-
ratepayer sources of funds to prioritize solving this crisis. 
 
Incentivize Schools to Install Filters and Ensure that Children Are Not at Risk 
Black children face an increased risk of lead exposure when compared with white children. 
EPA should move towards incentivizing the installation of filters and protecting children. 
 
Black communities and frontline communities have long suffered from disinvestment and lack of 
resources.  Past NAACP analysis has demonstrated that race, ethnicity, or language spoken had 
the strongest relationship to slow and inadequate enforcement of the SDWA of any 
sociodemographic characteristic analyzed. The final LCRI is a rare opportunity to make 
significant changes in the lives of millions of people in Illinois, and to provide a measure of 
environmental justice to families, and we encourage this administration to build on the progress 
made in the proposed rule by strengthening the final rule further. 
 
We Respectfully Demand Advocacy and Education on This Issue 
We need robust outreach to Black and frontline communities which includes education on the 
importance of our drinking water and how lead in drinking water can affect children and adult 
lives.  Nothing else is relevant to our health and wellbeing. 
 
Sincerely, 
Theodis Pace 
  
 
 
 
 
Rose E Joshua  
 
 
Theodis Pace, President  
 
 
 
 
Rose E Joshua, Esq., President 
Illinois State Conference 
 
 
 
 
Chicago Southside, ECJ Chair 
Of NAACP Branches

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0736 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 1 
 
 
 
 
January 15, 2024 
 
Michal S. Regan 
Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
AIHA’s Recommendations on EPA’s Proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
Agency/Docket Numbers: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 / FRL-5423.2-01-OW 
RIN: 2040-AG16 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
AIHA, the association for scientists and professionals committed to preserving and ensuring 
occupational and environmental health and safety (OEHS), appreciates the opportunity to 
provide feedback on the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. We hope you ﬁnd our feedback useful and are happy 
to answer any questions you may have. 
 
General Matters 
1. Whether the proposed revisions to the LCRR treatment technique are effective 
to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible in 
accordance with the SDWA. 
The only way to determine lead concentrations in drinking water is to test the water. The 
only way to test the body burden for lead is to test for lead concentrations in the human 
body. And any test result must accurately reﬂect actual conditions. AIHA, therefore, 
recognizes the need for lead laboratory certiﬁcation by participation and compliance with 
lead laboratory proﬁciency testing, which should be added to these regulations. 
AIHA supports EPA in proposing to lower the lead action level and eliminate the lead trigger 
level to simplify the rule and require water systems to act earlier. The current SDWA 15 ppb 
(15 µg/L) lead in water action level is not a health-based standard. AIHA believes that public 
education must play a signiﬁcant role in these proposed rules. 
Lead in the drinking water can cause long-term, permanent adverse health effects to 
exposed persons and unborn children. The extent of lead exposure from drinking water 
throughout the U.S. and the corresponding incidence of the long-term health effects from 
drinking water contaminated with low concentrations of lead is currently unknown. Funding 

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 2 
for research to examine the prevalence of human injury from lead in drinking water is 
needed. 
“Lead in tap water is primarily contributed by lead service lines and lead-containing solder 
and brass in premise plumbing. Although lead was banned for service line use in 1986 in the 
United States, 6.3–9.3 million LSLs are still in use nationally.”i  
AIHA recognizes that any level of lead ingestion may cause adverse health effects. 
AIHA supports the CDC’s efforts regarding lead exposure prevention, including: 
• 
“Primary prevention is the removal of lead hazards from the environment before a 
child is lead exposed. It is the most effective way to ensure that children do not 
experience harmful long-term effects of lead exposure. 
• 
Secondary prevention includes blood lead testing1 and follow-up care and referral. It 
remains an essential safety net for children who may already be exposed to lead.”ii   
AIHA believes lead in drinking water should be established at the lowest possible or lowest 
achievable concentrations. 
Regarding school facilities, AIHA supports the participation of elementary, middle, and 
secondary schools and youth detention centers in a water sampling program. 
“The LCRR requires water systems to sample at least 20% of elementary schools and at 
least 20% of childcare facilities each year until all facilities are contacted. An elementary 
school or childcare facility may decline to have its taps sampled. The LCRR does not 
require schools or childcare facilities to sample for lead or require them to allow water 
systems to conduct sampling; however, a Community Water System (CWS) is required to 
conduct sampling at the request of any school or childcare facility within its service area. 
Water systems must be sampled at secondary schools upon the school's request. States 
may offer waivers to the school and childcare facilities sampling requirements under 
certain circumstances.”iii  
 
2. Whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the 
regulatory approach used to address lead in drinking water consistent with the 
statutory standard for a treatment technique rule in section 1412(b)(7)(A) of 
SDWA. Speciﬁcally, EPA requests comment on ways that the proposed LCRI could 
be simpliﬁed and ways that burden, including paperwork burden, could be 
reduced without affecting the ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated 
adverse health effects. 
AIHA believes that EPA especially needs to reduce any complexity of the rule and include 
provisions that support more efﬁcient implementation by city water systems while reducing 
 
1 https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/testing-children-for-lead-poisoning.htm  

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 3 
lead exposure, particularly in low-income or other vulnerable populations, such as youth 
detention centers.  
For example, the proposed rule states: 
“While the LCRR used the deﬁnition of “full lead service line replacement” in subpart 
A of part 141 to specify full replacement criteria, these are substantive provisions 
that are integral to the requirements in § 141.84 (the service line inventory and 
replacement section). Including these substantive requirements in the service line 
replacement section of subpart I of part 141 instead of the deﬁnitions section of 
subpart A of part 141 should help water systems and States in implementation of 
these regulatory requirements.” 
EPA should describe the meaning more clearly so those without legal training can 
understand what this paragraph means to say regarding how these changes help water 
systems and States in the implementation of these regulatory requirements. 
Section § 141.2 contains “Deﬁnitions” 
AIHA believes the “executive summary” should provide concise operational meanings for 
“action level” and “trigger level” with how these meanings vary from the older lead in 
drinking water standard with an explanation of how these concentrations may vary. For 
example, “trigger” is found 78 times in the rule. “Action level” is found 556 times in the rule 
which carries confusion to the reader. 
 
3. Whether the proposed requirements of the rule are enforceable and promote 
compliance without the need for State or Federal enforcement action. EPA also 
solicits comment on ways the rule could be modiﬁed to better promote 
compliance. 
AIHA recommends that EPA clearly identiﬁes its enforcement policies and procedures for 
compliance with the new rule. Speciﬁcally, AIHA recommends that EPA clearly say how 
affected parties will be held accountable for lead testing and removing lead in the drinking 
water. 

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 4 
Service Line Replacement 
1. All aspects of the proposed scope of the replacement requirements, including 
the criteria used to deﬁne a full service line replacement (e.g., cutting the pipe at 
abandoned properties, replacing the entire service line) and which lead sources 
are subject to replacement under the mandatory program. EPA is seeking 
comment on whether to prohibit reconnection of any disconnected LSL or GRR 
service line. EPA is requesting comment on whether the Agency should include 
lead connectors or galvanized service lines that are or were downstream of a lead 
connector as part of mandatory replacement.  
AIHA believes that EPA should not allow lead connectors or galvanized service lines as part 
of mandatory replacement. 
 
3. Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets “control” for the purposes 
of the mandatory replacement provision (i.e., require systems to conduct full 
service line replacement in situations where the system has access to conduct the 
full replacement).  
AIHA believes that replacement provisions may vary according to engineering assessments 
of service lines. 
 
4. The proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement deadlines. EPA is 
seeking comment on whether it is feasible for systems across the nation to 
complete service line replacement in a shorter timeframe than ten years, such as 
in six, seven, or eight years. EPA is seeking comment on the rate construct 
approach, including how to calculate compliance with a given service line 
replacement deadline and average annual rate calculated across a rolling three-
year period. EPA also seeks comment on whether systems should be required to 
meet a minimum replacement rate in the ﬁrst three years after the compliance 
date to give States an opportunity to enforce replacement rate progress sooner 
than three years after the compliance date. EPA also seeks comment on the 
complexity of the rate construct. 
AIHA believes that each situation where service line replacement is required will be 
different, so ﬂexibility is recommended. The timeliest cost-effective approach is needed. 
AIHA recommends timely completion of lead-containing service line replacement across the 
nation.  
In cases of delayed remediation, persons affected by lead concentrations above the 
acceptable level should be notiﬁed in writing about the risks of lead exposure, the results of 

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 5 
lead service line replacement feasibility studies, and the time needed for complete and 
effective remediation. 
 
5. EPA is taking comment on whether States, as a condition of primacy, or EPA 
when it is directly implementing the program, should be required to set initial 
shortened deadlines by a certain timeframe, such as no later than 60 days after 
the compliance date. 
AIHA believes shortened deadlines for program implementation may prove difﬁcult and 60 
days after the compliance date is too short. 
 
6. The overall approach and basis to offer deferred service line replacement to 
systems with a high proportion of LSLs and GRR service lines in their distribution 
system relative to their total number of households served. EPA is requesting 
comment on its proposed threshold of 0.039 average annual number of 
replacements per household served, which is used to calculate the number of 
years that systems can defer. 
AIHA does not concur with the proposed threshold of 0.039 average annual number of 
replacements per household served. Each situation may differ and a single requirement for 
the determination of replacements should be based on individual assessments. 
 
7. Whether to require the State, as a condition of primacy, to approve the use of 
the deferred deadline provision where the water system qualiﬁes for it and/or 
whether to require the State, as a condition of primacy, to assess whether it would 
be feasible for a system to meet the 10-year deadline or a shorter deadline even if 
the system meets the regulatory criteria for the deferred deadline. 
AIHA does not believe that EPA should set deferred deadlines, however, remediation 
depends on the extent of the lead contamination problem and system capabilities. 
 
10. Whether systems conducting deferred service line replacement should be 
subject to any additional requirements beyond those for systems that are not 
replacing service lines in accordance with a deferred deadline. 
AIHA believes that deferred system line replacement may result in continued unacceptable 
lead exposures. EPA should implement a system where the worst lead-containing systems 
are addressed ﬁrst. 
 

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 6 
11. The requirement for systems to install a dielectric coupling when conducting a 
partial replacement of an LSL or GRR to separate the remaining LSL or GRR 
service line and the replaced service line unless the replaced service line is made 
of plastic and other recommended risk mitigation activities. 
The requirement for systems to install a dielectric coupling when conducting a partial 
replacement of an LSL or GRR to separate the remaining LSL or GRR service line is 
dependent on an engineering assessment. 
 
12. The proposed requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line 
replacement unless it is conducted in accordance with emergency or planned 
infrastructure work (excluding planned infrastructure work solely for the 
purposes of replacing lead and GRR service lines as part of a service line 
replacement program). Additionally, EPA is seeking comment on whether partial 
service line replacement should be prohibited during “planned infrastructure 
work” or with certain types of planned infrastructure work. 
AIHA does not believe EPA should limit community alternatives for system repair or 
replacement, particularly by prohibiting partial service line replacement, or with diverse 
types of planned infrastructure work. 
 
13. The ability of the market to correct for potential shortages in workers and 
materials to conduct service line replacement, as well to provide sufﬁcient 
quantities of ﬁlters to comply with the service line replacement and other 
relevant provisions in the proposal. 
AIHA believes that constraints on designers should not be placed on lead in drinking water 
remediation efforts. 
 
14. The extent to which property owner consent, if required by State or local law 
or water tariff agreement, might complicate full service line replacement and 
whether there are additional measures EPA can take to facilitate access through 
the LCRI. 
Lead service line replacement may not completely remove lead from homes. Older homes, 
especially in low-income communities where buildings and homes older than 1986 may still 
have LSLs connecting the building's plumbing system to the main water supply line. These 
building water lines, or lead solder can deteriorate and corrode, releasing lead particles into 
the drinking water. These older homes may still present a problem with lead exposure even 
after main service line replacement. 
 

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 7 
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
1. Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of the proposed sites 
should be included in Tier 3, if additional sites should be included, or if some 
should be included in a different, lower priority tier, such as Tier 4. Speciﬁcally, 
comment on whether sites served by galvanized service lines or containing 
galvanized premise plumbing that are identiﬁed as ever being downstream of an 
LSL or lead connector should be included in the same tier as other sites with a 
current lead connector (e.g., copper service line downstream of a lead connector).  
AIHA believes that the priority of system characterization should be dependent on the 
population serviced and the level of lead-containing constituents’ and the concentration of 
lead contamination found in system service lines. 
 
3. Comment on the applicability of alternate sampling protocols to assess CCT 
performance, increase customer participation, and other relevant factors. 
AIHA believes that all alternate sampling protocols should be consistent with the best 
available science and technology and conform to standard water sampling methods. 
 
5. Comment and any relevant data on the number and tiering of samples used to 
calculate the 90th percentile lead and/or copper levels for systems with LSLs for 
purposes of assessing CCT efﬁcacy. Speciﬁcally, whether samples from non-LSL 
sites that have higher lead concentrations than samples from LSL sites should be 
included and whether these higher values should replace lower values from LSL 
sites in the 90th percentile calculation. 
AIHA believes that all service lines containing lead should be identiﬁed using the best 
available technology based on engineering studies. 

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 8 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
2. In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the 
accuracy of non-lead service lines in their inventory that were categorized using 
methods other than records review or visual inspection of at least two points 
along the line. EPA is requesting comment on the number of validations required, 
the proposed 95 percent conﬁdence level approach used to develop the number of 
validations required, the criteria for which methods used to categorize non-lead 
service lines should be included in the validation pool (including whether non-
lead lines categorized based on records should be subject to validation), and the 
seven-year timeline for systems on a 10-year replacement deadline to complete 
the validation requirements. 
AIHA believes the EPA approach with the 95 percent conﬁdence level is reasonable. 
 
Lead Action and Trigger Levels 
1. EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of 0.010 mg/L, as well 
as comment and supporting data on alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, 
with regards to generally effective corrosion control treatment and identifying 
systems most at risk of elevated levels of lead in drinking water. 
AIHA supports the recommendations of the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) where 
“drinking fountains in older schools can be an important source of lead exposure. 
Unfortunately, there are no regulations for evaluating lead contamination of school drinking 
fountains in most states.” AAP recommends that State and local governments ensure that 
drinking water fountains in schools do not exceed water lead concentration exceeding 0.001 
mg/L (1 ppb). This recommended level of lead in school fountains is an order of magnitude 
below the EPA proposed new action level (0.010 mg/L).iv 
 
2. EPA is also seeking comment on the use of the action level to determine when 
additional public education is required, and the use of the same action level for 
public education as for the CCT provisions. 
AIHA believes public education is important for all service line investigations with written 
reports of all lead drinking water concentrations. At a certain concentration, persons need 
information on blood lead levels which may need to be determined for children and those 
who are or seeking to become pregnant. 

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 9 
Corrosion Control Treatment 
3. The proposed option for a water system to delay OCCT until after the system 
has replaced all of its LSLs and GRR service lines, while the system achieves at 
least 20 percent removal per year and must have no LSLs, GRR service lines, or 
lead status unknown service lines remaining at the end of the ﬁve-year period. 
AIHA believes this EPA approach is reasonable.  
 
Compliance Alternatives for a Lead Action Level Exceedance for Small 
Community Water Systems and Non-Transient, Non-Community Water 
Systems 
2. EPA is requesting comment on the ability and practicality of point-of-use 
devices to address multiple contaminants. 
As stated in a 2022 article, 
“The biggest challenge for POU ﬁlters is their underperformance for lead removal for 
some water compositions. NSF/ANSI 53 certiﬁed POU ﬁlters have been distributed in 
cities facing lead-in-water crises, such as Washington, DC. Flint, MI, Newark, NJ, 
University Park, IL, and Benton Harbor, MI. However, ﬁeld sampling and lab tests 
have found conditions in which POU ﬁlters did not work well. High concentrations of 
particulate lead (1–45 μg Pb/L) were observed in the efﬂuent of POU ﬁlters in 
Newark, NJ. The POU ﬁlter underperformance may be caused by (1) lead particles 
remaining as stable suspensions of nanoparticles and (2) low attachment efﬁciency 
to ﬁlter media because of repulsive electrostatic interactions. 
“Another challenge is the change of efﬂuent water chemistry after stagnation in the 
POU ﬁlter. A recent study found that the pH of tap water stagnated inside POU ﬁlters 
decreased by 0.1–0.3 pH units. If an under-sink ﬁlter is used, then the stagnated 
water can be more corrosive to any downstream lead-containing solder and ﬁxtures. 
Even though POU ﬁlter deployment is usually effective for controlling lead in tap 
water, its presence poses other challenges to tap water quality. The microbial 
colonization of the ﬁlter media inside the POU device can result in increases of total 
bacteria in the ﬁlter efﬂuent following stagnation periods as short as overnight, 
which will have public health implications if pathogenic bacteria are present.”v 
Other downsides include the cost of ﬁlters and the need for frequent changing (e.g., 3-5000 
L capacity for some ﬁlters). 

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 10 
Public Education 
1. The proposed determination that the public education treatment technique is 
feasible and prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent 
feasible. 
AIHA believes that public education efforts should include recommendations for blood lead 
testing as suggested by local physicians or other medical professionals. 
 
3. Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water 
systems are capable of providing consumer notices of individual tap sampling 
results within three calendar days of obtaining those results, regardless of 
whether the results exceed the lead or copper action level, or if a longer time 
frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 calendar days).  
AIHA agrees with the notiﬁcation of individual results within a reasonable time with 
recommendations on when to supply this information to an individual’s medical provider. 
 
6. Whether EPA should require systems to annually notify consumers if they are 
served by a lead connector, in addition to notiﬁcations for sites with lead, GRR, or 
lead status unknown service lines. 
AIHA supports the EPA, in addition to any drinking water lead concentration results, to 
require systems to notify consumers at least annually if they are served by a lead connector 
in addition for sites with lead, GRR, or lead status unknown service lines. 
 
8. Whether EPA should require additional public education requirements to 
further encourage swift service line replacement faster than the 10-year 
replacement deadline. For example, should water systems that have LSLs, GRR 
service lines, or unknown service lines ﬁve years after the compliance date for 
the LCRI be required to increase the frequency of the notiﬁcation of service line 
materials from annual to once every six months? 
AIHA believes it is reasonable to increase the frequency of notiﬁcation of service line 
materials depending on the circumstances. 
 

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 11 
9. EPA is seeking information and data on when a system provides translated 
materials to consumers with limited English proﬁciency, what resources are used 
to translate materials (e.g., State resources, community organizations), and what 
barriers water systems may face in providing accurate translated materials.  
AIHA believes training materials should be understandable to all community members and 
notes that translation services may be necessary. 
 
11. EPA is also requesting comment on additional ways to streamline public 
education and associated certiﬁcation requirements (e.g., combine deadlines for 
systems to conduct public education or submit information to the State).  
AIHA believes EPA funding should be provided and available and added to the rule for the 
development of local or under-served community public lead training programs, such as the 
OSHA Susan Harwood Training Grants program. 
 
Additional Requirements for Systems With Multiple Lead Action Level 
Exceedances 
1. Whether water systems should be required to take additional actions when the 
system exceeds the lead action level multiple times and if so, what actions are 
appropriate and feasible, and when these additional actions should be required 
under the LCRI. 
AIHA believes actions should be identiﬁed when blood lead monitoring is necessary and 
recommended for children or others where the lead action level is exceeded multiple times. 
Multiple action level exceedances should be deﬁned as month over month for a deﬁned 
number of months or a deﬁned number of months within a calendar year (e.g., three 
months). Other recommended actions could include the delivery of bulk potable water for 
distribution to affected populations. 
 
4. Whether EPA should require water systems to make ﬁlters certiﬁed to reduce 
lead and replacement cartridges, along with instructions for use, available to all 
consumers within 60 days of a system having multiple action level exceedances 
and whether there are any supporting or contrary data on whether the proposed 
ﬁlter requirement would be protective of public health. 
AIHA believes that water ﬁlters are not a long-term solution to multiple action level 
exceedance but only a stand-in until a long-term solution is implemented. 
 

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 12 
8. Whether, in addition to the proposed requirements, EPA should provide States 
discretion to determine appropriate action following a multiple action level 
exceedance that is tailored to meet speciﬁc system needs. 
AIHA believes that EPA should provide ﬂexibility in protecting against the harmful effects of 
lead while providing States with alternatives tailored to system needs and the extent of 
action level exceedance. 
 
Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities 
1. Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or to sample 
more frequently in schools and child care facilities. 
AIHA believes schools, youth detention facilities, and childcare facilities should take 
precedence for sampling and may need more frequent sampling depending upon an initial 
lead survey result. 
 
2. The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community water 
systems from the requirement for lead sampling in schools and child care 
facilities during the ﬁve-year period after the LCRI compliance date if the facility 
was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021 but prior to the LCRI compliance date 
and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver requirements of § 141.92(h). 
AIHA believes ﬂexibility should be allowable within the LCRI while maintaining the best lead 
sampling strategy. 
 
3. Whether or not to allow States to waive the requirements of § 141.92 for CWSs in 
schools and child care facilities that use and maintain ﬁlters certiﬁed to reduce 
lead, and if so, whether the waiver should only be allowed where schools and 
child care facilities are required by State or local law to install POU devices and 
maintain them. 
Recent research has shown limitations to POU devices. These limitations must be 
understood. However, AIHA believes in some instances ﬁlters will be effective, however not 
as a long-term solution.vi 
 
5. Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and child care facility 
sampling results publicly available, and if so, how frequently and in what 
manner. 
AIHA believes that all school and childcare facility sampling results should be publicly 
available, especially for real estate transactions. 

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 13 
Reporting and Recordkeeping 
1. EPA is requesting comment on the expansion of the inventory reporting to 
include lead connectors and non-lead service lines. 
AIHA recommends inventory reporting depending on an engineering study and best 
available practices. 
 
2. EPA has heard concern over the ability of States to review all required site 
sample plans and provide approvals in time for the ﬁrst tap monitoring period, 
and is requesting comment on whether EPA should consider a phased approach 
or alternate approach to reduce the burden on States following the rule 
compliance date. 
AIHA believes ﬂexibility should be allowable within the LCRI while maintaining the best lead 
sampling strategy. 
 
3. EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be required to maintain 
records related to distribution system and site assessments conducted by water 
systems. 
AIHA believes that records of any sampling and engineering assessment related to 
distribution systems should be maintained for an indeﬁnite period and graphically shown 
over time to clearly communicate trends. 
 
Compliance Dates 
Other Proposed Revisions to 40 CFR Part 141  
1. Consumer Conﬁdence Report 
a. EPA is requesting comment on the proposed requirement for systems to provide an 
informational statement in the CCR about the school sampling requirements with the 
information that consumers can contact the school or child care facility about any 
potential sampling results. 
AIHA agrees with the proposed requirement for systems to provide an informational 
statement in a publicly available consumer report about school lead in drinking water 
sampling results with addresses and other pertinent contact information.  
 
Conclusion 
If you have any questions about AIHA’s comments on this proposed rulemaking or other 
matters, please contact me at mames@aiha.org or (703) 846-0730. Thank you for your time 
and consideration. 

 
| aiha.org 
Recommendations on LCRI Proposed Rule | Page 14 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Mark Ames 
Chief Advocacy Ofﬁcer 
AIHA 
 
About AIHA 
AIHA is the association for scientists and professionals committed to preserving and 
ensuring occupational and environmental health and safety in the workplace and 
community. Founded in 1939, we support our members with our expertise, networks, 
comprehensive education programs, and other products and services that help them 
maintain the highest professional and competency standards. More than half of AIHA’s 
nearly 8,500 members are Certiﬁed Industrial Hygienists, and many hold other professional 
designations. AIHA serves as a resource for those employed across the public and private 
sectors as well as to the communities in which they work. For more information, please visit 
www.aiha.org. 
 
 
i Weiyi Pan and Daniel E. Giammar (2022). Point-of-Use Filters for Lead Removal from Tap Water: 
Opportunities and Challenges. Environmental Science & Technology 56 (8), 4718-4720. DOI: 
10.1021/acs.est.2c01415) retrieved from: 
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.2c01415. 
ii Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention. retrieved from 
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/default.htm 
iii Congressional Research Service. Lead and Copper Rule Revisions Report to Congress: 
https://sgp.fas.org/crs/misc/R46794.pdf 
iv 2016 “American Academy of Pediatrics Policy Statement on the Prevention of Childhood Lead 
Toxicity” retrieved from: https://www.drinkingwateralliance.org/single-post/2016/06/16/american-
academy-of-pediatrics-releases-policy-statement-on-the-prevention-of-childhood-l 
v Weiyi Pan and Daniel E. Giammar. (2022). Point-of-Use Filters for Lead Removal from Tap Water: 
Opportunities and Challenges. Environmental Science & Technology 56 (8), 4718-4720. DOI: 
10.1021/acs.est.2c01415 
vi Weiyi Pan and Daniel E. Giammar. (2022). Point-of-Use Filters for Lead Removal from Tap Water: 
Opportunities and Challenges. Environmental Science & Technology 56 (8), 4718-4720. DOI: 
10.1021/acs.est.2c01415

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0920 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Page1 
February 5, 2024 
 
Michael Goldberg 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water (Mail Code 4607M) 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest 
Washington, DC  20460 
Email: LCRI@epa.gov   
 
 
RE: 
US EPA’S Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
[Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801]  
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg: 
This American Petroleum Institute (API) and the American Chemistry Council (ACC) submits the following comments on 
EPA’s proposed rule for National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) (88 FR 
84878, December 6, 2023, EPA Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801), hereafter “Proposed Rule.”   
 
API represents nearly 600 companies involved in all aspects of the oil and natural gas industry (exploration, production, 
refining, marketing, and transportation). The ACC represents the leading companies engaged in the business of 
chemistry, which is a $639 billion enterprise and a key element of the nation’s economy. ACC participates on behalf of 
its members in administrative proceedings and in litigation arising from those proceedings.  Member companies of API 
and ACC have industrial facilities throughout the United States, of which some are also registered Non-Transient Non-
Community Public Water Systems (NTNCWSs).  Our membership is committed to the safety of our employees, including 
the protection of their health when consuming drinking water in the workplace.   
 
When assessing the requirements of the Proposed Rule and considering the competing priorities of the proposed PFAS 
regulations for Drinking Water, API and ACC have identified opportunities for EPA to provide additional flexibility and 
clarity to NTNCWSs.  Specifically, API and ACC request EPA allow the option for NTNCWSs to install point-of-use devices in 
lieu of lead service line (LSL) replacement for NTNCWSs and to provide bottled water as an alternative to pitcher filters or 
POU devices following disturbances.  API and ACC additionally request that EPA provide clear and timely guidance to all 
PWSs, including NTNCWSs on expectations associated with the final rule and the definition of Service Line.  Finally, API 
and ACC argue that EPA has underestimated the cost burden to NTNCWSs, and request that EPA consider feedback on 
assumptions that EPA has made on NTNCWSs when considering compliance alternatives. 
 
API and ACC are providing additional detail on these comments and feedback on assumptions made for NTNCWSs.  API 
and ACC encourage EPA to make appropriate revisions to the Proposed Rule, as set forth in these comments.  
 
Additional Details 

 
 
Page2 
1. EPA should allow Point-of-Use Devices in lieu of LSL replacement for NTNCWS that do not supply water to 
sensitive populations, such as schools or child-care facilities – The Proposed Rule contains Small System Flexibility 
provisions that allow NTNCWSs to leverage Point-of-Use (POU) systems in lieu of the corrosion control treatment 
requirements as described in the Proposed Rule § 141.93.  API and ACC appreciate EPA’s inclusion of Small System 
Flexibility and encourages EPA to consider additional applications for flexibility.   Specifically, API and ACC propose 
EPA allow NTNCWSs that do not supply water to sensitive populations (e.g., schools or child-care facilities) the 
option to use POU devices as an alternative to conducting Lead Service Line Inventories or Lead Service Line 
Replacements on the portion of the service line onto which the POU is installed.  This arrangement would allow 
NTNCWSs to outfit specific segments of their service lines with POU systems while replacing other lines if identified 
as LSLs.  This additional flexibility would further EPA’s objectives of the proposed rule by addressing both service 
lines and premise plumbing as potential lead sources. 
 
The Proposed Rule was issued in the same year as the proposed per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (PFAS NPDWR).  The proposed PFAS NPDWR identified Granular 
Activated Carbon (GAC) and Reverse Osmosis (RO) amongst the possible treatment technologies capable of 
removing PFAS from drinking water.  GAC and RO are also identified and certifiable via NSF / ANSI standards1 for 
the removal of lead from drinking water.  Where a single solution can achieve removal of both PFAS and Lead, 
EPA should allow NTNCWSs the flexibility to use a single solution instead of both removing LSLs and adding 
treatment for PFAS. 
 
Under the Proposed Rule, systems must make annual updates to service line inventories, tracking both changes 
in service lines and connector materials and systems would be required to identify service lines of unknown 
materials.  API and ACC propose PWSs that use POU devices be exempt from the requirement to identify the 
material of connectors and unknown service lines.  A resulting LSL inventory would thus identify either the service 
line material or the presence of a POU system.  Expanding flexibility for NTNCWS compliance with the Proposed 
Rule will maintain alignment with EPA’s goals in the Proposed Rule of protection of human health and 
transparency to the NTNCWS water consumers. 
 
2. EPA should add supplying bottled water and sample validation as an option for risk mitigation after 
disturbances for NTNCWSs – EPA is maintaining the Lead and Copper Rule Revision (LCRR) requirement that water 
systems provide pitcher filters or point-of-use devices for six months following partial and full LSL replacement, 
replacement of a lead connector, and other scenarios.  At NTNCWSs that serve at workplace, employers may find 
it feasible to supply employees with bottled water as an alternative to pitcher filters or POU devices.  Some 
workplace environments are staged with water coolers that contain large (e.g., 5 gallon) bottles of water, in which 
case allowing continued use of that water supply would prevent waste of pitcher filters that would not be used. 
API and ACC request that the flexibility to use bottled water be added for NTNCWSs in addition to the options of 
providing pitcher filters or POU devices.   
 
EPA specified a six month period of time to provide pitcher filters or POU devices on the basis of a 2008 study2, 
which referenced that one site in the study suggested the potential for lead accumulated in the system to be 
 
1 The Proposed Rule’s provisions for use of a POU device specify that the device must be independently certified by a third party to 
meet the American National Standards Institute standard applicable to the specific type of POU unit to reduce lead in drinking water.  
EPAs’ Consumer Tool for Identifying Point of Use (POU) Drinking Water Filters Certified to Reduce Lead specifies NSF/ANSI Standard 
53. 
2 Sandvig, A., Kwan, P., Kirmeyer, G., Maynard, B., Mast, D., Trussell, R.R., Trussel, S., Cantor, A., and Prescott, A. (2008). Contribution 
of service line and plumbing fixtures to lead and copper rule compliance issue. AWWA Research Foundation, 523. 

 
 
Page3 
released for months following disturbance, while most detected releases in systems took place in the first several 
days following LSL replacement.  The reason why one system was impacted for a lengthy period was not specified 
in the preamble.  The source document summarized elevated lead concentrations following LSL replacement as 
occurring in many cases for the first three days after replacement.  NTNCWSs at industrial facilities have the ability 
to control flushing of service lines and premise plumbing within buildings as well as the ability to conduct their 
own sampling following disturbances.   As such, industrial facilities are capable of monitoring taps.  API and ACC 
propose EPA allow NTNCWSs the flexibility to sample taps after a minimum of 96 hours following a disturbance 
and eliminate the use of mitigations upon receipt of analytical results confirming that lead concentrations are 
below the lead action level.    
 
3. Clear and timely guidance for industrial facility NTNCWSs is requested – EPA has concluded “the overwhelming 
majority of NTNCWSs that do have LSLs and Galvanized Requiring Replacement (GRR) service lines are expected 
to have relatively few of these service lines requiring replacement over the proposed 10-year deadline” (88 FR 
84912).  EPA’s position is based upon several assumptions, namely: 
• 
Responses from 147 NTNCWSs to the 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey Assessment3  that 
indicated lead service lines are rarely used are representative of the 17,418 NTNCWSs in SWDIS, 
• 
Responses from three states that estimated the number of LSLs at NTNCWSs in 20174 are accurate and 
representative across the country, and 
• 
NTNCWSs have no stand-alone lead connectors and no GRR service lines since NTNCWSs are unlikely to 
replace only the upstream portion of an LSL and leave a galvanized service line in place, because they own 
the entire service, and galvanized lines have a high failure rate given age and disturbance like that 
produced by removing a section of LSL.5  
 
The assumption that few NTNCWSs have lead service lines cannot be confirmed until the October 2024 deadline 
to submit Lead Service Lines inventories.  Furthermore, piping makeup and configuration of NTNCWSs at industrial 
facilities could be influenced by the specific sector in which piping is used.  For example, the newest refinery with 
significant downstream capacity was built in 19776, prior to the 1986 amendment to the Safe Drinking Water Act 
to prohibit the use of pipes, solder, or flux that was not “lead free” in public water systems.    
 
Conducting Lead Service Line Inventories is a complex undertaking.  NTNCWSs at industrial sites that attempt to 
leverage guidance documents that are developed for Community Water Systems are left to interpret guidance 
written for systems that provide water to homes.   EPA Issued "Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service 
Line Inventory" in August 2022, and guidance tailored for small CWSs and NTNCWSs was not issued until June of 
2023.  While API and ACC membership appreciates that EPA developed guidance tailored for smaller systems, the 
guidance was issued after LSL inventory development was underway.  Accordingly, API and ACC request that EPA 
provide timely and clear guidance for NTNCWS with examples applicable to NTNCWSs at Industrial facilities.  
 
 
3 88 FR 84912: Regarding NTNCWSs, Needs Survey responses from 147 NTNCWSs showed LSLs are rarely used in these systems since 
132 of them did not report any lead, GRR, or unknown service lines. 
4 Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvement, 2023. In August 2017, EPA disseminated a questionnaire 
to nine states asking for the estimated number or percentage of NTNCWSs with one or more LSLs and the total number of LSLs in 
NTNCWSs.  EPA received responses from seven states.  Four states did not provide any estimate.  The remaining three states 
provided estimates ranging from five to zero percent.  Based upon this data, EPA assumed 2.5% of NTNCWSs would have LSLs. 
5 Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvement, 2023 
6 US Energy Information Administration https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=29&t=6, accessed January 22, 2024 

 
 
Page4 
Clarity to the definition of Service Line is requested – EPA has added a definition of “Service Line” to the Proposed 
Rule, which states “Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe which 
connects the water main to the building inlet. Where a building is not present, the service line connects the water 
main to the outlet."  NTNCWSs at industrial facilities have service lines that do not enter buildings and are used 
for purposes other than drinking or cooking.  Specifically, regulations issued by the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) require potable water be used in eye wash station and safety showers; such safety devices 
can be located external or internal to buildings.   
 
EPA has the opportunity to add clarity and reduce ambiguity by specifying whether "outlet" in the definition is 
intended to mean all possible water uses or is specific to uses associated with cooking and drinking.  In § 141.154 
of the Proposed Rule, EPA provides informational statements regarding lead in drinking water, which includes the 
following language: "Before using tap water for drinking, cooking, or making baby formula, flush your pipes for 
several minutes. You can do this by running your tap, taking a shower, doing laundry or a load of dishes." API and 
ACC note EPA provides taking a shower as opposed to running the shower as an example of a means to flush lines 
and reduce exposure to lead in water used for drinking, cooking, or making baby formula.   Safety showers and 
eye washes in industrial facilities are not intended for consumption.   
 
API and ACC request EPA clarify the definition of "Service Line" as follows: “Service line, for the purpose of subpart 
I of this part only, means a portion of pipe that connects the water main to the building inlet. Where a building is 
not present, the service line connects the water main to an outlet used for cooking or drinking.".  
 
4. EPA’s assumptions for Cost Burden to NTNCWSs is an underestimate – EPA’s Economic Analysis of the Proposed 
Rule has assumed that NTNCWSs will not incur burdensome to costs to update their inventories since they own 
their own service lines and are not expected to have any unknowns.  This assumption is not accurate.  NTNCWSs 
at industrial facilities that have been developing their inventories have incurred costs to field-identify service lines 
in advance of the October 16, 2024 submission deadline.  Unknown service lines can occur through a variety of 
reasons including age of a facility and loss of drawings. Furthermore, NTNCWSs are unlikely to have customer 
meters, thus unlikely to have water meter readings or replacements as an opportunity to collect service line data.  
Further, EPA has assumed NTNCWSs are able to rely on drawings as a means to identify connectors and service 
line materials of construction; however, due to the age of some facilities, this is not consistently applicable to 
NTNCWSs. 
 
Cost will be a significant challenge in replacing all lead service lines, especially when considered alongside 
competing priorities such as PFAS removal. The average cost to fully replace a single lead service line is estimated 
to be between $6,507 and $8,519 per the Proposed Rule’s Economic Analysis; however, for NTNCWSs at Industrial 
facilities, these costs are likely higher due to line length as well as maintenance and safety practices required 
within industrial facilities and the possibility that piping may run adjacent to or through process units. While the 
federal Bipartisan Infrastructure Act has allocated funding for lead service line replacement, this funding will not 
be available to industrial facilities.  Similarly, the NTNCWSs at commercial facilities are not eligible for other 
funding mechanisms described in Section IV.G of the Proposed Rule’s preamble.  EPA should take these realities 
for NTNCWSs when considering the additional small system flexibilities proposed by API and ACC.  
 
5. Sample Tiering based on Premise Plumbing presents undue burden to Public Water Systems – The Proposed 
Rule maintains the tiering structure established by the original Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) and updated by the 
LCRR. In the Proposed Rule, EPA is proposing to adjust the definition for the highest priority tiers (Tier 1 and Tier 
2) to include sites with premise plumbing made of lead.  EPA specifies that by premise plumbing made of lead, 

 
 
Page5 
EPA means premise plumbing that consists of pure lead pipes, like the pipes used for LSLs, rather than pipes 
made from metal alloys which may contain lead content.  EPA further proposes galvanized premise plumbing to 
be an element of Tier 3. 
 
EPA has not requested that Lead Inventories include premise plumbing material construction.  Identifying the 
premise plumbing material of construction includes additional time and cost that EPA has not considered in the 
Economic Analysis.  EPA should not assume that NTNCWSs are likely to have previous knowledge of the premise 
plumbing present in buildings that are in their control.  
 
Conclusions:  
 
API and ACC appreciate the opportunity to file comments in this letter concerning the Proposed Rule.   EPA has 
requested feedback as to whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the regulatory 
approach used to address lead in drinking water consistent with the statutory standard for a treatment technique rule 
in section 1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. API and ACC propose the LCRI could be simplified and burden could be reduced 
without affecting the ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects by allowing NTNCWSs 
additional flexibility as described within these comments. 
 
Please contact me at (202) 682-8399, claff@api.org, when you wish to discuss these comments or if you would like any 
additional information concerning the issues raised in these comments.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Roger E. Claff  
 
 
 
 
 
Carly Zaccaria 
Senior Policy Advisor  
 
 
 
 
Environment Coordinator 
American Petroleum Institute  
 
 
 
American Chemistry Council

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0851 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
INDIANA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT 
We Protect Hoosiers and Our Environment. 
 
100 N. Senate Avenue  •  Indianapolis, IN 46204 
 
 
(800) 451-6027  •  (317) 232-8603  •  www.idem.IN.gov 
 
 
 
Eric J. Holcomb                      
Brian C. Rockensuess
 
 
Governor 
Commissioner
 
 
                                       
 
Visit on.IN.gov/survey or scan the QR code to provide feedback. 
 
We appreciate your input! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
Ms. Radhika Fox 
Assistant Administrator, Office of Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Mail Code:  28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Via:  http://www.regulations.gov 
 
Re:  National Primary Drinking Water Regulations:  Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
Docket #ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Dear Assistant Administrator Fox: 
 
The Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) values the opportunity to provide 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) with comments on the proposed national 
rulemaking “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations:  Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements” (Federal Register Number 2023-84878 posted December 6, 2023) (hereinafter 
“Proposed Rule”).  IDEM is responsible for the daily implementation of the Safe Drinking Water 
Act (SDWA) programs in Indiana, including the federal Lead and Copper Regulations as they apply 
to the public water systems in the state of Indiana.  IDEM’s has carefully reviewed the Proposed 
Rule and provides the following comments: 
 
1. IDEM agrees with removal of the trigger level, as this will allow for a more streamlined rule 
that will be much easier to communicate to the regulated public water systems and the 
general public.  It will also make it easier to implement the rule. 
2. IDEM agrees with the changing “Find and Fix” to “Distribution System and Site 
Assessment”.  This terminology no longer implies that a water system is responsible for 
replacing plumbing inside a customer’s home. 
3. IDEM disagrees with setting a timeframe, as a condition of primacy, for setting initial 
shortened deadlines in the rule, especially if that deadline is as short as sixty (60) days after 
the compliance date while there are multiple decisions needing to be made and documented 
in a short period of time.  It will be difficult to determine if it is “feasible” for a system to 
replace lead service lines (LSLs) at a faster rate, especially when considering the availability 
of both construction crews and replacement materials when every system with lead service 
lines will be replacing their lines at the same time.  The availability of human and physical 
resources should not be a state primacy issue. 
4. IDEM recommends that EPA allow systems to do partial replacements during planned 
infrastructure work when they are unable to get cooperation from the homeowner. 

 
 
 
 
Coordinating service line replacements with main line replacements and transportation 
projects (for re-paving), etc. is already challenging with the new ten-year timeline for LSL 
replacements. Prohibiting partial replacements in these cases will only reduce the ability for 
this coordination to occur and increase costs. Additionally, there are many other 
requirements that ensure any lead exposure from partially replaced service lines will be 
mitigated (e.g., the addition of dielectric couplings and additional flushing and risk 
mitigation requirements; public communication annually about presence of LSL/galvanized 
line requiring replacement (GRR)/unknowns; notification after change of ownership, etc.).   
5. IDEM recommends allowing the state to have full discretion to extend the ten-year lead 
service line replacement deadline for any system that provides reasonable justification and 
explains why the ten-year deadline needs to be extended. There could be a number of 
legitimate reasons, such as: supply chain issues, budget constraints due to increased costs, 
homeowners not responding in a timely manner, etc. The state should be responsible for 
reviewing any extension requests made by public water systems and have the authority to 
decide if the extension can be granted.  
6. The states and public water systems will need additional guidance from EPA as to which 
types of records may be acceptable to use to list service lines as non-lead in the baseline 
inventory without requiring additional validation. 
7. IDEM would prefer to see a single compliance number at the 90th percentile (the action level 
of 10 micrograms per liter) rather than having some requirements be triggered at the action 
level and others being triggered at the Practical Quantitation Limit (PQL of 5 micrograms 
per liter). 
8. For many small public water systems, especially in areas of the country, like Indiana, with 
high alkalinity levels in source water, the only available corrosion control treatment option 
will be feeding a phosphate inhibitor.  We have many analogous systems with similar water 
quality and do not believe that every system with LSLs and an action level exceedance will 
benefit from doing a pipe-loop study, nor will they have the funding available (especially 
while also removing lead service lines) to complete this complex study without having to 
wait for a grant and/or loan funding period to determine if they can afford to complete the 
study.  For the majority of these small and medium-sized systems in Indiana, the pipe loop 
study would tell them the same thing as the current corrosion control guidance manual does 
– feed an orthophosphate-based corrosion inhibitor.  Completing and reviewing the pipe-
loop studies will create additional burdens on the resources of public water systems and 
IDEM staff. 
9. Concerning the small system flexibilities written into the proposed LCRI, IDEM 
recommends that the ability to use point of use (POU) filters should be limited to small 
systems that have ownership or control of the distribution system and premise plumbing 
within their public water system.  These systems will be able to ensure access to the POU 
devices to maintain and replace as necessary and to conduct any testing required to ensure 
they are operating properly. 
10. IDEM does not agree that it is necessary to provide translation support into any and every 
language spoken in the state as a condition of primacy for this rule.  EPA should provide 
these translations either as part of a guidance document or via a link on their website. 
11. IDEM recommends EPA change the proposed provision to allow states to issue waivers to 
community water systems from the requirement for lead sampling in schools and childcare 
facilities during the five-year period after the LCRI compliance date if the facility was 
sampled for lead after January 1, 2021. We suggest changing the sampling date to January 1, 
2014, which coincides with the Reduction of Lead in Drinking Water Act and would include 
sampling efforts that resulted from funding provided by America’s Water Infrastructure Act 
of 2018 and the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act.  

 
 
 
 
 
In addition, IDEM is in general agreeance with the comments being submitted by the Association of 
State Drinking Water Administrators (ASDWA) and the Environmental Council of States (ECOS). 
 
IDEM provides this feedback to help U.S. EPA develop further clarity in the rule itself or in 
complementary guidance, as appropriate.  If you have any questions about our comments, please 
contact our Chemical & Surface Water Compliance Section Chief, Stacy Jones at 317-234-7454 or 
sjones@idem.IN.gov.  
 
IDEM thanks you for this opportunity to comment on this important rulemaking.  We encourage 
continued collaboration with the states as the rule becomes final and implementation begins. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Martha Clark Mettler 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Commissioner 
 
 
 
 
 
Office of Water Quality

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1344 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements 
 December 5, 2023 - Pages 84,878 – 85,090 
 
 
CITY OF CEDAR RAPIDS WATER DEPARTMENT  
Roy Hesemann, UƟliƟes Director 

 
 
 
 
 
Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
December 5, 2023 
Pages 84,878 – 85,090 
INTRODUCTION 
The City of Cedar Rapids Water Division (CRWD) is comprised of seven (7) Professional Engineers, four (4) Water Quality 
professionals (one plant manager, one lab manager, one water quality specialist, and one water quality operaƟons 
specialist), one (1) Environmental Manager, and one Water UƟliƟes Division Manager. Our Water Department is 
idenƟﬁed by the American Water Works AssociaƟon (AWWA) and the Environmental ProtecƟon Agency (EPA) as a large 
system (a system serving a populaƟon of 100,000 or more).  
This well-educated and experienced group has come together to collaboraƟvely comment on the Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements on behalf of the City of Cedar Rapids. It is important to note that the City of Cedar Rapids understand the 
AWWA will also be submiƫng comments on these draŌ rules; we enthusiasƟcally support and endorse all comments 
submited by AWWA.  
While we do support the eﬀort to remove lead service lines and improve overall water quality and health where feasible, 
the CRWD has a heavily vested interested in the proposed rule due to the implicated impact it will have on not only our 
owned service lines, but the private service lines of our customers.  
BACKGROUND 
CRWD’s primary concerns and recommendaƟons on the following issues within the proposed regulatory rule are listed 
below: 
1. Time, resources, and ownership. 
RECOMMENDATION: We believe the best and most eﬃcient use of systems’ limited Ɵme and resources would 
be to only require systems to comply on property owned by the system. 
2. Proposed declaraƟon that there is no safe level of lead in drinking water. 
RECOMMENDATION: Reword to “Lead in drinking water is primarily from materials used in plumbing 
components associated with service lines and home plumbing. If present, lead can cause serious health 
problems, especially for pregnant women and young children. To reduce risk, it is important to remove any lead 
components. Over the next several years, water systems will be focusing on removing lead service lines from the 
system. Owners can also lessen risk by replacing any lead or downstream galvanized plumbing on or in their 
property as well as any ﬁxtures that may contain lead.” 
 
 

 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS 
In the following pages, you will ﬁnd supporƟng documentaƟon for the recommendaƟons listed above, as well as more 
detailed responses to the proposed regulatory rule’s requests for comments. 
General Matters 
EPA requests comment on the following items pertaining to the rule as a whole. 
The proposed rule has numerous noƟﬁcaƟon requirements under various scenarios. These include:  
• 
3 days to deliver sample results to individuals, unless given over the phone, and then results need to be 
delivered by mail within 30 days.  
• 
30 days to deliver sample results to a school or childcare facility.   
• 
30 days to submit sampling results from schools to State and health agencies.  
• 
30 days for Tier 2 public noƟﬁcaƟon following a treatment technique violaƟon.  
• 
30 days to collect a follow up sample at any locaƟon that exceeds lead acƟon level.  
• 
60 days to make tap monitoring results publicly available.  
• 
60 days to oﬀer to inspect service line within 60 days of customer noƟﬁcaƟon.  
• 
60 days to deliver public educaƟon materials.  
• 
And more.  
By simplifying the number of diﬀerent reporƟng Ɵmelines for various scenarios, the EPA has an opportunity to greatly 
reduce the rule’s complexity. In turn, this will also reduce potenƟal for non-compliance. Systems would be burdened 
with creaƟng or ﬁnding a program or process that would track all various reporƟng Ɵmelines and deadlines following an 
acƟon. 
 
Complexity of the rule regarding the distribution of pitcher ﬁlters (ﬁrst seen on page 8,4886 Col. 2 Par. 4): DistribuƟon of 
pitcher ﬁlters and cartridges to residents represents a signiﬁcant cost and logisƟcal challenge for uƟliƟes. The decision 
to require a pitcher ﬁlter should be based on data that supports the likelihood that a parƟcular acƟon will result in a 
spike in lead levels. Is there data to support that a meter exchange will elevate lead levels and therefore necessitate a 
pitcher ﬁlter?  
Procuring and distribuƟng pitcher ﬁlters to residents as required by secƟon (g) (Notiﬁcation due to a disturbance to a 
service line that is known to or may potentially contain lead) will create substanƟal paperwork and personnel 
complexity for tracking distribuƟon and verifying receipts of pitcher ﬁlters to all impacted residents. UƟliƟes will again 
be forced to bear the ﬁnancial and logisƟcal burden of adopƟng a program or process to guarantee and/or verify a 
pitcher ﬁlter reaches each intended resident.  
If a uƟlity is able to procure a reliable program or process, an unintended risk of providing pitcher ﬁlters to consumers 
relies heavily on the consumer to also then properly care for, clean, and maintain the ﬁlter and cartridges. As stated in 
Pg. 8,5035 Col. 2 Par. 4 
2. Whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the regulatory approach used to 
address lead in drinking water consistent with the statutory standard for a treatment technique rule in section 
1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. Speciﬁcally, EPA requests comments on ways that the proposed LCRI could be simpliﬁed 
and ways that burden, including paperwork burden, could be reduced without aﬀecting the ability of the rule to 
prevent known or anticipated adverse health eﬀects. 

 
 
 
 
the NSF Consumer Guide to InternaƟonal CerƟﬁed Lead FiltraƟon Devices for ReducƟon of Lead in Drinking Water, “To 
ensure the ﬁlter conƟnues to reduce contaminants, replace it when it has reached the manufacturer's recommended 
ﬁlter capacity.1” Upon further research, many of these ﬁlters need to be replaced every one to six months. To achieve a 
six-month protecƟon period, consumers would need to replace the ﬁlter cartridges at least once and as many as 5 
Ɵmes, depending on the product selected for feasible procurement. Failure to replace the cartridge or clean the ﬁlter 
may falsely convey the sense of protecƟon; in reality, without proper maintenance and replacement, water quality is 
diminished, and potenƟally poses a new health risk to consumers: bioﬁlm or algal contaminaƟon of the ﬁlter 
cartridge.  
 
The LCRI proposal includes requirements for systems that intend to conduct partial replacements in coordination with 
planned infrastructure work. One of which is that systems are required to “oﬀer to replace” the customer’s portion of the 
service line (ﬁrst seen on page 8,4918 Col. 1 Par. 1). It is not clear what “oﬀer to replace” means, if the uƟlity is not 
required to pay for the remaining porƟon of the service line, or if the uƟlity does not have access to a porƟon of the 
service line.  
In our judgement, the sheer complexity of this proposed rule will make it very diﬃcult for uƟliƟes to fully comply and 
make it problemaƟc for regulatory agencies to track and enforce the applicable provisions. We recommend this 
porƟon of the proposed rule be limited to only the porƟon of system that the uƟlity owns. 
 
Service Line Replacement 
EPA is seeking comment on several aspects of the proposed service line replacement requirements. 
The proposed rule includes the following language:  
How does EPA deﬁne “unable to pay”? 
The inability to pay needs to include several factors, many of which are included in the EPA’s Individual Ability to Pay 
Plus (INDIPAY+) Guide. However, while this approach may work well for recurring bill cycles, it is likely to work less 
well for one-Ɵme, large expenditures like the replacement of a private service line. CRWD esƟmates that the 
replacement of a private service line has the potenƟal to cost anywhere between $5,000 and $10,000 or more. 
 
1 (NSF) 
Pg. 8,5035 Col. 2 Par. 5 
3. Whether the proposed requirements of the rule are enforceable and promote compliance without the need for 
State or Federal enforcement action. EPA also solicits comments on ways the rule could be modiﬁed to better 
promote compliance.  
Pg. 8,5064 Col. 1 Par. 9 
(vi) A funding strategy for conducting service line replacement. Where the water system intends to charge 
customers for the cost to replace all or a portion of the service line because it is authorized or required to do so 
under State or local law or water tariﬀ agreement, the funding strategy must include a description of whether 
and how the water system intends to assist customers who are unable to pay to replace the portion of the 
service line they own; 

 
 
 
 
 
It takes a considerable amount of staﬀ Ɵme and logisƟcal coordinaƟon to develop mailing lists and to send out leters, as 
most contacts need to be manually culƟvated. Repeat atempts to contact customers have historically not improved the 
response rate.  
What is considered a valid atempt to reach a customer? Are calls considered to be a valid atempt, and, if so, does 
EPA expect that we document and track these calls?  
 
EPA has stated the vast majority of water systems will be required to comply with the 10-year replacement deadline for 
all lead services. However, EPA has also indicated that systems who do not own the full service line (from main to meter) 
would not be classiﬁed as having “control” of the full service line, and therefore would not be subject to the 10-year 
replacement period if funding cannot be secured for the private side replacement, or the customer does not provide 
consent for the replacement of the private side. A small minority of water systems own the enƟre service line (from 
main to meter). How does EPA expect water uƟliƟes not owning the full service line to abide by the 10-year 
replacement requirement?  
Ownership of service lines varies with each system. The system can only legally modify what it owns. Where colder 
climates require meters to be installed inside the home, the curb stop within the public ROW funcƟons in the same 
aspect as the meter does for systems in warmer climates where the meter is at the curb in the public ROW. As previously 
stated, we strongly recommend requiring systems to maintain and improve only what they own and separate the 
burden of improvement and replacement of private side service lines to a diﬀerent program. It is agreeable that if system 
owned work poses an increased risk to consumer health, then ﬁlters can be provided along with educaƟon materials to 
the consumer. 
 
Pg. 8,9423 Col. 1 Par. 1 
2. …whether a reasonable eﬀort to obtain property owner consent should be more than four times (e.g., ﬁve, six, 
or seven times).  
Pg. 8,5035 Col. 3 Par. 2 
3. Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets “control” for the purposes of the mandatory replacement 
provision (i.e., require systems to conduct full-service line replacement in situations where the system has access 
to conduct the full replacement). 
Pg. 8,5035 Col. 3 Par. 3 
4. The proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement deadlines. EPA is seeking comment on whether it is 
feasible for systems across the nation to complete service line replacement in a shorter timeframe than ten years, 
such as in six, seven, or eight years. EPA is seeking comment on the rate construct approach, including how to 
calculate compliance with a given service line replacement deadline and average annual rate calculated across a 
rolling three-year period. EPA also seeks comment on whether systems should be required to meet a minimum 
replacement rate in the ﬁrst three years after the compliance date to give States an opportunity to enforce 
replacement rate progress sooner than three years after the compliance date. EPA also seeks comment on the 
complexity of the rate construct. 

 
 
 
 
We do not believe it is feasible for systems to replace all lead and GRR service lines within ten years for the following 
reasons: 
A. UƟliƟes do not have suﬃcient funding available to fully replace all lead service lines. Only a fracƟon of the BIL 
funding for LSL replacements is forgivable; most funding through the State Revolving Fund (SRF) is available in the 
form of a loan, which uƟliƟes will need to ﬁnd money in the already Ɵght budget to pay for over Ɵme. Meanwhile, 
uƟliƟes are also struggling to ﬁnance repairs and replacements necessary for deterioraƟng infrastructure due to 
falling revenues. If uƟliƟes are forced to raise rates to pay for systemwide LSL replacements, this will harm low-
income residents who may already struggle to aﬀord uƟlity payments.  
B. The current 15 billion in BiparƟsan Infrastructure Law (BIL) funding is currently only guaranteed for 5 years.  
C. Customers in need of LSL replacement do not have the discreƟonary funding available to bear the cost of their 
privately owned porƟon. This is especially true of lower income residents, which equates to approximately 11% 
or 341,600 residents in the state of Iowa.  
D. Many uƟliƟes do not fully own the service line from main to water meter, and therefore do not have legal 
ownership or access over the full service line.  
E. Many customers are not willing to grant access to the property even if full replacement of a service line is made 
available to them at no cost. This is based on results from a nearby pilot project, Lead ReducƟon Pilot Program by 
Des Moines Water Works where only 35% of consumers have capitalized on the ongoing program oﬀerings2. 
F. Required service line replacements will lead to a sharp spike in prices for material(s) and labor, which will 
further exacerbate the diﬃculty of execuƟng service line replacement projects. 
G. NaƟonwide demand for service line replacement materials creates strain on the supply chain, leading to 
potenƟal for widespread shortages and lack of availability. 
 
 
What does dielectric coupling include, does a rubber gasket count towards this? What speciﬁc standards would it need 
to meet?  
 
This would eﬀecƟvely discourage uƟliƟes who do not have a way of achieving full-service line replacements from 
replacing water mains. Water main breaks are also a signiﬁcant health risk for consumers, as they carry a risk of 
 
2 Des Moines Water Works representaƟve, Iowa AssociaƟon of Water AuthoriƟes Conference 2024 
Pg. 8,5036 Col. 1 Par. 4 
11. The requirement for systems to install a dielectric coupling when conducting a partial replacement of an LSL 
or GRR to separate the remaining LSL or GRR service line and the replaced service line unless the replaced service 
line is made of plastic and other recommended risk mitigation activities.  
Pg. 8,5036 Col. 1 Par. 5 
12. The proposed requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line replacement unless it is conducted in 
accordance with emergency or planned infrastructure work (excluding planned infrastructure work solely for the 
purposes of replacing lead and GRR service lines as part of a service line replacement program). Additionally, EPA 
is seeking comment on whether partial service line replacement should be prohibited during “planned 
infrastructure work” or with certain types of planned infrastructure work.  

 
 
 
 
contaminaƟon during depressurizaƟon events. We recommend EPA avoid rulemaking that would disincenƟvize 
needed infrastructure work.  
Progress is sƟll being made even if the customer does not want to replace the privately owned porƟon of the service 
line. If a ﬁlter is provided for six months following the parƟal replacement and corrosion control is in place, then the 
system has done what they can do to protect public health. 
 
We believe the market will be slow to correct for potenƟal shortages in workers and materials and prices of work and 
materials will be driven up by supply and demand, placing burden on the systems and customers. This is a 
compounding factor that speaks to why the ten-year replacement requirement is not realisƟc. We are already observing 
shortages in available contractors and material prices to perform infrastructure work.  
In systems where ownership of the service line is from the main to the curb stop, there is no mechanism to force the 
replacement of the privately owned side of a service line; similar to the concept that there is no legal way to force the 
replacement of a home’s kitchen faucet. For systems that we own only a porƟon of the service line with no mechanism 
to force replacement of the privately owned porƟon, we recommend opening funding streams directly to 
homeowners to replace the private side of their service line, and then require the replacement of the uƟlity-owned 
side of a service line within a certain period of Ɵme following the replacement of the private side of a service line. This 
will allow property owners to drive the replacement process, and equitably support disadvantaged communiƟes by 
providing direct funding assistance. 
 
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
EPA is seeking comments on several proposed revisions to compliance tap sampling for lead and copper. 
This would have to be answered with reﬁned data idenƟfying the measurable diﬀerence in release of lead from a lead 
connector as opposed to a 3-foot LSL. Systems oŌen do not have data on private plumbing components, so decisions 
reliant on known premise plumbing components are problemaƟc without accurate and Ɵme-consuming and voluntary 
data collecƟon. Premise condiƟons are beyond the legal scope of water systems. 
Pg. 8,5036 Col. 1 Par. 6 
13. The ability of the market to correct for potential shortages in workers and materials to conduct service line 
replacement, as well to provide suﬃcient quantities of ﬁlters to comply with the service line replacement and 
other relevant provisions in the proposal. 
Pg. 8,5036 Col. 1 Par. 7 
14. The extent to which property owner consent, if required by State or local law or water tariﬀ agreement, might 
complicate full service line replacement and whether there are additional measures EPA can take to facilitate 
access through the LCRI. 
Pg. 8,5036 Col. 1 Par. 9 
1. Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of the proposed sites should be included in Tier 3, if 
additional sites should be included, or if some should be included in a diﬀerent, lower priority tier, such as Tier 4. 
Speciﬁcally, comment on whether sites served by galvanized service lines or containing galvanized premise 
plumbing that are identiﬁed as ever being downstream of an LSL or lead connector should be included in the 
same tier as other sites with a current lead connector (e.g., copper service line downstream of a lead connector).  

 
 
 
 
 
According to the proposal, sampling must be performed at as many LSL sites (Tier 1 and 2) as possible, which would 
likely exclude or lessen this occurrence.  However, history has shown for many systems that occurrence of high lead 
levels in the ﬁrst Liter occurs at sites serviced by lead soldered copper service line material. This accounts for the 
majority of lead detecƟons and acƟon level exceedances that occur in the 90th percenƟle calculaƟon. Upon resampling 
the same locaƟon and tap, the detecƟon is not over the acƟon limit. When other neighboring premises are tested, the 
results are also below the acƟon limit, thus showing it to be a premise issue and not a system issue. The condiƟon of 
the ﬁxture sampled does play a role in results. Does the proposed rule allow for ﬂexibility to assess the condiƟon of a 
ﬁxture when the result is obtained? For example, if it is clear that the ﬁxture is old or in a corroded state and sample 
results indicate elevated lead, can this result be atributed to the corroded state of the ﬁxture? This would not be a 
reasonable assessment of Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) or of system water quality. 
Is there ﬂexibility to exclude this datapoint in the 90th percenƟle if found to be ﬁxture related? 
AddiƟonal relevant quesƟons: It was menƟoned that the sampling pool will reset to the standard six-month intervals, 
but if a system is currently on reduced monitoring, does the sample number reset? Currently, systems are required 
to collect 50 samples triennially, will this reset to 100 samples every six months until meeting new reduced 
monitoring criteria? 
 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
What determines the 95% conﬁdence – are a certain number of service lines from the pool allowed to deviate from 
the classiﬁcaƟon and sƟll remain within the 95% conﬁdence? Does the category of unknown but not lead (UX) fall into 
the overall category of “unknowns” which require categorizaƟon and/or addiƟonal invesƟgaƟon?  
Example: If a city or municipality has an ordinance that prohibited the installaƟon of lead service lines prior to 
the federal lead ban, those services that do not have a posiƟve conﬁrmaƟon of material would be categorized as 
“unknown but not lead”. 
 
Pg. 8,5036 Col. 2 Par. 5 
5. Comment and any relevant data on the number and tiering of samples used to calculate the 90th percentile 
lead and/or copper levels for systems with LSLs for purposes of assessing CCT eﬃcacy. Speciﬁcally, whether 
samples from non-LSL sites that have higher lead concentrations than samples from LSL sites should be included 
and whether these higher values should replace lower values from LSL sites in the 90th percentile calculation.  
Pg. 8,5036 Col. 2 Par. 9 
2. In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of non-lead service lines in 
their inventory that were categorized using methods other than records review or visual inspection of at least two 
points along the line. EPA is requesting comment on the number of validations required, the proposed 95 percent 
conﬁdence level approach used to develop the number of validations required, the criteria for which methods 
used to categorize non-lead service lines should be included in the validation pool (including whether non-lead 
lines categorized based on records should be subject to validation), and the seven-year timeline for systems on a 
10-year replacement deadline to complete the validation requirements. 

 
 
 
 
Other QuesƟons: 
1. The proposed rule would require validation to be performed using visual inspection on “at least two points on the 
line”. How is this deﬁned? Can a visual inspecƟon where the service line enters the home count toward 
validaƟon? Will one visual validaƟon suﬃce on each side of the curb stop or is it two validaƟon points on each 
side of the curb stop? 
2. The proposed rule includes a requirement to inspect the material of a service line if a customer notiﬁes the utility 
of an incorrect categorization in the inventory. Does this requirement to inspect only apply to the exposed 
porƟon of the service line (such as the porƟon that enters the building), or is this a requirement to pothole a 
buried service line? Would the visual inspecƟon on “at least two points on the line” be applicable? 
 
Lead Action and Trigger Levels 
EPA’s posiƟon appears to be that there is no safe level of lead. What is the raƟonale for changing the acƟon level from 
15 ppb to 10 ppb or 5 ppb?  
We recommend seƫng a health-based standard. The dual-posiƟon that there is no safe level, yet there is an allowable 
level is confusing and will has the potenƟal to add to distrust of government municipaliƟes by the general public.  
 
Corrosion Control Treatment 
Would addiƟonal sampling requirements be acceptable or adequate ﬁrst (instead of modiﬁcaƟons to exisƟng OCCT) to 
verify that a problem with the exisƟng OpƟmized Corrosion Control Treatment (OCCT) actually exists? 
 
Public Education 
Pg. 8,5036 Col. 3 Par. 4 
1. EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of 0.010 mg/L, as well as comment and supporting 
data on alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, with regards to generally eﬀective corrosion control 
treatment and identifying systems most at risk of elevated levels of lead in drinking water. 
Pg. 8,5037 Col. 1 Par. 3 
4. The treatment recommendation and CCT study process can take multiple years to complete. For systems with 
existing corrosion control, the system may be able to alter the existing treatment (e.g., increase pH and/or 
orthophosphate dose) without a new CCT study on a much faster timeframe rather than waiting for study results 
that may recommend that same change. EPA is requesting comment on whether there are situations and/or 
conditions where existing treatment modiﬁcations may achieve similar lead reductions rather than delaying new 
treatment for two-and-a-half years while a study is underway.  
Pg. 8,5037 Col. 2 Par. 1 
2. Comment and supporting data on the capacity of water systems to conduct some or all of the required public 
education activities in 30 days, or another period of time that is less than 30 or 60 days, after the end of the tap 
sampling period in which a systemwide lead action level exceedance occurs. 

 
 
 
 
Time frames (previously menƟoned under General Maters) should be consistent between reporƟng, requiring public 
educaƟon, etc. 
Three (3) business days is a more realisƟc maximum when taking into account extended holidays and weekends. 
OperaƟng schedules may also vary between uƟliƟes (i.e. closed on Friday’s, half days on Friday’s, etc.). Business days 
allow for proper Ɵme to be given for review and accuracy, potenƟally lessening the man-hour burden on staﬀ. 
How many Ɵmes can a customer request sampling and is there a waiƟng period between same requests? Three (3) 
business days is more realisƟc when taking into account extended holidays and weekends. Business days allow for 
proper Ɵme to be given for review and accuracy, lessening the burden on staﬀ. 
 
We would like to see clariﬁcaƟon and a straighƞorward approach to outlining outreach acƟviƟes. What is considered a 
valid communicaƟon method for contacƟng the customer? Door Hangers? Neighborhood informaƟonal meeƟngs? 
Phone calls? If calls are allowed, is it expected to track these calls? Providing clariﬁcaƟon on the porƟon of the service 
line that is mandated (recommended to be what is under control of the uƟlity) to be replaced is also suggested. 
 
 
This requirement will remove the system’s ability to achieve faster replacement by taking valuable Ɵme and resources 
away from idenƟﬁcaƟon, validaƟon, and coordinaƟon of projects focused on main replacement where lead service 
lines are located.  
 
Pg. 8,5037 Col. 2 Par. 2 
3. Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water systems are capable of providing 
consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three calendar days of obtaining those results, 
regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or copper action level, or if a longer time frame is needed ( e.g., 
three business days, seven calendar days, 14 calendar days).  
Pg. 8,5037 Col. 2 Par. 3 
4. Whether the proposed requirement for water systems to oﬀer lead sampling to consumers with LSLs, GRR 
service lines, or unknown service lines in the notice of service line material is eﬀective at reducing adverse health 
eﬀects. EPA is also requesting comment on the requirement for water systems to deliver consumer-initiated test 
results within three days of obtaining those results. 
Pg. 8,5037 Col. 2 Par. 4 
5. Whether the types and timing of outreach activities proposed for systems failing to meet the mandatory 
service line replacement rate are appropriate and whether other activities should be considered. 
Pg. 8,5037 Col. 2 Par. 7 
8. Whether EPA should require additional public education requirements to further encourage swift service line 
replacement faster than the 10-year replacement deadline. For example, should water systems that have LSLs, 
GRR service lines, or unknown service lines ﬁve years after the compliance date for the LCRI be required to 
increase the frequency of the notiﬁcation of service line materials from annual to once every six months?  

 
 
 
 
The City of Cedar Rapids has commited to ensuring we are providing the same level of excellent customer service to 
all community members, that is why we have a contracted partnership with Hands Up CommunicaƟon to give 
employees access to resources to eﬀecƟvely serve residents with Limited English Proﬁciency (LEP) or who are deaf or 
hard of hearing. CommunicaƟon resources they provide include sign language and non-English language interpreƟng 
services as well as translaƟon and transcripƟon services. 
Hands Up CommunicaƟons provides interpreƟng services for over 190 non-English languages and American Sign 
Language (ASL). InterpreƟng services can occur on-site, remotely by video and over the phone. Video Remote 
interpreƟng using the InterpretManager or BoostLingo iOS or Android app can be used if a resident walks in and needs 
interpreƟng services, while the over the phone 3-way calling works well for residents who contact your department by 
phone. 
Public educaƟon requirements should be simpliﬁed and condensed. Refer to “General Maters” secƟon for more 
informaƟon on current reporƟng deadlines, etc. 
 
Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances 
EPA is proposing new actions to be required of systems that exceed the lead action level multiple times, based on the 
proposed criteria of three action level exceedances in a ﬁve-year period. EPA is requesting comments on all aspects of this 
proposed requirement, and speciﬁcally the following: 
Requiring ﬁlter distribuƟon to all customers would likely create more widespread fear and distrust of public water 
systems and would have a signiﬁcant ﬁnancial and administraƟve burden to large systems. As menƟoned previously, 
this can also pose addiƟonal health risks if ﬁlters are not kept clean and appropriately maintained or replaced by the 
user. 
In addiƟon, the City of Cedar Rapids building codes have eliminated any system-controlled source of lead in premises 
built in 2014 and later. If monitoring of corrosion control shows opƟmal performance, there is no increased risk to the 
consumer when the system has 90th percenƟle exceedances.  
Pg. 8,5037 Col. 2 Par. 8 
9. EPA is seeking information and data on when a system provides translated materials to consumers with limited 
English proﬁciency, what resources are used to translate materials (e.g., State resources, community 
organizations, publications), and what barriers water systems may face in providing accurate translated 
materials.  
Pg. 8,5037 Col. 3 Par. 2 
11. EPA is also requesting comment on additional ways to streamline public education and associated 
certiﬁcation requirements (e.g., combine deadlines for systems to conduct public education or submit information 
to the State). 
Pg. 8,5037 Col. 3 Par. 7 
4. Whether EPA should require water systems to make ﬁlters certiﬁed to reduce lead and replacement cartridges, 
along with instructions for use, available to all consumers within 60 days of a system having multiple action level 
exceedances and whether there are any supporting or contrary data on whether the proposed ﬁlter requirement 
would be protective of public health.  

 
 
 
 
These measures are not necessary for homes with non-lead service lines and plumbing (see comment above). 
Due to the fact that all systems vary and have unique reasons for potenƟal exceedances, we feel individual States 
would be beter able to assess the unique situaƟons and determine an appropriate course of acƟon. 
 
Lead Sampling in Schools and Childcare Facilities 
EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed lead sampling in schools and childcare facilities requirements, and 
speciﬁcally: 
Since systems are not in ownership of service lines within schools or childcare faciliƟes, sampling more than once only 
adds further burden to systems. We recommend Elementary schools and childcare faciliƟes have the ability request 
sampling in circumstances where they are choosing to replace premise lead plumbing.  
Allowing states to issue waivers accomplishes the same goal. This waiver will greatly help larger systems lessen the 
burden. 
Without ownership of the service line, publicizing tesƟng results does not fall under the system’s domain unless there 
is an exceedance of the 90th percenƟle lead acƟon limit. In these cases, results are shared with the facility and Public 
Health and communicaƟon and plans for miƟgaƟon can all beter be addressed by either of those enƟƟes. 
 
Pg. 8,5038 Col. 1 Par. 2 
6. Alternative requirements for systems with multiple action level exceedances to provide ﬁlters to their 
consumers, such as requiring water systems to provide ﬁlters and replacement cartridges to consumers served by 
an LSL, GRR service line, or unknown service line or to all consumers, or to require systems to consult with the 
State upon meeting the criteria for multiple action level exceedances, after which the State determines the 
appropriate action to reduce lead exposure. 
Pg. 8,5038 Col. 1 Par. 4 
8. Whether, in addition to the proposed requirements, EPA should provide States discretion to determine 
appropriate action following a multiple action level exceedance that is tailored to meet speciﬁc system needs. 
Pg. 8,5038 Col. 1 Par. 6 
1. Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or to sample more frequently in schools and 
childcare facilities. 
Pg. 8,5038 Col. 1 Par. 7 
2. The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community water systems from the requirement for 
lead sampling in schools and childcare facilities during the ﬁve-year period after the LCRI compliance date if the 
facility was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021 but prior to the LCRI compliance date and the sampling 
otherwise meets the waiver requirements of § 141.92(h). 
Pg. 8,5038 Col. 2 Par. 2 
5. Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and childcare facility sampling results publicly available, and 
if so, how frequently and in what manner. 

 
 
 
 
Reporting and Recordkeeping 
EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed reporting and recordkeeping, and speciﬁcally the following: 
Including lead connectors is necessary. Considering the LCRR already speciﬁed the need to classify non-lead service 
lines, is this reference diﬀerent? If so, how? 
As a system, there is concern whether States will be able to review and provide approvals in a Ɵmely fashion based on 
current response Ɵmes for pracƟces in place. A phased approach would assist States and industry in acquiring the labor 
and materials needed as all systems phase into mandatory administraƟon and replacement planning. 
 
Compliance Dates 
The proposed LCRI includes a three-year implementation period following the publication of the ﬁnal rule until the 
compliance date to allow States time to obtain primacy and work with systems to prepare to comply. It also allows 
systems time to plan and obtain funding for LSLR as appropriate. EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed 
LCRI compliance dates and whether it would be practicable for water systems to implement any of the proposed LCRI 
requirements earlier than three years from the date of ﬁnal action on the proposed LCRI. Speciﬁcally: 
Other Proposed Revisions to 40 CFR Part 141  
1. Consumer Confidence Report 
A statement in the Consumer Conﬁdence Report (CCR) is necessary and contacƟng the school or childcare facility 
directly is the best avenue for inquiries. Systems do not have enough accurate informaƟon on private service lines to be 
able to answer all quesƟons eﬀecƟvely. 
 
 
Pg. 8,5038 Col. 2 Par. 4 
1. EPA is requesting comments on the expansion of the inventory reporting to include lead connectors and non-
lead service lines. 
Pg. 8,5038 Col. 2 Par. 5 
2. EPA has heard concern over the ability of States to review all required site sample plans and provide approvals 
in time for the ﬁrst tap monitoring period, and is requesting comment on whether EPA should consider a phased 
approach or alternate approach to reduce the burden on States following the rule compliance date.  
Pg. 8,5038 Col. 3 Par. 5 
a. EPA is requesting comment on the proposed requirement for systems to provide an informational statement in 
the CCR about the school sampling requirements with the information that consumers can contact the school or 
childcare facility about any potential sampling results. 

 
 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
In closing, the Cedar Rapids Water Division appreciates the opportunity to provide comments and ask quesƟons to the 
LCRI proposal. We have addressed the EPA’s request for speciﬁc comments and provided addiƟonal quesƟons for 
consideraƟon.  
It is important to note that CRWD also supports the eﬀort to remove lead service lines and improve water quality and 
health where feasible. As can be seen, this is an extremely complicated endeavor, and it is not an easy task on any level. 
CRWD believes the best and most eﬃcient use of systems’ limited Ɵme and resources would be to focus on property the 
system owns. Ownership varies from community to community and provides signiﬁcant complicaƟons to fulﬁlling the 
intent of this rule. In areas that have proacƟvely and eﬀecƟvely managed corrosion control to keep lead from becoming a 
signiﬁcant health risk, lead in drinking water is not at the forefront of consumer’s minds. According to the Iowa Health 
and Human Services department and many others across the naƟon, lead in drinking water is not the primary source of 
lead poisoning3. It contributes very litle even when lead poisoning is a concern.  
To review, CRWD’s primary concerns and recommendaƟons on the following issues within the proposed regulatory rule 
are listed below: 
1. Time, resources, and ownership. 
RECOMMENDATION: We believe the best and most eﬃcient use of systems’ limited Ɵme and resources would 
be to only require systems to comply on property owned by the system. 
2. Proposed declaration that there is no safe level of lead in drinking water. 
RECOMMENDATION: Reword to “Lead in drinking water is primarily from materials used in plumbing 
components associated with service lines and home plumbing. If present, lead can cause serious health 
problems, especially for pregnant women and young children. To reduce risk, it is important to remove any lead 
components. Over the next several years, water systems will be focusing on removing lead service lines from the 
system. Owners can also lessen risk by replacing any lead or downstream galvanized plumbing on or in their 
property as well as any ﬁxtures that may contain lead.” 
Not only does the proposed declaraƟon, in essence, contradict the “allowable” proposed 10 ppb lead level, it also insƟlls 
fear into consumers and creates widespread distrust in a product we work very diligently to promote as far as customer 
health being our top priority. The goal is to get the lead out and improve health, but this endeavor cannot fall enƟrely on 
water systems since so many other variables exist beyond the water system’s control.  
Thank you for your Ɵme and review of CRWDs comments and quesƟons. 
 
3 (Iowa Health & Human Service Department)

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1336 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Re: Proposed Rule, Environmental Protecon Agency, “Naonal Primary Drinking Water Regulaons 
for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI),” Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
Dear Administrator Regan:
Today, there are more than 9 million lead service lines in the ground around the U.S.1, impacng 30 
million or more Americans right now.  My wife and I recently gave birth to twins (now 9 months old) 
and with so many services lines in our communies, we face the sad reality that we must be
prepared to hear a dreaded phrase: “Your child has tested posive for lead poisoning”. While this 
horrible reality is felt across the county, these lines are o:en disproporonately in low-income and 
communies of color, exposing them to increased risk of lead-contaminated drinking water. It has also 
impacted my hometown of Poughkeepsie, NY, which has an esmated 5,500 lines, a very large number 
relave to the populaon2. That is why swi: acon is urgent; the health of another generaon of 
children being exposed to lead is on the line, and the EPA & Biden administraon has an 
unparalleled opportunity in the Lead and Copper Rule Improvement (LCRI) proposal to ﬁx this 
problem once and for all.
As cited by the EPA, young children, infants, and fetuses are parcularly vulnerable to lead because 
the physical and behavioral eﬀects of lead occur at lower exposure levels in children than in adults3. 
A dose of lead that would have liDle eﬀect on an adult can have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on a child. In 
children, low levels of exposure have been linked to damage to the central and peripheral nervous 
system, learning disabilies, shorter stature, impaired hearing, and impaired formaon and funcon 
of blood cells.
Because of the commitment of the Biden Administraon & the EPA to strengthen the exisng lead 
and copper rule via the LCRI, we have a once-in-a-generaon opportunity to provide immediate 
help to the 10 million American households and 400,000 schools/child care centers served by a lead 
service line (LSL) or pipes.4 While the LCRI puts forward several reacve iniaves to address lead 
exposure from LSLs in the country, the LCRI does not go far enough for the many Americans that will 
be waing ten years or more for LSL replacements, represenng a “lead acon gap” for many 
residents and communies. 
I call on the EPA to strengthen the ﬁnal LCRI with the following acons:

Deliver immediate help by requiring point of use ﬁltraon devices to residents with an acve 
lead service line: Require systems with lead service lines to distribute lead reducing pitcher 
ﬁlters & replacement cartridges, or faucet mounted ﬁlters, to every resident serviced by a lead 
line unl six months a:er that line is replaced.
                                                            
1 hDps://www.epa.gov/system/ﬁles/documents/2023-04/Final_DWINSA%20Public%20Factsheet%204.4.23.pdf
2 hDps://www.mesunion.com/hudsonvalley/news/arcle/poughkeepsie-lead-pipes-enviromental-advocates-
18154048.php
3 hDps://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/basic-informaon-about-lead-drinking-water
4hDps://www.whitehouse.gov/brieﬁng-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-lead-
pipe-and-paint-acon-plan/


Shorten or eliminate the exceedance window: If a water system has a test site with one 
exceedance, they should immediately retest for conﬁrmaon.  If the system has a conﬁrmed 
exceedance, water systems should deliver remedies prescribed by the LCRI.
o
To accelerate the delivery of lead-free drinking water to communies with conﬁrmed 
lead exceedances, the EPA should require systems to distribute (vs. “make available”) 
point-of-use (POU) ﬁltraon & educaonal materials to residents to ensure those 
households use ﬁlters in their homes.

Make the LCRI eﬀecve as soon as possible: Every year we wait to implement the LCRI is 
another year a crisis can develop or more children can/will test posive for lead poisoning which 
is why three years is too long to wait to implement.
I applaud the EPA’s eﬀort to enact a naonal soluon to reduce the levels of lead in drinking water and 
we strongly believe that the EPA has a unique opportunity to accelerate the necessary help to vulnerable 
populaons & underserved communies in the ﬁnal LCRI by strengthening provisions that would ensure 
safe and lead-free drinking water is available in all communies.
Thank you for your me and consideraon of these comments.
Sincerely,
Dan Tudesco

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1332 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
Michael Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 
Mail Code 4101M 
Washington, DC 20460-0001 
 
Re:  National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements, Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
Clean Water Action and Clean Water Fund respectfully submit these comments regarding the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead 
and Copper: Improvements (LCRI).   
 
Comments Related to Line Service Line Replacement 
Mandatory Replacement Requirement 
Our engagement in revisions of the Safe Drinking Water Act Lead and Copper Rule has 
emphasized the need to fully replace all lead service lines. We fully support the proposal to 
require all water systems subject to the Rule’s provisions to fully replace lead service lines 
within ten years.  We have focused on lead service lines as a critical aspect of controlling lead in 
drinking water for a number of reasons:  
 We have long known that lead can harm the developing brains of infants and 
children. Now we know that even low-level exposure contributes to cardiovascular 
disease, which widens the circle of concern. Replacing lead service lines - the largest 
source of lead in drinking where they are present – will reduce lead in drinking water 
and therefore overall lead exposure, every bit of which matters to everyone’s health. 
 

2 
 
 Because exposure to all sources of lead disproportionately burdens people of color 
and low-income people, any added exposure from lead in drinking water compounds 
this inequity. 
 Momentum toward this goal is greater than it has ever been as indicated by water 
system activities, state policy developments, Congressional interest, and EPA’s own 
proposal.  
EPA’s proposal is consistent with commitments made in the White House Lead Pipe and 
Paint Action Plan and with the findings of the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) 
review, which found that “Replacing 100 percent of lead service lines is an urgently needed 
action to protect all Americans from the most significant source of lead in drinking water 
systems.”1 
The 2021 LCRR, while not requiring mandatory lead service line replacement, suggested 
that fully replacing lead service lines would be appropriate and achievable. Inventory and 
replacement plan requirements put key aspects of a program in place. In Strategies to 
Achieve Full Lead Service Line Replacement (LSLR), an EPA document published to support 
the proposed LCRR, EPA noted that “LSLR programs can be structured in ways to overcome 
potential legal, financial, and practical challenges related to full LSLR.”2 Using lead in water 
distribution systems - a practice that began over 100 years ago - was a regrettable choice 
about which there was concern about public health risks at the time.3 EPA’s proposal 
appropriately recognizes that since full lead service line replacement is the best way to 
protect public health and is achievable, then it should be incorporated into the Rule’s 
requirements.   
 
Lead Service Line Definition 
In clarifying the definition of a “Lead Service Line,” EPA appears to have removed an 
essential sentence: “A lead service line may be owned by the water system, owned by the 
                                                
1 Review of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR), 86 Fed. 
Reg. 71574 (Dec. 17, 2021 
2Strategies to Achieve Full Lead Service Line Replacement, October 2019, EPA 810-R-19-003, page 5 
3 Rabin, Richard, The Lead Industry and Lead Water Pipes: ‘A Modest Campaign, American Journal of Public 
Health, Vol. 98, No. 9, September 2008 

3 
 
property owner, or both.”4 This is critical to protecting public health, as well as to Rule 
requirements including inventory development and full lead service line replacement. If service 
ownership is left ambiguous in EPA’s definition, then the intent of EPA’s emphasis on full 
replacement and on discouraging partial replacements throughout the proposal could be 
negated. Any ambiguity around what constitutes a lead service line and what is required to be 
included in the inventory and to be replaced is likely to undermine EPA’s overall goal of 
achieving full replacement of all lead service lines.  
 
Cost-Sharing in Replacement Programs 
We have consistently urged EPA to require water systems to cover the full cost of 
replacement regardless of ownership or whether the line is located under private or public 
property. The environmental justice review commissioned by EPA as part of the LCRR 
rulemaking process in 2019 found that presuming customers must pay for things, including 
covering part of the cost of lead service line replacement, leaves low-income people with 
inequitable access to the benefits of reducing lead in their water and puts them at 
disproportionately higher health risk.5 The environmental justice review for the current 
proposal found that replacement programs relying on cost-sharing could result in more 
replacements for high-income households, and notes other proposed provisions intended to 
counter this potential inequity. These equity provisions, intended to reduce differential impact, 
include: requiring equity considerations in replacement plans; increasing transparency by 
requiring replacement plans be public, and calculating the replacement rate on a 3-year rolling 
average to account for possible delays caused by targeting child care facilities, schools, or areas 
with higher lead exposure. We support these provisions but remain concerned that they do not 
fully counter the inequities involved in requiring customers to share the cost of replacement. 6 
 
                                                
4 40 C.F.R. §141.2  
5 Abt Associates, Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, October 22, 
2019, Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-0008 
 
6 Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, EPA, November 2023, 
pages 88-89, Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0689 

4 
 
While requiring customers to contribute has historically been a common practice, this is 
changing. Water systems are finding ways to conduct and finance replacements without 
customer contributions. Cost-sharing programs themselves create inefficiency and increased 
work for strained water system workforces. Perpetuating this antiquated approach will 
undermine the lead service line replacement and public health protection goals of the proposal.  
 
EPA proposes to “remain neutral”7 on cost-sharing, which they determine to be a 
matter of State and local law.  Yet, EPA is also “strongly encouraging customer-side 
replacement to be offered at no direct cost to the customer wherever possible to achieve 
higher customer participation rates and reduce environmental justice impacts that may result 
when customers cannot afford to replace their portion of the line.”8 This underplays the 
potential impact of requiring customers to pay for part of replacement costs. In most cases, 
customers will be able to refuse to contribute regardless of their ability to “afford” this cost, 
thus seriously limiting the ability to achieve full replacement of all lead service lines.  
 
EPA should revisit the decision that it is not within their authority to require systems to 
cover the full cost of replacement. EPA’s requirement that States and systems identify barriers 
to full replacement is a positive step to identifying where State and local laws prohibit the no-
cost sharing practices that EPA is strongly encouraging. EPA should work with States and 
systems on how to overcome these State and local impediments to protecting public health and 
meeting new SDWA requirements.  
 
Control and Access Issues 
EPA proposes to define “control” of lead service lines as legal and physical “access.”9 
This leaves unacceptable uncertainty for systems and States, and interferes with full 
replacement goals. “Access” could be interpreted in very different ways. In the proposal, EPA 
discusses the potential for customers to refuse any replacement activity on their property 
regardless of whether a customer contribution is required. This will require documentation and 
                                                
7 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI), 88 Fed. Reg. 84923 
(Dec. 6, 2023) 
8 88 Fed. Reg. 84923 (Dec. 6, 2023) 
9 88 Fed. Reg. 84921 (Dec. 6, 2023) 
 

5 
 
procedures for attempting to replace the line when the property changes ownership or other 
circumstances change as EPA describes.  However, “access” could also be interpreted far more 
broadly to mean that if a system does not own a portion of the line, it lacks control and 
therefore access. This would have unacceptable consequences for full replacement and public 
health protection. For example, it could be interpreted to mean that if a system doesn’t own a 
portion of the service line that it therefore does not have access. EPA should define and clarify 
access more clearly in the regulatory requirements text to avoid this potential 
misinterpretation.  
 
Deferred Deadlines 
The deferred deadline proposal for systems with atypically high numbers of lead service 
lines formalizes an unacceptably long timeline for replacement. Because this applies only to a 
few systems, as EPA acknowledges, it should not be codified in the LCRI. EPA is already 
proposing to allow States to set a deadline of less than ten years for systems where the State 
determines if it is feasible. States should work with these systems that have atypical numbers of 
lead service lines to outline a schedule, perhaps in the form of a variance, rather than EPA 
setting a number in the LCRI. The goal of such an approach would be to avoid setting an upper 
limit that these systems might well be able to exceed, as EPA acknowledges, and to avoid 
having replacement incomplete for decades.  
 
Partial Lead Service Line Replacements 
We agree with proposals to prohibit partial replacements in most cases because of the 
potential to increase lead levels. However, EPA should do more than discourage partial 
replacements by signaling that the intention is to “virtually eliminate” the practice. A partial 
lead service line, whether it is under private or public property, is still a lead service line that 
contributes to elevated lead in drinking water. Presence of lead service lines is thus an ongoing 
public health risks and an impediment to the 100% replacement goal. Leaving part of a lead 
service line in place to ensure continued water service in the case of an emergency is 
reasonable, as long as mitigation activities are conducted and the system works to complete 

6 
 
the replacement. EPA should further restrict the exclusion for conducting partial replacements 
during planned infrastructure work that is not for the purpose of replacement.  Precisely 
because such maintenance is usually planned well ahead of time, systems should be able to 
make arrangements with customers in the event that lead service lines are encountered. As 
water systems complete lead service line inventories and update them, they will be increasingly 
more prepared to identify when routine maintenance plans are likely to encounter lead service 
lines and at which homes or buildings. Where customer cooperation is impossible, the risk 
mitigation activities that would be required for emergency repairs can be conducted and other 
requirements for this situation would continue to apply.  
A failure to reign in partial replacements to the greatest extent possible could result in 
the perpetuation of a practice that has left many partial lead service lines in place, particularly 
but not only on the “customer-owned” side or under private property. This complicates 
preparation of accurate inventories and replacement activities. A prohibition on partial 
replacements except in emergencies and special circumstances, with a goal of virtually 
eliminating this practice, is consistent with the public health protection goals of the LCRI. 
Connectors 
We support EPA’s proposal to define connectors as being no longer than two feet and to 
require any lead connectors encountered to be replaced. We continue to recommend that lead 
connectors be included in the mandatory replacement requirement not only if they are 
encountered in the course of maintenance, repair, or replacement but also if they are identified 
through the records reviews required in the Inventory provisions of the Rule. As EPA notes, lead 
connectors are included in the inventory and customers served by pipe with a lead connector 
must be notified because lead connectors can contribute to lead in drinking water.  
 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
 
We agree with EPA’s proposal to conduct record reviews in order to include lead 
connectors in the required inventories, and to identify the locations of previously replaced lead 
connectors, and to track where lead connectors are replaced in the future.   

7 
 
 
We support the proposal to require systems to identify State or local laws or water tariff 
agreements that govern access to conduct full service line replacement and for States to notify 
systems in writing of similar State or local laws or constitutional requirements. These State or 
local laws could impact systems’ ability to effectively carry out replacement requirements and 
need to be considered in development of replacement plans. This requirement can also help 
resolve confusion and lack of clarity around what, if any, impact such State and local provisions 
actually have on access and financing issues. EPA is requesting comment on whether plans 
should be updated in the case of any changes in State or local laws or other provisions that 
impact replacement plans, and we agree that updated plans should be required if these 
changes impact elements of the replacement plan.  
 
EPA requests comment on the threshold for requiring systems to host inventories, 
inventory summary data, replacement summary data, and service line replacement plans 
online. Specifically, EPA requests comment on whether such a requirement should pertain to 
systems serving more than 10,000 persons rather than the 50,000-person threshold in the 
proposal. We think it is reasonable to require online hosting for systems serving greater than 
10,000 persons since systems will have prepared these materials and submitted them to the 
State and should thus have the ability to host them online.  
 
Action Level and Trigger Level 
We support EPA’s proposal to eliminate the LCRR Trigger Level and to lower the Action 
Level to 10 μg/L. The intention of the Trigger Level, which was to promote early action to 
reduce lead levels when sampling results demonstrated elevation was a good one. However, 
having two tiers of activities based on sampling results set up a complicated process for water 
systems and States to manage and for the public to understand.  While the Action Level is not a 
health-based level and is intended to assess corrosivity and the effectiveness of any treatment, 
nonetheless increased understanding of health effects of lead at very low levels supports 
setting the Action Level lower than it was first set in the LCR.  
 
EPA should re-examine the decision not to lower the Action Level to 5 μg/L as many 
public health and other stakeholders advocate. It is difficult for those outside the drinking water 

8 
 
sector and the regulatory community to understand the justification for setting the Action Level 
based on whether it is generally demonstrative of how well corrosion control treatment is 
working.  While EPA’s estimates do indicate that an Action Level of 5 μg/L would lead to more 
exceedances, and thus more burden on implementing State agencies, it is increasingly difficult 
to explain being more stringent in avoiding lead exposure in drinking water wherever possible. 
These perceptions still matter despite the fact that the Action Level itself is not set as nor does 
it function as a health-based level. Ongoing perceptions that regulations meant to control lead 
exposure in drinking water are not sufficient does not increase customers’ confidence in their 
drinking water – an issue all stakeholders can agree is important. We are not arguing that the 
Action Level should be set based on public perception, but that given the communications 
inherent in a level that is not a health-based level and the ongoing debate around a lower 
Action Level that EPA should revisit the possibility that a lower Action Level would better 
support the overall LCRI goals. The health risk communication challenges inherent in the nature 
of the Action Level support the full lead service line replacement goals of the proposal, given 
that over time overall lead levels will go down.  
 
Compliance Alternatives for a Lead Action Level Exceedance for Small Community Water 
Systems and Non-Transient Non-Community Water Systems 
 
EPA requests comment on limiting small system flexibility to use point-of-us devices and 
plumbing replacement as compliance alternatives to systems serving 3,300 persons and fewer. 
We agree with EPA’s proposal that these compliance alternatives in the case of Action Level 
exceedances are most appropriate for and should be limited to systems serving 3,300 persons 
or fewer.  
 
Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) 
As we noted in comments on the LCRR in 2020, EPA should ensure that the LCRI does 
not minimize and in fact emphasizes the need to consider the water quality impacts of 
increasing the use orthophosphate for corrosion control. Orthophosphate treatment is a critical 
item in our toolbox for preventing corrosion and controlling lead in drinking water, but its use 

9 
 
can have the unintended consequence of increasing phosphorus loadings to downstream 
surface waters and wastewater treatment facilities. Nutrient pollution like phosphorus can 
trigger excessive plant and algal growth in streams, lakes, reservoirs, and estuaries. Certain 
algae are toxic and can make people sick if they swim or come in contact with contaminated 
water. In extreme cases algal growth can result in “dead zones” devoid of any aquatic life. 
When harmful algal blooms (HABs) occur in streams, lakes, or reservoirs that are drinking water 
sources, it can create treatment challenges for drinking water systems. There are also economic 
impacts to nutrient pollution, both in the form of treatment costs for wastewater utilities that 
may have to meet certain Clean Water Act pollution limits for nutrients and in the form of lost 
recreation and tourism dollars when a lake, river, or beach is closed because of a toxic algal 
bloom.  
EPA’s economic analysis of the proposed LCRI concluded phosphorous entering surface 
waters from orthophosphate would be small compared to total phosphorus loads from all other 
anthropocentric sources.  Yet even a relatively small increase in total phosphorus in water 
bodies already impaired for phosphorus is problematic considering there is wide agreement 
among scientists that the frequency and distribution of algal outbreaks have increased in recent 
years.10 
Reducing all sources of nutrient pollution nationwide is a long-standing EPA priority. 
Public health protection and water quality can benefit by acknowledging the need for a holistic 
approach. Requiring full lead service line replacement, as EPA is proposing, is one element of a 
holistic approach in that over time it will reduce treatment needs and has the additional benefit 
of addressing particulate lead which is not always reduced by orthophosphate treatment.  EPA 
should also support research into innovative approaches to phosphorous management and 
continue to support advanced understanding of corrosion control practices. We do not suggest 
taking lightly the need to reduce exposure to lead at the tap, regardless of its source. We do ask 
EPA not to dismiss the need to address the unintended consequences of contributing more 
                                                
10National Office for Harmful Algal Blooms at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, “Recent Trends: National 
Changes,” July 11, 2016, https://www.whoi.edu/redtide/regions/us-recent-trends  

10 
 
nutrient pollution to water bodies, which itself can create public health risk in drinking water11 
and impact water bodies that are already impaired or experiencing HABs.  
 
Please note that we have also joined other comments, including with Environment 
America others about schools and childcare settings and with Earthjustice and others about key 
provisions in the proposal. We thank EPA for enabling robust public participation during the 
LCRR Review and LCRI process and for consideration of these comments.  
 
Questions can be addressed to Lynn Thorp, National Campaigns Director, Clean Water 
Action/Clean Water Fund, lthorp@cleanwater.org, 
202-754-3460. 
 
 
                                                
11 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Assistant Administrator for Water Joel Beauvais memo to State 
environmental and health agency Commissioners, February 9, 2016; 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-03/documents/samplelettercommissionersfeb2016.pdf

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0967 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 
 
February 5, 2024 
Submitted Via Email 
Michael Goldberg 
Standards and Risk Management Division 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 
Mail Code 4607M 
Washington, DC 20460 
(202) 564–1379 
LCRI@epa.gov 
 
RE: Comments on behalf of Northwestern University WISE-Dx Faculty Team Regarding EPA’s 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
Mr. Goldberg,  
My name is Robert Weinstock; I am the Director of the Environmental Advocacy Center 
at the Northwestern Pritzker School of Law and I write on behalf of myself and a team of 
colleagues based at Northwestern University. We write as members of an interdisciplinary team 
that works under the name “Making Water Insecurity Visible Using Synthetic Biology 
Diagnostics” (or “WISE-Dx”) to study, develop, and deploy new water quality testing 
technology. Please see Attachment 1 for a collection of curriculum vitae of the relevant faculty 
members, including the following globally renowned chemists, civil engineers, synthetic 
biologists, and anthropologists: 
• William Dichtel, PhD, Robert L. Letsinger Professor, Department of Chemistry, 
Northwestern University 
• Julius B. Lucks, Professor of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern 
University 
• Jean-François Gaillard, Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northwestern 
University 
• Sera L. Young, Anthropology & Global Health, Associate Professor, Northwestern 
University 
• Robert A. Weinstock, Director, Environmental Advocacy Center, Clinical Associate 
Professor of Law, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law 
• Michael C. Jewett Professor, Adjunct Professor of Chemical and Biological Engineering, 
Northwestern University and Professor of Bioengineering, Stanford University 

 
2 
 
Members of the group have developed a technology that uses cell-free biosensors and a 
one-drop sample to provide an easy-to-read positive or negative result for water contaminants, 
including lead and copper. Professors Lucks and Jewett co-founded a private company, 
Stemloop, Inc., in 2019, which has developed convenient user interfaces and reliable 
manufacturing methods to scale up this biosensing technology for wider access and use. One of 
our aims in the WISE-Dx project is to develop, understand, and deploy this new technology to 
improve public policies and public health outcomes. Our overall vision is that this biotechnology 
platform will help mitigate the economic, political, and health impacts of the global water crisis 
by providing actionable information to individuals and communities that can positively impact 
their daily lives and inform mitigation strategies. As described further below, we are in the first 
stages of implementing a National Science Foundation grant, which will fund a pilot program to 
assess how easily members of the public in Chicago are able to use and interpret rapid biosensor 
tests for lead in their drinking water and whether their actions or attitudes change with respect to 
drinking water quality issues, among other research activities.1 
We submit these comments regarding the United States Environmental Protection 
Agency’s (“EPA”) proposed rule titled “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead 
and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878 (Dec. 6, 2023),” (the “LCRI”). To specify how 
our input can help advance EPA’s overarching goal to “achieve increased protection of 
communities from lead exposure through drinking water,”2 we have organized these comments 
using EPA’s enumerated requests for comments.  
Before responding to EPA’s enumerated questions, it is important to recognize broadly 
how the technology discussed herein can help EPA achieve another of the LCRI’s broad goals, to 
“address potential disproportionate impacts of lead in drinking water in communities, including 
through proposed lead service line replacement and public education, among other areas of the 
proposed rule.”3 Rapid biosensor testing can meaningfully move the needle on equity by granting 
 
1 URoL:ASC: The design, development, and societal impact of rapid, in-home, water quality biosensors, U.S. 
National Science Foundation, https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=2319427. 
 
The faculty members of the Northwestern University WISE-Dx team submit these Comments as a collection of 
individuals with relevant expertise. Descriptions of work being performed under this NSF grant are provided to 
substantiate the expertise and perspectives offered in these Comments.  No time, funding, or other resources 
provided or supported by this NSF grant or covered by the scope of work for this NSF grant were used in producing 
these Comments.  Nothing herein relates to the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of any Federal grant, 
or the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal contract, grant, loan or 
cooperative agreement. See 45 CFR s. 604.100.   
  
2 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84879 
(Dec. 6, 2023). 
3 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84878 
(Dec. 6, 2023). 

 
3 
 
all communities, regardless of size and resources, an additional, affordable, and accessible tool to 
understand and tackle lead issues proactively. Rapid lead biosensor technology offers a relatively 
low cost, easy-to-use method to indicate the presence of dissolved lead in drinking water above a 
determined threshold. As elaborated below, the biosensor tests are less expensive than traditional 
laboratory sampling and operate in essentially the same manner as the home tests for Covid-19 to 
which we have all become accustomed.  In other words, biosensor tests can be accessible to many 
more people and can be used by people themselves to provide nearly immediate information. The 
implementation of this technology does not replace traditional laboratory sampling for total lead, 
but it can be used in conjunction with traditional sampling in many applications within the Safe 
Drinking Water Act (“SDWA”) regulatory framework. Biosensor technology, then, can assist 
EPA in its efforts to address disproportionate impacts that stem from lead in drinking water by 
both improving water system performance and empowering and engaging people from all 
communities.4  
Our comments respond to EPA’s request for public comment by addressing how 
innovative rapid lead testing tools can strengthen public health protections by pinpointing lead 
hazards in drinking water with greater speed, accessibility, cost-effectiveness, and overall scale. 
These user-friendly, affordable lead test kits should enable significantly expanded testing, leading 
to more efficient sampling, in schools, childcares, and residences. The real-time insights 
unlocked can enable drinking water systems to achieve faster lead service line (“LSL”) 
replacement through optimized resource allocation. Additionally, rapid testing empowers 
individuals and communities themselves to take charge of assessing lead issues, granting citizens 
visibility into lead levels at the tap to encourage mitigation actions like filter installation while 
systems undertake LSL replacement. In summary, these cutting-edge rapid test kits provide a 
dynamic new means to improve lead hazard identification, resource optimization, community 
empowerment, and risk reduction. 
I. OVERVIEW 
For EPA’s consideration, this comment provides recommendations on integrating 
innovative rapid lead testing technologies into the proposed LCRI. Major themes center on 
getting useful information about lead exposure to the public as quickly as possible and utilizing 
rapid testing kits in schools, as part of enhanced public education requirements, and as a 
complement to traditional compliance sampling.  We believe rapid lead testing technology can 
expedite and optimize the LSL replacement process. These comments are organized as direct 
responses to the EPA’s specific requests for comments.  
 
4 Sera Young & Julius Lucks, What’s Really in Your Water? Rapid at-home tests for contaminants are on the way, 
Scientific American, https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/whats-really-in-your-water/ (Apr. 18, 2021). 

 
4 
 
First, we provide an overview of rapid lead biosensor testing technology and how it can 
be utilized by systems and consumers.  Second, after providing this context, we respond to the 
section titled “Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities.” Here, we detail how rapid 
lead biosensors can help protect children from lead in drinking water at school.  Third, we 
provide comments regarding “Compliance Alternatives for a Lead Action Level Exceedance for 
Small Community Water Systems and Non-Transient, Non-Community Water Systems,” 
discussing how utilizing rapid testing to evaluate the performance of point-of-use filtration 
devices can help guide proper maintenance and contaminant removal.  Fourth, we discuss “Public 
Education” and explore how rapid biosensor testing can enable quicker interventions and further 
expedited notification policies regarding traditional laboratory sampling results and lead 
exceedances. Then, the comments address EPA’s requests for comments regarding “Tap 
Sampling for Lead and Copper,” showcasing how rapid testing can augment traditional sampling 
approaches for assessing water quality, providing invaluable real-time insights.  The comments 
then briefly address EPA’s “Service Line Replacement” section and the renamed “distribution 
system and site assessment” requirements.  These comments conclude by commenting on the 
“Feasibility of Proposed Inventory Requirements To Support Mandatory Service Line 
Replacement” and note potential costs and benefits of implementing this technology. 
II. INTRODUCTION TO RAPID LEAD TESTING TECHNOLOGY 
With the LCRI, “‘EPA is doing what Congress charged it to do decades ago: getting the 
lead out of drinking water.  Communities demanding safe water got the attention of President 
Biden, whose administration will finally remove every lead pipe from the ground.’”5  History 
shows that this is easier said than done.  We are providing these comments to support EPA’s 
objectives in expeditiously completing this project.  Our aim is not only to contribute to the 
completion of this massive and massively important project, but also to ensure that communities 
and individuals receive timely and comprehensive information regarding their water quality 
along the way.  This becomes especially crucial given the extended duration anticipated for 
complete LSL replacement under the proposed requirements of the LCRI, particularly in the 
communities with the most lead service lines, like our hometown of Chicago.  
Though the proposed LCRI has a plethora of laudable components and policies, including 
requiring nationwide full LSL replacement and moving the lead action level closer to the health-
based goal of zero lead exposure, new water testing technologies can help further EPA’s goals 
 
5 What They Are Saying: Broad range of leaders and advocates applaud Biden-Harris Administration’s proposal to 
strengthen the lead and copper rule to protect communities from lead in drinking water, United States 
Environmental Protection Agency, https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/what-they-are-saying-broad-range-leaders-
and-advocates-applaud-biden-
harris#:~:text=The%20EPA%20is%20doing%20what,lead%20pipe%20from%20the%20ground.%E2%80%9D 
(Dec. 4, 2023) (quoting Erik Olson of the Natural Resource Defense Council).  

 
5 
 
“to significantly reduce exposure to lead through drinking water” as a means to deliver important 
public health benefits.6 Integrating rapid lead biosensors into the implementation of the proposed 
LCRI will increase and accelerate public health benefits the proposed rule can deliver. 
The WISE-Dx team at Northwestern University was recently awarded a three-million 
dollar grant from the National Science Foundation to “expand [our] work making water 
insecurity challenges more visible and empowering citizens and communities to proactively test 
and understand the quality of their drinking water.”7  Please see Attachment 2 for a detailed 
summary of the work being done under this NSF grant.  The biosensor tests being developed and 
deployed in connection with this grant can detect contaminant content in water and give rapid 
results similar to the manner in which an at-home Covid test does.8  “A unique feature of the 
underlying cell-free biosensing technology is that it is accessible to diverse stakeholders—people 
from a range of ages, abilities, and backgrounds can see, touch, and operate these devices, 
creating powerful entry points for engagement and education.”9 In work under the NSF grant, we 
have strategically identified lead, copper, and per/polyfluoroalkyl substances (“PFAS”) as widely 
recognized contaminants of major concern.10  WISE-Dx members’ research is the basis of a 
pilot-stage lead biosensor product produced by the company Stemloop.11  Currently consumer-
ready rapid lead biosensor technology can identify lead in water in the range of 5-10 ppb, with 
the even lower detection limits under development, and indicates its results in a familiar two-
stripe format: one stripe in the indicator strip means the test functioned properly; two stripes 
indicate dissolved lead is present in the sampled water above the test’s threshold. Further, our 
team is developing rapid testing kits for copper and has made significant progress toward a 
similar test that can detect the presence of PFAS. 
As recently explained in the Chicago Tribune, our work underway will roll out new 
biosensor kits to 350 homes in Chicago.12 These kits will be provided for free as part of our 
study, but cost approximately $20 per test commercially, and will deliver results in just 30 
 
6 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84878-9 
(Dec. 6, 2023). 
7 Interdisciplinary Water Security Project Receives $3 Million NSF Grant, Northwestern University, 
https://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2023/08/interdisciplinary-water-security-project-receives-
three-million-nsf-grant/ (Aug. 8, 2023).  
8 Id. 
9 See Attachment 2 – URoL:ASC: The design, development, and distribution of rapid, in-home, water quality 
biosensors, at 3 (summary of WISE-Dx research proposal, provided to NSF).   
10 URoL:ASC: The design, development, and societal impact of rapid, in-home, water quality biosensors, U.S. 
National Science Foundation, https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=2319427 
11 https://stemloop.com/.  
12 350 Chicago households will get free water testing kits for lead as part of Northwestern study, Chicago Tribune, 
https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/environment/ct-chicago-lead-water-kits-northwestern-20230911-
h6hp43jbzzccrdevknvaeazi3q-story.html (Sept. 11, 2023).  

 
6 
 
minutes using a format that can be used directly in the home. As production scales up and 
becomes more efficient, we anticipate the $20 per test cost to decline significantly and quickly. 
Additionally, the current detection and reporting threshold indicates the presence of lead at 
EPA’s action level proposed in the LCRI of 10 ppb, though that the indicator threshold can be 
adjusted during manufacture. Currently, EPA estimates annual LCRI sampling costs using the 
prevailing laboratory-based protocols at approximately $170-180 million, based on its least 
expensive projections.13  Given the limited success of the LCR in eliminating lead exposure 
through drinking water, it is imperative that eligible water supplies identify and deploy more 
economical, practical, and efficient means to provide the public with information they can use to 
protect themselves and to promptly identify and eliminate lead pipes.14 
Using technology like rapid lead biosensors in conjunction with traditional lab-based lead 
sampling could facilitate systems to more efficiently meet the LCRI’s requirements and goals, 
and with faster and greater impact, because biosensing technology complements traditional lab-
based sampling.  The current laboratory-based lead sampling method can cost around $50-$150 
per test, and results take approximately two weeks from when they reach the laboratory, and in 
practice often longer than that.15  These limitations in sampling technology have contributed to 
the slow pace of LSL replacement nationwide.  For example, in issuing the original 1991 Lead 
and Copper Rule EPA expected water suppliers to be able to complete replacement of LSLs in a 
maximum of 14 years. In 2021, USEPA revised this rule to allow replacement to take 33 years 
instead of 14, citing the impracticality of the original goal given the technology available.16 
New biosensing technology is well-suited to help better pinpoint actual lead exposure 
within homes, while systems focus under the LCRI on replacing dangerous LSLs leading into 
homes. Given that lead exposure through drinking water results from LSLs in interplay with 
other factors such as internal plumbing, corrosion, fitting and valves, water chemistry, stagnation, 
 
13 See Exhibit 9: Estimated National Total Monetized Annualized PWS Rule Costs – 3 Percent Discount Rate 
(millions of 2022 USD) & Exhibit 10: Estimated National Total Monetized Annualized Rule Costs – 7 Percent 
Discount Rate (millions of 2022 USD), National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84982-3 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
14 Let’s Follow Through on President’s Promise to Pull All Lead Pipes in 10 Years, NRSC, 
https://www.nrdc.org/bio/erik-d-olson/lets-follow-through-presidents-promise-pull-all-lead-pipes-10-years 
15 Attachment 2 – URoL:ASC: The design, development, and distribution of rapid, in-home, water quality 
biosensors, at 2 (summary of WISE-Dx research proposal provided to NSF).  General information about 
commercially-available lab testing on EPA’s website suggests a cost range of $20-100.  See U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Basic Information About Lead in Drinking Water, https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-
drinking-water/basic-information-about-lead-drinking-
water#:~:text=Since%20you%20cannot%20see%2C%20taste,costs%20between%20%2420%20and%20%24100 
(last accessed February 4, 2024).   
16 Daniel Eyal, EPA’s Lead and Copper Rule: Examining Challenges and Prospects, Environmental & Energy Law 
Program, https://eelp.law.harvard.edu/2021/01/lead-and-copper-rule/#_ftnref4 (Jan. 28, 2021). 

 
7 
 
and water treatment,17 having rapid and inexpensive tests should allow individuals and eligible 
water suppliers to collect more samples within a home and better understand the specific threats 
of lead exposure within the specific household context. This is why lower-cost, easier-to-use, and 
more widely available testing technology is necessary—one could test and get immediate results 
at multiple taps in a house and/or at different times to get a more complete picture of lead risk in 
the home.  This information would allow consumers and water providers to more efficiently, 
economically, and effectively address the actual sources of lead risk.  
Integrating this technology within the implementation of the proposed LCRI will provide 
EPA, water systems and the public greater opportunities to learn about using and acting on this 
new source of water quality information.  That will not only enhance the effectiveness of the 
proposed framework, but also contribute to public health and knowledge benefits outside of the 
LCRI itself.  Even if the technology is not required to be used in the LCRI, allowing its use in 
LCRI implementation can promote the voluntary adoption of the technology beyond the LCRI’s 
specific mandates, allowing a wider range of stakeholders to harness its benefits. Though this 
technology cannot replace traditional lead sampling, principally because it currently detects only 
dissolved lead, not total or particulate lead, when the rapid lead biosensor testing and traditional 
laboratory sampling approaches are used in conjunction, it should allow for the more efficient 
and effective achievement of EPA’s goals in the LCRI. Accordingly, we have provided the below 
comments which address areas in which we believe the EPA can encourage the use of rapid 
testing technology to help reach their goals more efficiently.  
III. RESPONSES TO SPECIFC EPA REQUESTS FOR COMMENT  
 
A. Lead Sampling in Schools and Childcare Facilities: 
“1. Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or to sample more 
frequently in schools and childcare facilities.” 
Although EPA may lack the authority under a NPDWR to require schools and childcare 
facilities that are not regulated as public water systems (“PWS”) to act,18 lead biosensor tests 
could provide an additional means for non-PWS schools and childcare facilities to conduct 
voluntary lead testing and thereby have better water quality information. Improving lead testing 
in non-PWS schools and childcare facilities is essential to protecting children from lead 
contamination. Although there is no definitive nationwide count of schools and childcare 
facilities that fall outside of SDWA regulation, EPA’s data suggests that the overwhelming 
 
17 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84906-
07 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
18 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84956 
(Dec. 6, 2023). 

 
8 
 
majority of schools and childcare facilities are not regulated directly under the SDWA. 
According to EPA’s 2021 figures, up to over ~98% of schools and childcare facilities are not 
required to conduct lead sampling as PWS themselves.19 The fact that so many of our schools 
and childcare facilities are unregulated under the SDWA means that finding alternative ways to 
encourage or require lead testing or sampling would be a significant step toward identifying lead 
problems and protecting children from lead exposure. 
The WIIN Act in 2016 sought to address this issue by establishing the Lead Testing in 
School and Child Care Program Drinking Water grant, which was later amended to the 
Voluntary School and Child Care Lead Testing and Reduction Grant Program in 2021, to support 
and encourage voluntary lead testing in schools and child care facilities.20 According to EPA’s 
data, between October 2021 and March 2023, 10,232 schools have conducted sampling this grant 
program.21 While this is tremendous progress, given the substantial number of schools and child 
care facilities that have yet to be reached, both technological and structural innovations are 
necessary to meet the nationwide need for expanded lead testing in schools and childcare 
facilities. Rapid biosensor tests may be a valuable tool for EPA to make participation in 
voluntary lead testing more appealing and feasible for schools and childcare facilities that cannot 
be reached by EPA’s direct regulatory authority under the SDWA.  EPA should consider 
creating some incentive or allowance within the federal grant program for schools and childcare 
facilities to use rapid biosensor tests. This incentive would not necessarily have to be equivalent 
to the incentive for conducting full laboratory lead sampling; EPA could instead create an 
intermediate tier of incentives for facilities that implement rapid lead biosensors or could simply 
allow or encourage the integration of biosensors into grant proposals. 
Indeed, facilitating the distribution of rapid, low-cost tests to schools and childcare 
facilities could can deliver multiple benefits to the schools and their students. Jewett and Lucks, 
with co-authors, demonstrated the ease of use of a lead-based biosensor system in educational 
 
19 This estimate was calculated from EPA’s 2021 estimates stating that “approximately 8,000 schools and childcare 
facilities maintain their own water supply” and “[t]here are approximately 98,000 public schools and 500,000 
childcare facilities not regulated under the SDWA.” Lead in Drinking Water in Schools and Childcare Facilities, 
United States Environmental Protection Agency, https://19january2021snapshot.epa.gov/dwreginfo/lead-drinking-
water-schools-and-childcare-
facilities_.html#:~:text=EPA%20is%20responsible%20for%20ensuring,Drinking%20Water%20Act%20(SDWA). 
(last visited Feb. 4, 2024).  
20 Wiin Grant: Voluntary School and Child Care Lead Testing and Reduction Grant Program, United States 
Environmental Protection Agency, https://www.epa.gov/dwcapacity/wiin-grant-voluntary-school-and-child-care-
lead-testing-and-reduction-grant-program (last visited Feb. 4, 2024). 
21 School and Child Care Lead Testing and Reduction Grant Program Summary Data, United States Environmental 
Protection Agency, 
https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/school-and-child-care-lead-testing-and-reduction-grant-
program (last visited Feb. 4, 2024). 

 
9 
 
kits that could be used in schools and at home.22 When the team at Stemloop conducted pilot 
classes at Chicago Public Schools (“CPS”) high schools, they described their experience as 
follows: 
We ran two pilots at CPS schools. The first was at Von Steuben High School, where 
we sampled two drinking water fountains, five times each. The second was at 
Infinity Math, Science and Technology High School in Little Village, where 
students had collected stagnated water from their homes for testing in the 
classroom. The latter experience created awareness of lead in drinking water 
issues, was educational for the students, and exposed them to new technology that 
they were able to directly access and provide feedback on. Our team left feeling as 
if we had inspired and empowered the students to think more deeply about 
waterborne hazards, environmental contamination, the role of technology, and 
their own future potential – one Stemloop employee at the pilot is from Little Village 
and the students cheered when they found out. We created at least a few citizen 
scientists that day and received a handful of thankful emails after the pilot. 
The introduction of this biosensor technology could allow schools and childcare facilities 
that otherwise would be discouraged by the cost and difficulty of traditional lead sampling to 
collect information about lead levels through rapid testing.  Even if rapid tests cannot replace 
current laboratory sampling methods, having some information of lead levels in schools that 
would otherwise not conduct any testing at all would be useful. Further, upon learning from 
rapid tests that there may be dangerous levels of lead, schools would likely be encouraged to 
conduct more rigorous testing through traditional laboratory sampling methods.  
Beyond encouraging their use through grant programs, EPA can also integrate rapid 
biosensor tests into the proposed LCRI language itself. For example, EPA could slightly modify 
the language in 40 C.F.R. § 141.92(c)(2)(i)(B) to require that notifications to schools and 
childcare facilities include information about sampling and rapid testing.  Requiring water 
systems to provide information to schools about cheaper lead testing alternatives to traditional 
sampling, like the biosensor technology here, would better equip schools to engage in voluntary 
testing and protect children.  This change to the informational requirement would be especially 
effective if schools were able to access rapid tests from their water system.  To further 
supplement these changes, EPA could also modify the actual sampling requirements to mandate 
that water systems conduct traditional laboratory sampling wherever schools identify a potential 
lead hazard through a rapid biosensor test.  One example of how EPA could do so would be to 
 
22  Kristen J. Jung, et al., At-home, Cell-free Synthetic Biology Education Modules for Transcriptional Regulation 
and Environmental Water Quality Monitoring, National Library of Medicine, 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9881948/ (Jan. 9, 2023). 

 
10 
 
adjust 40 C.F.R. § 141.92(f) to read as follows: “Community water systems must collect five 
samples per school and two samples per child care facility at outlets typically used to provide 
water for human consumption. Community water systems must additionally collect samples at 
any school or child care facility where alternative lead tests report exceedances of the action 
level. These samples do not replace the minimum sampling requirements elsewhere in this 
subsection” (additions in italics).23 In sum, EPA should consider modifying the language of the 
proposed rule to include requirements that leverage advancements in technology like the 
biosensor technology discussed here to better protect children’s health. 
Even if EPA may lack SDWA authority to require non-PWS school and childcare 
facilities to gather more drinking water quality information, state laws may provide state 
agencies that implement the LCRI with broader authority than the federal statute.  Biosensor 
technology can also play a pivotal role in encouraging lead testing in schools and childcare 
facilities through state and local regulation. Because the technology is, as discussed above, 
cheaper and more user friendly, state and local authorities may be willing to mandate that 
schools and childcare facilities conduct rapid testing, even if those state or local authorities 
would be unwilling to mandate more expansive traditional laboratory sampling.  
The 2017 Illinois Lead Testing Law is a concrete example of how state laws can be a 
vital tool to keep children safe from lead and can have a broader reach than the SDWA. That 
program required public elementary schools to sample their drinking water for lead.24 Of the  
roughly 2,100 schools that reported sampling results, over 1,800 found some level of lead in their 
drinking water, including over 1,350 schools with at least one sample exceeding 5 ppb.25 Those 
schools with samples exceeding 5 ppb were required by the law to notify parents.26 As a result of 
the testing, Illinois public school administrators gained crucial information as to how widespread 
the lead problem was throughout the state, disseminated that information to parents, and were 
required to take immediate actions to mitigate risks to children, such as shutting down or 
repairing fixtures with dangerous lead levels.27 With the biosensor technology described here, 
similar state laws and programs can achieve even more impact than the 2017 Illinois law. 
Agencies in states like Illinois that already have authority to direct schools and childcare 
facilities to test could consider requiring or encouraging more and more frequent testing using 
biosensors. The lower costs and ease-of-use of rapid biosensor tests should mean that similar 
 
23 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 85084 
(Dec. 6, 2023).  
24 225 ILCS 10/5.9 (2017). 
25 Emily Hoerner, An Illinois Law Required Schools to Test Water for Lead. They Found it all Over the State., 
Chicago Tribune (May 7, 2023). 
26 Id. 
27 Id. 

 
11 
 
programs could be extended beyond elementary schools and could more feasibly require periodic 
testing that would be more reliable than a one-time sampling.  
With the understanding that state authorities may be discouraged from imposing stricter 
sampling mandates under state laws due to increased costs associated with doing so, we 
encourage EPA to highlight potential benefits and reduced costs of testing with biosensor 
technology in its discussions with state agencies that help implement the SDWA. Maximizing 
the efficacy and expertise of such state agencies will be key for EPA in advancing the goals of 
the LCRI. Therefore, EPA should strive in implementing the LCRI to leverage the combination 
of broader state authority, like in the 2017 Illinois statute, with new technology, like rapid 
biosensors, to best protect children at all schools and childcare facilities.  
B. Compliance Alternatives for a Lead Action Level Exceedance for Small 
Community Water Systems and Non-Transient, Non-Community Water 
Systems: 
“2. EPA is requesting comment on the ability and practicality of point-of-use devices to 
address multiple contaminants.” 
In response to the EPA’s inquiry into the feasibility and practicality of point-of-use 
devices to mitigate the risk posed by multiple contaminants, it is important to consider how rapid 
lead test kits can be a significant asset in assuring the efficacy of point-of-use devices.  
First and foremost, though, rapid lead biosensors serve as an efficient, relatively low-cost 
measure to illustrate the ability and practicality of point-of-use devices by monitoring their 
effectiveness in filtering out lead. Specifically, these kits can be paired with point-of-use devices 
to assess filter performance; confirm adequate filter performance over time; and locate optimal 
water sources at which to apply point-of-use filters. Specifically, users can periodically conduct 
on-site lead analysis using these kits, providing a quick assessment of lead levels in their water. 
This is crucial for users to monitor (1) filter performance, by setting a baseline of water quality 
before the application of a point-of-use filter; (2) ongoing performance after the point-of-use 
filter is applied; and (3) the effective lifespan of the point-of-use filters, considering different 
households may use filters differently and different source water characteristics may cause filters 
to become ineffective more quickly. The rapid lead biosensors act as a proactive measure, 
enabling users to regularly monitor lead levels and ensure the ongoing effectiveness of installed 
point-of-use devices.  
Increased insight into water quality across time is crucial to address the long-recognized 
challenge of variability in lead content at a single tap over time or at different taps in the same 

 
12 
 
household.28 In other words, water from a kitchen sink may have different lead levels than water 
from a refrigerator spout in that same kitchen, and water at the same tap may exhibit different 
lead levels depending on the day or time sampled.  A key component of rapid lead biosensors is 
their ease of use and ability to provide crucial information instantaneously, allowing the kits to 
assist users in evaluating the relative lead risk of various taps within a home. This helps 
households decide whether a tap filter is needed in just one room or for the entire house or even 
to adjust which taps they use for drinking water in the first place. Biosensor tests can assist 
residents in identifying optimal water sources within their homes and guide their use of point-of-
use devices to best mitigate lead risks. 
 
Biosensors can also help illuminate the ability and practicality of point-of-use devices to 
address multiple contaminants.  Biosensors can be made to detect a range of contaminants, so 
they can help reveal benefits of point-of-use filters in preventing exposure to other contaminants 
beyond lead. Rapid biosensor tests based on the technology developed by WISE-Dx members 
have been produced and can be designed to test for the presence of a wide variety of chemicals 
that may be found in drinking water.29  The biosensor technology here has been studied with 
respect to testing for metals like lead, copper, zinc, and cadmium, but also antibiotics and other 
chemical compounds.  This means biosensor tests could confirm the efficacy of point-of-use 
devices in protecting people from a variety of chemicals that might be filtered out alongside lead 
contamination. This would demonstrate that point-of-use filters deployed to meet the LCRI 
requirements deliver even greater public health benefits.   
 
Integrating biosensors into LCRI implementation will facilitate familiarity with their 
usage and results interpretation among regulators, systems, and consumers, meaning that point-
of-use device benefits beyond lead filtration can be observed and appreciated. Notably, this 
biosensor technology is nearing the ability to analyze copper levels in a commercially viable and 
 
28 “The primary rationale for promulgating the LCR as a treatment technique rule was due to the nature of lead and 
copper contamination.  As EPA described in 1991, and is still accurate today, lead and copper do not generally occur 
in source water, but instead are introduced in drinking water by the corrosive action of water in contact with 
plumbing materials containing lead and copper.  These sources of lead and copper were and continue to be present 
in both the water system’s distribution system and in plumbing materials in homes. In 1991, EPA explained that lead 
and copper levels at the tap can be highly variable ‘due to many factors including the amount of lead and copper in 
the resident’s plumbing or in the PWS’s distribution system . . . temperature, age of plumbing components, chemical 
and physical characteristics of distributed water, and the length of time water is in contact with those materials’ (56 
FR 26473, USEPA, 1991).  EPA noted that while it is feasible to accurately measure the level of lead or copper in an 
individual sample, the inherent variability across sites and systems makes it ‘technologically infeasible to ascertain 
whether the lead or copper level at a tap at a single point in time represents effective application of the best available 
treatment technology’ (53 FR 31527, USEPA, 1988).”  National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and 
Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84906 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
29 Jaeyoung K. Jung, et al., Cell-free biosensors for rapid detection of water contaminants, Nature Biotechnology, 
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-020-0571-7 (Jul. 6, 2020).   

 
13 
 
consumer-friendly kit, and it is under development to rapidly test for per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS).30 PFAS, characterized as “forever chemicals,” are estimated to be present in 
at least 45% of the nation’s tap water, emphasizing the importance of expanding options for 
lower-cost, accessible PFAS testing.31 Given that EPA’s current proposed National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulation for certain PFAS would set Maximum Contaminant Levels based on  
analytical limits, rather than the public health imperative to eliminate PFAS exposure, ther eis 
tremendous value in facilitating new ways to measure and track PFAS at the tap.32 Increasing 
collective experience with alternative modes of water quality testing is particularly important 
given that so many Americans draw their water from unregulated private wells, water sources 
that have not been systematically tested for PFAS.33  Integrating rapid biosensor technology in 
the LCRI implementation will create opportunities for regulators, water systems, and individual 
members of the public to learn more about how to deploy this new technology most effectively 
and efficiently to address other dangerous drinking water contaminants, whether through future 
EPA regulation under the SDWA or otherwise.  
 
Rapid biosensor tests can help ground truth the efficacy of point-of-use devices, by 
measuring their effectiveness over time, and can be adapted to address other chemicals of serious 
concern. This real-time data, coupled with the broader contaminant removal capability of point-
of-use devices, empowers individuals and systems to make informed decisions about water 
quality. Biosensors enable continuous assessment of point-of-use devices and the potential to 
significantly contribute to a comprehensive water quality management strategy that goes beyond 
addressing lead contamination. For these reasons, we recommend EPA consider incentivizing or 
requiring the use of rapid lead biosensors alongside point-of-use devices. 
 
C. Public Education: 
“1. The proposed determination that the public education treatment technique is feasible and 
prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible.” 
We endorse the proposed determination affirming the feasibility of the public education 
treatment technique in preventing—or at least reducing—known or anticipated adverse health 
 
30 Attachment 2 – URoL:ASC: The design, development, and distribution of rapid, in-home, water quality 
biosensors, at 11-14 (summary of WISE-Dx research proposal provided to NSF).   
31 Tap water study detects PFAS “forever chemicals” across the US, U.S. Geological Survey, 
https://www.usgs.gov/news/national-news-release/tap-water-study-detects-pfas-forever-chemicals-across-us (Jul. 5, 
2023).  
32 PFAS National Primary Drinking Water Regulation Rulemaking, 88 Fed. Reg. 18638 (Mar. 29, 2023). 
33 PFAS and Drinking Water: What You Should Know, PFAS-Exchange, https://pfas-exchange.org/pfas-and-
drinking-water-what-you-should-
know/#:~:text=Most%20smaller%20supplies%20have%20not,all%20labs%20offer%20PFAS%20testing . 

 
14 
 
effects to the best possible extent. “To more accurately understand water insecurity, we need to 
know if humans have reliably sufficient water for basic domestic needs, including for drinking 
and hygiene.”34 “[W]hile most U.S. consumers drink tap water (71 percent) and more than half 
(55 percent) are concerned about contaminants in their drinking water or don’t know what’s in it, 
nearly half (42 percent) do not take steps to filter or treat their home’s drinking water.”35 More 
and more efficient manners of informing consumers about water quality threats and conditions 
would go a long way toward helping consumers take necessary steps to better protect themselves. 
In light of these concerns and this inaction, the integration of rapid lead testing kits could 
significantly enhance the intended impact of the public education requirements outlined by EPA 
in the LCRI. This enhancement can be realized through expediting the public notification 
process; motivating and assisting consumers in taking proactive measures to protect themselves; 
and fostering increased resident engagement by encouraging requests for traditional tap sampling 
authorized under the proposed LCRI. The following parts of this section will address how the 
integration of rapid lead testing can assist with these goals.  
Before turning to specific applications of rapid lead biosensors in the public education 
requirements, it is important to note that implementing the use of rapid lead biosensors could 
increase compliance costs associated with public education requirements.  However, those 
systems incurring these expenses are those with identified lead problems and these costs are 
justified by the potential public health benefits. Further, any marginal increases in public 
education costs are highly unlikely to alter the basic benefit-cost analysis of the LCRI because 
EPA’s lowest estimate of the service line replacement requirements is approximately $1.9 
billion, or 64% of EPA’s “Estimated National Total Monetized Annualized PWS Rule Costs,” 
and EPA’s projected public education costs amount to just $251 million, or 8.5%, of these same 
projected costs.36 The power of this cost comparison only increases if the LCRI’s more 
expensive cost projections are considered.  EPA’s cost analysis based on a discount rate of 7% 
show service line replacement cost estimates amounts from approximately $2.4 billion (80.7% of 
projected costs) to approximately $3.5 billion (73.2% of projected costs).37 
 
34 Stephanie Kulke, When it’s ‘easier to buy Coke than water,’ Northwestern Now, 
https://news.northwestern.edu/stories/2023/07/anthropologist-sera-young-on-global-issue-of-water-insecurity/ (Jul. 
27, 2023).   
35 More Than Half of Americans Are Concerned About Their Drinking Water, But Many Don’t Take Action, 
National Science Foundation, https://www.nsf.org/news/more-than-half-of-americans-are-concerned-about-their-
drinking-water (last accessed Feb. 4, 2024). 
 
 
 

 
15 
 
“2. Comment and supporting data on the capacity of water systems to conduct some or all of 
the required public education activities in 30 days, or another period of time that is less than 
30 or 60 days, after the end of the tap sampling period in which a systemwide lead action level 
exceedance occurs.” 
EPA will no doubt receive comments from systems and others as to the timeframe in 
which water systems have the capacity to conduct some or all of the required public education 
activities. Regardless of whatever capacity concerns exist and are substantiated, it is crucial to 
highlight that rapid lead kits could play a significant role in providing faster, less expensive 
public education activities in the wake of an action level exceedance. In the event that systems 
express concerns about feasibility or timing, EPA should consider incorporating requirements 
related to rapid testing.  The notification regarding or distribution of biosensor tests could be 
included in the standard public education requirements.  Alternatively, requiring or allowing the 
use of biosensor tests could be made a part of any compliance flexibility mechanisms allowed in 
the final rule, such as, for example if a given water system with an action level exceedance is 
required to submit a plan for actions it will take if it seeks alternative education requirements or 
additional time to complete or education requirements.  
These public education requirements come into play when a water system surpasses the 
action level in over 10% of its compliance samples, a threshold designed to identify problems 
with the system’s corrosion control treatment (“CCT”). That action levels exceedances are meant 
to indicate system-wide issues based on a small sample size underscores the urgency of promptly 
informing all residents about the water reaching their homes in these scenarios. In this context, 
rapid biosensor tests could be distributed so consumers throughout the system could swiftly 
receive rapid test results, offering them immediate insights into their water quality. Systems 
could provide rapid lead biosensors alongside the public education materials required when the 
system exceeds the action-level. For example, § 141.85(b)(2)(i) points out that systems must 
deliver written materials within paragraph (a) of § 141.85. These requirements outline the 
necessity of apprising residents about the use of filters, the importance of running water to flush 
out lead, the need to minimize the use of hot water, clarification that boiling water does not 
diminish lead levels, appropriate cleaning methods, and additional measures to mitigate lead 
exposure. Furthermore, the proposed required notices would urge regular testing and provide 
guidance on how consumers can initiate the process to have their water tested. EPA should make 
a simple and powerful addition to these proposed requirements:  a rapid biosensor test should be 
included in the package delivering these notices. At least, information about accessible and easy-
to-use testing alternatives should be included.    
Whatever the timeframe ultimately required for the distribution of public education 
materials, the requirements for those education materials should be buttressed by inclusion of 

 
16 
 
information about rapid lead biosensors.  Better still, biosensors could be distributed as part of 
those public education efforts themselves.   
“3. Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water systems are 
capable of providing consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three calendar 
days of obtaining those results, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or copper 
action level, or if a longer time frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 
14 calendar days).” 
Whatever timeframe may be feasible for systems to deliver results once samples have 
been processed at a laboratory, it is evident that systems can leverage rapid lead biosensors in 
conjunction with traditional sampling methods to provide meaningful information to consumers 
more quickly.  Acknowledging that the prompt delivery of consumer notices depends on the 
capacities of systems, integrating rapid lead testing kits emerges as a complementary solution. At 
sites where lead and copper testing is conducted, systems can distribute these rapid lead 
biosensors to residents at the same time as drawing samples for laboratory analysis; biosensor 
results will be available nearly immediately, while the residents await the more complete 
laboratory results.  
In other words, systems can conduct both tests at once. This is exactly what our team is 
researching in Chicago—we are providing pilot participants with biosensor tests during the same 
visit as when we draw water for testing at the laboratory, so consumers receive biosensor results 
instantly and the lab results when they are ready.  Our proposal here is that water systems can 
conduct rapid lead biosensor testing along with traditional sampling in just the same way. 
Consumers would be provided with same-day rapid testing results, enabling consumers to take 
steps that day to protect themselves.  Water systems themselves may benefit from knowing that a 
rapid biosensor has already detected lead in a sample heading to a laboratory; it could be marked 
for prioritized processing or could be flagged within the systems inventory or other planning 
processes, so the system is ready to proceed most efficiently once the laboratory result is 
returned. 
Because systems may comment that a three-day notification window is too short, EPA 
can require in the final LCRI this parallel use of rapid testing kits contemporaneously with 
laboratory sample collection. This would place less pressure on the three or even seven-day 
notification period because consumers would be provided with same-day notification of whether 
the dissolved lead content of their water exceeded the regulatory threshold.  Consumers can take 
steps that same day to mitigate their risks.  Further, consumers would be able to use these tests at 
multiple water-dispensing locations within their homes. 
It is crucial to highlight here that careful consideration around messaging and 
communications at each step would be needed and that this proposed parallel process would 

 
17 
 
create two distinct notifications—the first being the same-day notification provided by the rapid 
biosensor tests and the second being more detailed traditional sampling results released to 
consumers at whatever later date EPA deems feasible in this rulemaking.  Explaining the 
difference between the testing and sampling approaches would be part of the public notification 
effort and would be necessarily delivered at the time of rapid lead biosensor testing because that 
is when a resident could first see a result indicating that lead is in their drinking water.  In 
addition to explaining the differences between the two approaches, systems would need to 
highlight other important points such as the difference between dissolved and total lead, the 
possibility for lead results at the same tap to vary at different times, and the possibility for lead 
results to differ based on the time of day or the tap at which the test was conducted.  This would 
be needed to avoid potential confusion as consumers would have a better idea of how to interpret 
each test.  The pilot project WISE-Dx is conducting under the NSF grant includes developing 
and rolling out such communications with our technology and studying if and how well these 
notification communications work to transmit information meaningfully and to support consumer 
actions to protect themselves.38 EPA should consider requiring this dual approach to provide the 
most comprehensive and phased strategy to keep consumers as quickly and well-informed as 
possible about their water quality.  
“4. Whether the proposed requirement for water systems to offer lead sampling to consumers 
with LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines in the notice of service line material is 
effective at reducing adverse health effects. EPA is also requesting comment on the 
requirement for water systems to deliver consumer-initiated test results within three days of 
obtaining those results.” 
The proposed mandate to provide lead sampling to consumers with LSLs, GRR service 
lines, or unknown service lines is a pivotal component of the LCRI.  This provision ensures that 
citizens served by the most potentially dangerous service lines have the chance to be aware of 
their water quality.  However, a significant drawback in this proposal is the prolonged duration 
associated with customer-initiated lead sampling.  Requiring that systems provide an option to 
request lead sampling does not mean such requests will be fulfilled quickly.  Even beyond the 
requirement to deliver results within three days, or some other timeframe, there is the significant 
possibility that simply processing test requests and collecting samples will take a significant 
 
38 Attachment 2 – URoL:ASC: The design, development, and distribution of rapid, in-home, water quality 
biosensors, at 10-11 (summary of WISE-Dx research proposal provided to NSF).  “The primary expected outcome 
is an at-home test that can easily be used by non-scientists to determine if there is Pb in their water. Findings about 
its accuracy and impact on [knowledge, attitudes, and behavior] will be communicated to participants through 
follow up email/mail communications, and in aggregate to the broader communities in consultation with the 
Community Advisory Board including at city council meetings, community meetings, and in two OpEds in Chicago 
newspapers, similar to those we have published elsewhere.” Id at 11. 

 
18 
 
amount of time given the logistical complexities involved.39 It is common for turnaround times 
of consumer-initiated laboratory sampling to take between 2–4 weeks based on the time needed 
to send kits to residences, wait for the kits to be mailed back and processed by the laboratory, 
and then finally having to deliver the results back to residences.  As such, whatever EPA sets as 
the time limit to deliver results, that clock will not even begin to run for an undetermined and 
potentially unacceptably long period.  While a customer waits for their request to be processed 
and a sample or samples to be collected and tested, everyone in that home continues to drink 
water that is possibly lead contaminated.  
For example, the City of Chicago’s current customer-initiated laboratory lead testing 
program took three years to provide laboratory results confirming dangerous levels of lead at the 
undersigned faculty member’s former residence, a townhome built in 1977.  He made the initial 
request for a testing kit on October 8, 2019.  The estimated completion time provided by the City 
was 365 days. Not until December 2021 did City staff arrive at his home to visually inspect the 
service line connection within the home and draw samples for laboratory analysis, an 
appointment only scheduled after samples self-collected by the resident were analyzed and 
revealed lead above the action level.  Notification of that the results from the City-drawn samples 
indicated action level exceedances came four months later, in March of 2022.  The City only 
provided the actual laboratory results in a letter dated November, 2023.  
Given that experience in Chicago and the fact that SDWA requires the Administrator to 
identify treatment techniques that “would prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the 
health of persons to the extent feasible,”40 EPA should require or encourage systems to provide 
rapid biosensor tests to customers who request traditional sampling. Rapid biosensor tests could 
be provided both with the required public education required after a system exceeds the action 
level, as discussed above in response to question #2 in this section, and concurrent with 
traditional laboratory sample collection when requested by a specific customer, as described 
above in response to question #3 in this section.  In either case, the combination of rapid lead 
biosensors with traditional sampling methods could feasibly mitigate a greater proportion of 
adverse health effects by promptly delivering actionable water quality information to consumers 
 
39 Id. 
40 “In establishing treatment technique requirements, the Administrator is required to identify those treatment 
techniques ‘which, in the Administrator’s judgment, would prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the 
health of persons to the extent feasible.’ 42 U.S.C. 300g–1(b)(7)(A).  ‘Feasible’ is defined in section 1412(b)(4)(D) 
of the SDWA as ‘feasible with the use of the best technology, treatment techniques and other means which the 
Administrator finds, after examination for efficacy under field conditions and not solely under laboratory conditions, 
are available (taking cost into consideration).’ Specifically, EPA must assess the ‘best technology,’ as opposed to 
generally available technology, that has been tested beyond the laboratory under full-scale conditions; however, the 
technology need not be in widespread, full-scale use (SDWA section 1412(b)(4)(D)).” National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84901 (Dec. 6, 2023). 

 
19 
 
and thus enabling them to take steps to avoid consuming or using contaminated water. This is 
aligned with EPA’s proposed requirements of providing notifications “as soon as practicable”41 
and “[increasing] the likelihood that the public education activities are effective in preventing 
adverse effects of lead on the health of persons to the extent feasible.”42 
Integrating rapid biosensor tests could help maximize the potential value from the 
proposed mandate to offer lead sampling to consumers served by certain types of service lines. 
Doing so can help better mitigate adverse health effects by allowing for more opportunities for 
consumers to more quickly take steps to avoid using contaminated water. The value is further 
shown as consumers are essentially self-notified on the same day and can take the necessary 
precautions immediately. For example, parents and childcare providers can use these tests as 
they decide which water to use for preparing food, including infant formula, and beverages for 
their children.43  Rapid biosensors can be used to test water throughout homes and buildings, 
enabling residents to make the safest choices about water use even among options within a 
household.  Alternatively, if these tests demonstrate that water quality is free of dissolved lead, 
they can decide to spend money for other household needs that might otherwise be spent on 
bottled water.44 
A major reason that EPA is including this proposed requirement in the LCRI is that “[it] 
believes this proposed requirement would encourage more people who are at greater risk of lead 
exposure to have their tap sampled to find out if there is lead in their drinking water and what 
actions they can take to reduce their risk of exposure.”45 Rapid lead biosensors, deployed 
alongside traditional sampling, as described above, can be crucial to advancing this goal, 
 
41 “Section 1414(c)(2)(C) of SDWA specifies additional requirements related to the public notice if the action level 
exceedance has the potential to have serious adverse effects on human health as a result of short-term exposure, 
including that it must ‘be distributed as soon as practicable, but not later than 24 hours’ after the water system learns 
of the action level exceedance, and that the system must report the exceedance to both the State and the 
Administrator within that same time period (42 U.S.C. 300g–3(c)(2)(C)(i) and (iii)).” National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84901 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
42 “For the proposed LCRI, EPA is retaining the overall framework of the public education provision in the LCRR, 
which requires water systems to educate consumers about the risks of lead in drinking water and ways to reduce 
their risk.  EPA is proposing changes to strengthen the public education requirements to (1) increase the likelihood 
that the public education activities are effective in preventing adverse effects of lead on the health of persons to the 
extent feasible, and (2) conform to proposed changes to other aspects of the rule such as the removal of the lead 
trigger level.” National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 
84878, 84946 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
43Attachment 2 – URoL:ASC: The design, development, and distribution of rapid, in-home, water quality biosensors, 
at 3, 9-11 (summary of WISE-Dx research provided to NSF). 
44 Id. 
45 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84950 
(Dec. 6, 2023). 

 
20 
 
especially for the most vulnerable populations.46  Accurate and timely information about the 
presence of most contaminants is currently very difficult for most people to obtain due to both 
bureaucratic and technical reasons.  People from lower income or historically disadvantaged 
communities may be less likely to open a communication from a water system—which may be 
mistaken for a past-due bill, for example—or may have less time or fewer resources with which 
to navigate a convoluted sampling request process.  A unique feature of the biosensing 
technology is that it is accessible to diverse stakeholders—people from a range of ages, abilities, 
and backgrounds can see, touch, and operate these devices, creating powerful entry points for 
engagement and education, including the necessary engagement and education required to follow 
through with multi-step water system programs to implement customer-initiated sampling with 
laboratory analysis.  
The proposed requirement for water systems to offer customer-initiated lead sampling 
may even contribute to more extensive processing, sampling, and lab delays in the future given 
that there should be more demand for such sampling.  Those could be very natural consequences 
of EPA’s goal that the proposed requirement requiring systems to more broadly offer sampling 
“would encourage more people who are at greater risk of lead exposure to have their tap 
sampled.”47  Indeed, though increased sampling demand is part of the purpose of this 
requirement and would be a positive public health development, EPA should build strategies into 
the LCRI to address this possible effect of implementing the LCRI.  The use of lead biosensors 
as described in this section aligns with the proposed requirement and mitigates this potential 
implementation issue in that provides consumers prompt information from rapid test results even 
while they await traditional results on a timeline feasible for systems.   
While rapid lead biosensors do not substitute for traditional sampling analyzed at a 
laboratory, this new technology can address important limitations in the process for customer-
initiated tests under the proposed LCRI by delivering results on the same day. Consumers 
receive some meaningful information immediately and can act on that information even while 
they await traditional laboratory results that, if history is an indication, may lag for extremely 
long periods of time.  Accordingly, EPA should consider incorporating rapid lead biosensors in 
the LCRI provisions regarding customer-initiated sampling.  
 
46 Attachment 2 – URoL:ASC: The design, development, and distribution of rapid, in-home, water quality 
biosensors, at 3, 9-11 (summary of WISE-Dx research provided to NSF). 
47 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84950 
(Dec. 6, 2023). 

 
21 
 
D. Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper: 
“3. Comment on the applicability of alternate sampling protocols to assess CCT performance, 
increase customer participation, and other relevant factors.” 
In assessing the applicability of alternate sampling protocols to evaluate CCT 
performance, and encourage customer participation, it is crucial to first acknowledge that the 
traditional sampling protocols established by EPA, such as water running time and sample 
collection methods, address important technical concerns.  That said, the standard sampling 
protocol also creates limitations related to logistics, timing and cost.  Here, rapid lead biosensors 
can be a valuable complement to traditional methods, enabling more testing, across different 
time and at multiple locations.  
The feasibility and cost-efficacy of using rapid lead biosensors at multiple points of use 
and at different times is important given that EPA has noted that lead content in samples can 
vary greatly based at different times, days, and fixtures, let alone across different sampling 
sites.48 For instance, in a house with a LSL, rapid tests enable testing at various faucets within 
the house, offering insights into which lines or fixtures may have elevated lead levels. This 
granular information can aid in assessing CCT efficacy, especially when determining if lead is 
originating from within the house where further optimization of CCT might not mitigate it in any 
event.  Additionally, as discussed above, rapid lead biosensors can empower consumers to 
protect themselves by providing information about relative lead levels in different water sources 
within their homes.  
“EPA is seeking feedback on other alternative sampling protocols, such as random daytime 
sampling (in which sampling sites are not predetermined and there is no minimum stagnation 
time), that could be used to assess CCT performance (See section IX.).” 
Rapid biosensor tests are well-suited for use in the event EPA pursues alternative 
sampling protocols, offering the advantage of providing quick and almost instantaneous results. 
Because biosensors react to dissolved lead and do not need to depend on specific collection 
techniques or chemical preparation, they can be easily deployed without predetermined sampling 
site and or minimum stagnation times.  It’s crucial to note again that while rapid biosensor tests, 
at this point, cannot replace traditional laboratory-based sampling, specifically because currently 
available biosensor kits do not detect particularized lead. 
 
48 “EPA noted that while it is feasible to accurately measure the level of lead or copper in an individual sample, the 
inherent variability across sites and systems makes it “technologically infeasible to ascertain whether the lead or 
copper level at a tap at a single point in time represents effective application of the best available treatment 
technology.” National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 
84878, 84906 (Dec. 6, 2023). 

 
22 
 
Rapid biosensor tests can be utilized to guide where traditional sampling may be 
necessary. For instance, if a rapid test indicates elevated lead levels, it suggests a specific need 
for more detailed traditional sampling. Ultimately, rapid biosensor tests could serve as valuable 
tools in the context of alternative sampling approaches, providing real-time information for 
assessing CCT performance and ensuring water quality compliance. 
“5. Comment and any relevant data on the number and tiering of samples used to calculate 
the 90th percentile lead and/or copper levels for systems with LSLs for purposes of assessing 
CCT efficacy. Specifically, whether samples from non-LSL sites that have higher lead 
concentrations than samples from LSL sites should be included and whether these higher 
values should replace lower values from LSL sites in the 90th percentile calculation.” 
The emerging availability of rapid biosensor tests should support EPA in requiring or 
encouraging the collection and reporting of test results from non-LSL sites that have higher lead 
concentrations than samples from LSL sites. Non-LSL sampling results exceeding the action 
level may reveal that there is an undiscovered source of lead within the system or that the site is 
actually an LSL site that was missed during the inventory process. Given the distinct information 
that could be derived from non-LSL sites with high lead levels, EPA should consider including 
in compliance calculations results exceeding action levels from non-LSL sites without displacing 
any data from LSL sites. We agree with EPA that systems should prioritize sampling LSL sites, 
and thus we support EPA’s decision to refuse to allow for substitution of non-LSL samples for 
LSL samples.  
The relevance of the rapid biosensor tests to including non-LSL site samples in 
compliance calculations is that biosensor tests make it more viable for systems to conduct more 
extensive testing of non-LSL sites. The lower cost, time, and effort that would go into testing 
non-LSL sites with rapid lead testing kits would mean that systems could conduct more non-LSL 
tests without redirecting resources to sample LSL sites. This additional information may, in some 
circumstances, act as valuable data that could supplement EPA’s proposed approach to the 90th 
percentile standard.  
One concrete way in which EPA may be able to gather more information from non-LSL 
sites—and in doing so, gain more insight into where resources are best allocated to resolve the 
most pressing lead threats to drinking water quality—is to require or encourage systems to use 
rapid biosensor tests extensively throughout the water system, even at non-LSL sites. Where the 
rapid tests flag potential lead hazards at non-LSL sites, EPA can require or encourage additional 
testing using traditional lab methods.  For example, if a customer suspects that water delivered 
by a non-LSL site is contaminated with lead, and a rapid test confirms that suspicion, it could 
make sense to prioritize—and then include in compliance calculations—traditional laboratory 
sampling at that non-LSL site.  Such as a result would merit such regulatory attention because 

 
23 
 
the presence of lead above the action level at a site the system had classified as being served by a 
non-LSL line could indicate a previously unknown lead issue within a portion of the system 
larger than the particular service line. Such a scenario could also demonstrate a potential 
oversight or error in the system’s inventory itself; rapid lead biosensors could then serve as a 
confirmation means to ensure accurate inventories under the LCRR (see also below at Section G. 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan).  
In other words, rapid lead biosensors can provide a cheap way to conduct an initial 
survey of lower-risk sites for which compliance sampling is not currently required and that may 
not be worth initially testing with traditional laboratory methods. EPA should consider the 
additional feasibility of acquiring non-LSL data presented by rapid lead biosensors by, for 
example, fashioning more stringent requirements for conducting and reporting the results of non-
LSL testing. 
“6. Comment on whether State authority to specify sampling locations when a system is 
conducting reduced monitoring should apply regardless of the number of taps meeting sample 
site criteria.” 
In general, we endorse the notion that giving more thoughtful consideration to the 
selection of sampling locations is a positive aspect of the LCRI. Therefore, we support this 
proposal. One enhancement to this aspect of the LCRI could be the incorporation of rapid lead 
biosensors. These kits offer a valuable solution to enhance the efficiency of water sampling 
during reduced monitoring periods. They provide nearly instantaneous results, allowing for quick 
adjustments in sampling locations for traditional lab sampling as needed. This becomes 
particularly relevant when considering the state authority’s role in specifying sampling locations, 
irrespective of the number of taps meeting sample site criteria.  
Incorporating rapid biosensor tests into state approaches to select sampling locations is 
justified due to their cost-effectiveness and efficiency.  Again, here, rapid tests would not replace 
traditional sampling but could be utilized as a screener for systems or state authorities to better 
decide where to sample, enabling state authorities to make informed decisions about sampling 
locations in real time, at a lower cost. This flexibility empowers states to efficiently target 
sampling efforts, ensuring resources are allocated where needed most.  
Therefore, we recommend that, in promulgating the final LCRI, EPA clarify the 
usefulness of alternative sampling technologies, like rapid biosensor tests, when State authorities 
exercise their powers to specify sampling locations.   

 
24 
 
E. Service Line Replacement: 
“10. Whether systems conducting deferred service line replacement should be subject to any 
additional requirements beyond those for systems that are not replacing service lines in 
accordance with a deferred deadline.” 
Systems with permission to defer service line replacement are being allowed to leave lead 
pipes in place longer, exposing people to that lead longer.  Therefore, such systems should be 
required to do everything else possible to protect people.  That is the right policy from a public 
health perspective and will incentivize systems to replace LSLs as fast as possible. 
In assessing whether systems conducting deferred service line replacement should face 
additional requirements, EPA should consider how rapid lead kits can serve as proactive 
measures that can help protect public health.  EPA can mandate that these systems, which are 
already failing to keep up with the nationwide schedule EPA has set to protect public health, 
provide residents with rapid lead testing kits. By implementing this requirement, funded by the 
systems themselves, EPA can encourage the systems to accelerate service line replacement and 
simultaneously empower consumers with immediate information about their water quality with 
which they can take prompt actions to protect themselves and their families.  
It is noteworthy that the NSF-funded research our team is in the process of launching will 
include a study of how the use of rapid lead biosensors affects people’s understandings of water 
quality problems and whether those people then take actions to related to water quality problems 
based on the rapid test results.49 Our study will pilot this technology in Chicago, one of the water 
systems anticipated to take advantage of the deferred deadlines provisions proposed in the LCRI.   
Requiring systems on deferred LSL replacement schedules implement rapid testing also 
aids those systems in understanding trends and targeting areas for more efficient public health 
interventions.  Specifically, by having real-time data from these tests, authorities can identify 
areas or communities where lead exposure risks are higher.  This is because we expect 
consumers whose biosensor tests indicate lead content above the regulatory minimum will 
request to have their tap traditionally sampled.  Additionally, biosensor results could be uploaded 
using a QR code or other easy means of reporting.  This information would then allow for more 
efficient and targeted interventions, such as coordinating blood lead level testing resources or 
point-of-use filter distribution, enabling authorities to focus their resources and efforts where 
they are most needed.  
Rapid lead biosensor tests could be a valuable tool to mitigate lead exposure risks during 
deferred service line replacement, aligning with the broader goal of safeguarding public health. 
 
49 Attachment 2 – URoL:ASC: The design, development, and distribution of rapid, in-home, water quality 
biosensors, at 9-11 (summary of WISE-Dx research provided to NSF).  

 
25 
 
As such, EPA should consider requiring systems conducting deferred service line replacement to 
utilize rapid lead biosensors in efforts to better protect public health.  
F. Distribution system and site assessment: 
“EPA is proposing to rename the LCRR's “find-and-fix” requirement to better align with the 
underlying requirements of the provision.” 
 EPA proposes to rename the LCRR “find-and-fix” provision as the “distribution system 
and site assessment” provision to better reflect the content of the requirements.50  This proposed 
nomenclature change is reasonable because it emphasizes the complicated nature of “fixing” lead 
in drinking water at a particular tap and reflects a more precise description of the regulatory 
expectations.  However, the substance of the process remains, where water systems are required 
to conduct an assessment of both the distribution system and specific sites where elevated lead 
levels are identified.  The overarching goal is still to understand and address the factors 
contributing to elevated lead levels in drinking water at a particular location and the requirement 
to consider actions to address identified issues is retained in the proposed LCRI.51  Though the 
name will change in the rule to deemphasize the “fix,” a significant challenge persists: water 
systems may lack, or perceive that they lack authorization to address elevated lead levels 
effectively, i.e. to “fix” them, if the source of lead is or may be within the home or on the 
homeowner’s property.  EPA explains that, “[f]or example, one stakeholder indicated that 
identified cause of the lead level could be a premise plumbing issue that the water system may 
not be authorized to “fix” it.52   
Rapid lead kits can help alleviate this problem by enabling water systems to sample more 
locations within a home, at lower costs, and less disruption to households, to “find” where, 
exactly, the problem is and either “fix,” it or advise the resident on how to do so.53  As 
 
50 “EPA has heard concerns that the term ‘find-and-fix’ is an inaccurate title for this section and should be changed 
as it implies the water system will implement the ‘fix’ in all cases. For example, one stakeholder indicated that 
identified cause of the lead level could be a premise plumbing issue that the water system may not be authorized to 
‘fix’.” National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 
84944 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
51 “The new, proposed name, distribution system and site assessment, more clearly explains what the proposed 
requirement for systems entails: assessing potential reasons at the system- and site-level why a lead sample tested 
above the lead action level.” National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 
Fed. Reg. 84878, 84965 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
52 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84944 
(Dec. 6, 2023). 
53 “With the proposed requirements for systems to provide customer-requested sampling and as well as the 
requirement to provide prompt notice of consumers’ lead sample results, EPA expects some customers might be 
more willing to provide access based on sampling results.  Where compliance sampling tests above the lead action 
level and is subject to the proposed distribution system and site assessment requirements, a system could identify the 
presence of a lead or GRR service line as the probable cause for the higher lead levels, which could increase the 

 
26 
 
mentioned throughout these comments, rapid biosensor tests can be utilized by both systems and 
consumers to test water from various sources and fixtures within a residence, such as 
refrigerators, sinks, and even showers, providing immediate results which can lead to the more 
precise identification of where lead is coming from within both distribution systems and specific 
sampling sites.  This more precise identification of lead sources can help expedite EPA’s 
“requirement for systems to collect follow-up tap samples at sites with elevated lead levels.”54  
Further, because these biosensors can be used at multiple locations within a home, it can help 
consumers and water systems have more confidence in which line is the probable cause of higher 
lead levels. Additionally, EPA reasons that consumers may be more willing to provide access to 
their homes based on sampling results, a shift in attitude that could be anticipated from rapid lead 
biosensor results, too.55  Rapid lead biosensors enable consumers to quickly perceive potential 
threats from their water quality, which would likely encourage them to request traditional 
sampling or to allow access for remedial efforts or further inspection by the water system. 
Overall, using rapid biosensors within the distribution system and site assessment requirements 
should allow for a more targeted and effective approach.  
Important substantive regulatory language for the “distribution system and site 
assessment” will remain unchanged by the LCRI, but EPA should ensure that preexisting 
language is implemented with the benefit of the most up-to-date tools.  This includes 
§ 141.82(j)(2), which provides that water systems must collect follow-up samples at any 
sampling site that exceeds the action level and that “[t]hese follow-up samples may use different 
sample volumes or different sample collection procedures to assess the source of elevated lead 
levels.”56 The current language, then, already contemplates that systems may use approaches 
other than the traditional laboratory sampling approach to “to assess the source of elevated lead 
levels.”57  EPA should explicitly endorse the use of rapid lead biosensors by water systems 
addressing this requirement. Moreover, incorporating periodic rapid biosensor testing at intervals 
after service line removal enhances the verification of lead levels and can be utilized to quickly 
show that the work was successful. This proactive approach expedites the confirmation process, 
 
likelihood that customers provide access for service line replacement.” National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84921 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
54 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84944 
(Dec. 6, 2023). 
55 “EPA expects some customers might be more willing to provide access based on sampling results. Where 
compliance sampling tests above the lead action level and is subject to the proposed distribution system and site 
assessment requirements, a system could identify the presence of a lead or GRR service line as the probable cause 
for the higher lead levels, which could increase the likelihood that customers provide access for service line 
replacement.” National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 
84878, 84921 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
56 40 C.F.R. § 141.82(j)(2). 
57 Id.  

 
27 
 
increasing confidence in work done, potentially reducing costs, and ensuring the sustained 
effectiveness of lead mitigation efforts. 
G. Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan: 
“EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed service line inventory approach.” 
 EPA has requested general comments on its service line inventory approach and 
comments on these points relate also to the section within the LCRI regarding “Feasibility of 
Proposed Inventory Requirements To Support Mandatory Service Line Replacement.” 
Specifically, our comments respond to the statement that “EPA has determined that it is feasible 
(i.e., technically possible and reasonably affordable relative to a large system) for water systems 
to create a complete and accurate inventory of service line materials by the proposed service line 
replacement deadline to support the treatment technique for mandatory service line 
replacement.”58 This section of these comments will explore the integration of rapid lead 
biosensor testing to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of LSL inventories in accordance 
with EPA’s well-founded position that “[e]stablishing an inventory of service line materials and 
identifying the location of LSLs are key steps in getting them replaced.”59 
“Service line inventories are the foundation from which water systems can take action to 
address LSLs.”60 Given that, we agree with EPA that “[l]ocating LSLs is the first and critical 
step to replacing them.”61 EPA’s inventory guidance instructs that “[p]rioritizing investigations 
of service lines that are unknown-likely lead and replacing them if found can lower costs and 
save time related to access agreements, traffic control, and field crew mobilization. This 
approach may also reduce the costs associated with false negatives (i.e., digging up a suspected 
lead line and finding that it is non-lead).”62 The rapid lead biosensing technology described 
above can help systems locate LSLs and screen for which service lines of unknown material 
merit follow-up, which will assist in developing a thorough, accurate, and actionable service line 
inventory. 
Rapid biosensor technology can assist in efficiently determining whether a service line of 
unknown material is, in fact, made of lead because a biosensor result showing lead above the 
action level would be inexpensive, easily gathered, and immediate evidence suggesting just that. 
 
58 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84933 
(Dec. 6, 2023). 
59 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Fact Sheet for Developing and Maintaining A Service Line Inventory, 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-06/EPA-Factsheet-Combined-06072023%20508-final.pdf (last 
accessed February 4, 2024).  
60 Id. 
61 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Office of Water, Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line 
Inventory, EPA-816-B-22-001, https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-
08/Inventory%20Guidance_August%202022_508%20compliant.pdf (Aug. 2022) at 1-2.    
62 Id. at 6-7.  

 
28 
 
Rapid lead biosensor tests could be applied by single staff members, using a real-time, positive 
biosensor result to trigger bringing the larger and more equipped crews to undertake more 
intensive investigation techniques like potholing. Without knowledge of the underlying pipe 
structure, common service line investigative methods such as potholing, water quality sampling, 
and predictive modeling can be time consuming, costly, and invasive.63  Rapid lead technology 
offers a less invasive, efficient, and less expensive approach to identifying likely LSLs by 
allowing water sources to be tested in just minutes.  This could include utilizing rapid tests for 
screening purposes to identify areas where more invasive or intensive inventory techniques, such 
as potholing, might be necessary. It would then be more economical to train and equip potholing 
crews to perform LSL replacements if they are directed more efficiently and more reliably to 
more likely LSLs.  EPA already notes that “systems can save costs by replacing LSLs when 
crews find them onsite during service line investigations.”64 Further, EPA recommends that 
“[w]ater systems should select the method(s) that are best suited to their particular distribution 
system and community, considering cost, labor skill requirements, disruption to homeowners, 
overall time, and accuracy.”65  Rapid biosensors provide a new inventory tool that is less 
invasive and disruptive to homeowners, has relatively low costs, requires no skilled labor, and 
provides immediate and accurate information. 
Additionally, the incorporation of rapid lead testing can prove beneficial in identifying 
lead issues at non-LSL sites, especially considering fixtures and connectors issues. Therefore, 
using rapid lead biosensors could be a cost-effective approach to confirm the absence of lead 
exposure through drinking water at sites not served by LSLs, offering a less expensive way to 
ensure the accuracy of inventories and to protect water safety in residences where lead issues are 
not anticipated. If it is confirmed that a home is served by a non-LSL and yet a rapid biosensor 
test detects lead, systems and residents will know there is another source of lead that must be 
addressed, such as fixtures. 
Accordingly, we recommend that EPA highlight these benefits of lead biosensors in the 
service line inventory contest when promulgating the final LCRI.  EPA could also integrate these 
comments in the context of revising its LCRR Inventory Guidance, providing insights on how 
new technologies, including rapid lead testing, can enhance and streamline various aspects of the 
inventory process. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
Integrating innovative rapid biosensor technology can enhance implementation of EPA’s 
proposed LCRI across multiple facets. Our comments have focused specifically on the potential 
 
63 Id. (See generally, Chapter 5, describing benefits and drawbacks of various inventory tactics). 
64 Id. at 1-1.  
65 Id. at 5-1.  

 
29 
 
for these rapid biosensor tests to facilitate more extensive sampling in vital settings like schools 
and childcare facilities in a timely and cost-effective manner. Additionally, we discussed the 
value of rapid testing in assessing contaminant removal capabilities of point-of-use devices and 
highlighted how real-time insights from rapid testing empower quicker public health 
interventions and align with expedited notification policies. Moreover, we explored the 
applicability of rapid testing to augment alternative tap sampling approaches for dynamically 
evaluating water quality. Finally, we emphasized the benefits of leveraging rapid testing 
methodologies to expedite and streamline the identification of high-risk LSLs as well as confirm 
the absence of lead threats in residences without lead pipes. Most importantly and if deployed in 
various contexts throughout the LCRI, expanding the use and availability of rapid biosensor tests 
can empower people and communities to better know the quality of the water coming from their 
taps and take steps to protect their families and to demand action from their water providers.   
We firmly believe adoption of these recommendations in the final LCRI will significantly 
strengthen implementation of EPA’s regulatory goals regarding improved public health 
outcomes.  The time is now to leverage 21st century technologies to address this 20th century 
environmental health threat. Thank you for your attention to this important matter and please do 
not hesitate to contact me if you would like any additional information.  
Respectfully Submitted, 
______________________________ 
Robert Weinstock 
Director, Environmental Advocacy Center 
Northwestern Pritzker School of Law 
robert.weinstock@law.northwestern.edu 
On behalf of the WISE-Dx Faculty Group at  
Northwestern University

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
 
Comments on behalf of Northwestern University WISE-Dx Faculty Team Regarding 
EPA’s Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 

Abbreviated Curriculum Vitae 
 
William Dichtel, PhD 
Robert L. Letsinger Professor 
Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University 
2145 Sheridan Rd, Evanston, IL 60208-3113 
wdichtel@northwestern.edu 847-467-6031 
 
A. Education and Training 
 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology   
 
 
Chemistry 
 
B.S.  
2000 
University of California - Berkeley  
 
 
 
Chemistry 
 
Ph.D.  2005 
University of California - Los Angeles and Caltech 
 
Postdoctoral Fellow  
2005–2008 
(Jointly Appointed) 
 
B. Research and Professional Experience 
 
2016-present 
 
Robert L. Letsinger Professor of Chemistry, Northwestern University 
2014-2016  
Associate Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University 
2008-2014  
Assistant Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University 
 
C. National and International Awards 
 
• 
ACS/PMSE Global Outstanding Mentor Award in Polymer Science & Engineering (2021):  
Recognizes one US and one international PhD student in polymer science, and their advisors. 
• 
Fellow, American Association for the Advancement of Science (2021) 
• 
Blavatnik National Laureate in Chemistry (2020):  
Given to the top American chemist <42 years old 
• 
Akron Local Section Award, American Chemical Society (2018) 
• 
Guggenheim Fellowship (2018) 
• 
Research Corporation Frontiers in Research Excellence and Discovery (FRED) Award (2018) 
• 
Crain’s 40 under 40 in Chicago Business (2017) 
• 
Leo Hendrik Baekeland Award, North Jersey Section of the ACS (2017):  
Given to the top American Chemist <40 years old 
• 
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Fellowship (2015) 
• 
Kavli Frontiers of Science Fellow (2015) 
• 
Polymer International – IUPAC Award for Creativity in Applied Polymer Science (2014) 
• 
ACS National Fresenius Award (2013) 
• 
Camille Dreyfus Teacher Scholar Award (2013) 
• 
ACS Arthur C. Cope Scholar Award (2013) 
• 
Sloan Research Fellowship (2012) 
• 
Research Corporation Cottrell Scholar Award (2012) 
• 
NSF CAREER Award (2011) 
 
 

 
 
         Dichtel Short CV 
2 
D. Ten Selected Publications (from more than 180 refereed publications) 
1. Kim, S.; Li, K.; Alsbaiee, A.; Brutman, J. P.; Dichtel, W. R. “Circular Reprocessing of Thermoset 
Polyurethane Foams.” Adv. Mater. 2023, 2305387. 
2. Skala, L. P.; Stern, C. L.; Bancroft, L.; Moisanu, C. M.; Pelkowski, C.; Aguilar-Enriguez, X.; Swartz, 
J. L.; Wasielewski, M. R.; Dichtel, W. R. “A Modular Platform for the Precise Assembly of Molecular 
Frameworks Composed of Ion Pairs.” Chem, 2023, 9, 1208-1220. 
3. Natraj, A.; Ji, W.; Xin, J.; Castano, I.; Burke, D. W.; Evans, A. E.; Struass, M. J.; Ateia, M.; Hamachi, 
L. S.; Gianneschi, N. C.; ALOthman, Z. A.; Sun, J.; Yusuf, K.; Dichtel, W. R. “Single-crystalline 
Imine-Linked Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Frameworks Separate Benzene and Cyclohexane 
Efficiently” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2022 144, 43, 19813–19824 
4. Trang, B.; Li, Y.; Xue, X-S.; Ateia, M.; Houk, K. N.; Dichtel, W. R.; “Low-temperature Mineralization 
of Perfluoroalkylcarboxylic Acids.” Science, 2022, 377 839-845.  
Highlighted by >100 media outlets, including the New York Times, the BBC, and PBS. 
5. Wang, R.; Lin, Z. W.; Klemes, M. J.; Ateia, M.; Trang, B.; Wang, J.; Ching, C.; Helbling, D. E., and 
Dichtel, W. R. “A Tunable Porous Beta-Cyclodextrin Polymer Platform to Understand and Improve 
Anionic PFAS Removal.” ACS Cent. Sci., 2022. 8, 5; 663-669.  
6. Sheppard, D.T.; Jin, K.; Hamachi, L.S; Dean, W.; Fortman, D.J.; Ellison, C.J.; Dichtel, W.R. 
“Reprocessing Postconsumer Polyurethane Foam Using Carbamate Exchange Catalysis and Twin-
Screw Extrusion” ACS Cent. Sci. 2020, 6, 921-927. 
7. Klemes, M. J.; Ling, Y.; Ching, C.; Wu, V.; Helbling, D. E.; Dichtel, W. R. “Reduction of a 
Tetrafluoroterephthalonitrile-β-Cyclodextrin Polymer to Remove Anionic Micropollutants and 
Perfluorinated Alkyl Substances from Water.” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2019, 58, 12049-12053. 
8. Sun, C.; Shen, M.; Chavez, A. D.; Evans, A. M.; Liu, X.; Harutyunyan, B.; Flanders, N. C.; Hersam, 
M. C.; Bedzyk, M. J.; de la Cruz, M. O.; Dichtel, W. R.; “High Aspect Ratio Nanotubes Assembled 
from Macrocyclic Iminium Salts.” Proc. Natl. Acad. U. S. A. 2018, 115, 8883–8888.  
9. Evans, A. M.; Parent, L. R.; Flanders, N. C.; Bisbey, R. P; Vitaku, E.; Chen, L. X.; Gianneschi, N. C.; 
Dichtel, W. R.; “Seeded Growth of Single-Crystal Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Frameworks.” 
Science, 2018, 361, 52–57. 
10. Alsbaiee, A.; Smith, B. J.; Xiao, L.; Ling, Y.; Helbling, D. E.; Dichtel, W. R. “Rapid removal of organic 
micropollutants from water by a porous β-cyclodextrin polymer.” Nature, 2016, 529, 190–194. 
E. Service and Activities 
1. Defense Science Study Group (2022-2024) 
2. Cofounder (2016), Chief Science Officer and Board Member (2016-2021), Cyclopure, Inc., which is 
commercializing cyclodextrin-based adsorbents for PFAS remediation and other purposes. 
3. Editorial Advisory Boards: ACS Central Science, Chemical Society Reviews, Chemical Science, 
Chemistry of Materials  
4. Associate Editor, ACS Materials Letters (2018-2022) 
5. Associate Chair, Department of Chemistry (2022-present)  

CURRICULUM VITAE
Julius B. Lucks
Professor of Chemical and Biological Engineering
Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Rd. Evanston, IL 60208
web: luckslab.org, twitter: @LucksLab
EDUCATION
B.S., Chemistry (Highest Honors) (2001) University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
M.Phil., Chemistry (2002) University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
M.S., Chemical Physics (2004) Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
Ph.D., Chemical Physics (2007) Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
Miller Fellow Postdoctoral Associate (2011) University of California, Berkeley, CA
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE
Professor (2021-)
Associate Professor (2016-2021)
and Associate Chair (2018-), Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University
	
Affiliations at Northwestern:
	
	
Associate Chair, Chemical and Biological Engineering, 2018-Present
	
	
Member and Preceptor, Chemistry of Life Processes Institute, 2016-Present
	
	
Member, Center for Synthetic Biology, 2016-Present
	
	
Member, Center for Water Research, 2018-Present
	
	
Member, Center for Engineering, Sustainability and Resilience, 2019-Present
	
	
Member, Center for Air and Water, International Institute of Nanotechnology, 2020-Present
	
	
Preceptor, Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences Graduate Program, 2016-Present
	
	
Preceptor, Steering Committee, Molecular Biophysics Training Program, 2017-Present
	
	
Preceptor, Biotechnology Training Program, 2017-Present
	
	
Affiliate, International Institute of Nanotechnology, 2016-Present
Assistant Professor, Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, 2011-2016
	
Affiliations at Cornell:
	
	
Graduate Field Member, Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell Biology, 2013-2016
	
	
Graduate Field Member, Biomedical Engineering, 2014-2016
	
	
Graduate Field Member, Computational Biology, 2014-2016
	
	
Graduate Field Member, Microbiology, 2014-2016
Director, NSF Synthetic Biology Across Scales NRT Graduate Training Program, 2019-
Co-founder, Stemloop Inc., 2019-Present
Instructor and Co-Creator, Cold Spring Harbor Course on Synthetic Biology, 2013-2015
James  C. and Rebecca Q. Morgan Sesquicentennial Faculty Fellow, Cornell University, 2012-2016
Miller Fellow Postdoctoral Associate, Bioengineering, Univ. of California, Berkeley, 2008-2011
Postdoctoral Associate, Information Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 2007
Visiting Scholar, Theoretical Physics, Institute Marie Curie, Paris, Fr, 2005
HONORS AND AWARDS
2022 Phi Lambda Upsilon Award Lecture, University of Nebraska
2022- American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering (AIMBE) College of Fellows
	
For “discovering RNA folding principles related to understanding and treating disease, and 
	
engineering synthetic biology diagnostics for global health.”
2020 Blavatnik National Awards for Young Scientists, Finalist Life Sciences
2017 Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar Award
2016 ACS Synthetic Biology Young Investigator Award
2016 Northwestern Searle Leadership Award
1

2015 NSF CAREER Award
2015 Cornell College of Engineering Mr. and Mrs. Richard F. Tucker `50 Teaching Award
2013 NIH Director’s New Innovator Award
2013 Office of Naval Research (ONR) Young Investigator
2013 Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship
2012 Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Young Faculty Award
2012 James C. and Rebecca Q. Morgan Sesquicentennial Faculty Fellow
2008-2011 Miller Research Fellow, University of California, Berkeley
2002-2007 John and Fannie Hertz Foundation Graduate Fellow
2002 Robert Karplus Prize Fellowship in Chemical Physics, Harvard University
2001 Winston Churchill Scholarship, Churchill College, Cambridge University
2001 National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship (Declined, Duplicate Funding)
2001 Department of Defense Graduate Fellowship (Declined, Duplicate Funding)
2000-2001 Barry M. Goldwater Scholarship, Univ. North Carolina, Chapel Hill
2001 Francis P. Venable Medal, Univ. North Carolina, Chapel Hill
2001 Academic Excellence in Physical Chemistry, Univ. North Carolina, Chapel Hill
2000 Phi Beta Kappa, Univ. North Carolina, Chapel Hill
2000 NSF REU Fellowship, Univ. Colorado, Boulder
1999 American Chemical Society Undergraduate Research Award
BOARDS
Advisory Board, MSCA European Doctoral Network SYNSENS, 2022-Present
Editorial Board, GEN Biotechnology, 2021-Present
Guest Editor, PNAS, 2022
Editorial Board, Nucleic Acids Research, 2015-2021
Editorial Board, ACS Synthetic Biology, 2011-Present
Editorial Affiliate, bioRxiv, 2014-Present
PUBLICATIONS (As of 12/13/22, Google Scholar H-index: 37; i10-index 57; Total Citations: 4866)
* = corresponding author; # = student from Lucks group; % = undergraduate student; blue =  highlight
1.
W. Thavarajah#, P. Our, D. Awuor, K. Kiprotich, R. Aggarwal, J. B. Lucks*, S. L. Young (2022). The 
accuracy and usability of point-of-use fluoride biosensors: a field study in Nakuru County, Kenya. npj 
Clean Water (provisionally accepted).
2.
M. A. Boyd, W. Thavarajah#, J. B. Lucks*, N. P. Kamat* (2022). Robust and tunable performance of a 
cell-free biosensor encapsulated in lipid vesicles. Science Advances (in press).
3.
R. A. Rasmussen#, S. Wang, J. M. Caramillo, V. Sosnowski, B-K Cho, Y. A. Goo, J. B. Lucks*, T. V. 
O’Halloran (2022). Zur and zinc increase expression of E. Coli ribosomal protein L31 through RNA-
mediated repression of the repressor L31p. Nucleic Acids Research, doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac1086.
4.
S. V. Harbough, A. D. Silverman#, Y. G. Chushak, K, Zimlich, M. Wolfe, W. Thavarajah#, M. C. Jewett, J. 
B. Lucks, J. L. Chávez (2022). “Engineering a synthetic dopamine-responsive riboswitch for in vitro 
biosensing” ACS Synthetic Biology, doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.1c00560.
5.
D. Z. Bushhouse#, E. K. Choi#, L. M. Hertz#, J. B. Lucks* (2022). “How does RNA fold dynamically?” 
Journal of Molecular Biology, doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2022.167665.
6.
L. Cheng#, Elise N. White, Naomi L. Berg, Angela M Yu, Alan A. Chen*, J. B. Lucks* (2022). 
“Cotranscriptional RNA strand exchange underlies the gene regulation mechanism in a purine-sensing 
transcriptional riboswitch”. Nucleic Acids Research, doi:10.1093/nar/gkac102. Breakthrough Article.
2

7.
K. J. Jung#, K. K. Alam#, Chloé M. Archuleta#, J. B. Lucks* (2022). “Programming cell-free biosensors 
with DNA strand displacement circuits”. Nature Chemical Biology, doi:10.1038/s41589-021-00962-9. 
Cover article. News and Views: “Logic invades cell-free biosensing.” E. Amalfatino and K. Pardee, 
Nature Chemical Biology, doi:10.1038/s41589-021-00963-8.
8.
K. J. Jung#, K. K. Alam#, J. B. Lucks* (2022). “ROSALIND: Rapid detection of chemical contaminants 
with in vitro transcription factor-based biosensors”. Methods in Molecular Biology, 
doi:10.1007/978-1-0716-1998-8_20.
9.
W. Thavarajah#, L. M. Hertz#, D. Z. Bushouse#, C. M. Archuleta#, J. B. Lucks* (2021). “RNA 
Engineering for Public Health: Innovations in RNA-Based Diagnostics and Therapeutics.” Ann Rev 
Chemical and Biological Engineering doi:10.1146/annurev-chembioeng-101420-014055. (Invited 
submission).
10. C. J. Glasscock#, J. T. Lazar, B. W. Biggs, J. H. Arnold%, M. K. Kang, D. Tullman-Ercek*, K. Tyo*, J. B. 
Lucks* (2021). “Dynamic control of pathway expression with riboregulated switchable feedback 
promoters.” ACS Synthetic Biology doi:10.1021/acssynbio.1c00015.
11. M. Verosloff#, W. Corcoran, T. Dolberg, J. Leonard*, J. B. Lucks* (2021). “RNA sequence and structural 
determinants of Pol III transcriptional termination in human cells”. Journal of Molecular Biology doi: 
10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166978.
12. A. Yu#, P. M. Gasper, L. Cheng#, L. B. Lai, S. Kaur, V. Gopalan, A. A. Chen*,  J. B. Lucks* (2021). 
“Computationally reconstructing RNA cotranscriptional folding pathways from experimental data reveals 
rearrangement of non-native folding intermediates”. Molecular Cell. Doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2020.12.017 .
13. K. J. Jung#, K. K. Alam#, M. Verosloff#, D. A. Capdevila, M. Desmau, P. R. Clauer#, J. W. Lee, P. Q. 
Nguyen, P. A. Pasten, S. Matiasek, J.-F. Gaillard, D. P. Giedroc, J. J. Collins, J. B. Lucks* (2020). “Cell-
free biosensors for rapid detection of water contaminants.” Nature Biotechnology. doi: 10.1038/
s41587-020-0571-7.
14. E. J. Strobel#*, J. T. Lis, J. B. Lucks (2020). “Chemical transcription roadblocking for nascent RNA 
display.” Journal of Molecular Biology, 295, 6401-6412, doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.012641. Selected for 
special issue on methods.
15. W. Thavarajah#, M. Verosloff#, K. J. Jung#, K. K. Alam#, J. Miller, M. C. Jewett, S. L. Young*, J. B. 
Lucks* (2020). “A primer on emerging field-deployable tools for democratizing global water quality 
monitoring.” npj Clean Water, 3, 18, doi: 10.1038/s41545-020-0064-8.
16. A. D. Silverman#, U. Akova#, K. K. Alam#, M. C. Jewett*, J. B. Lucks* (2020). “Design and optimization 
of a cell-free atrazine biosensor.” ACS Synthetic Biology, 9, 671, doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.9b00388.
17. W. Thavarajah#, A. D. Silverman#, M. Verosloff#, N. Kelley-Loughnane, M. C. Jewett, J. B. Lucks* 
(2020). “Point-of-use detection of environmental fluoride via a cell-free riboswitch-based biosensor.” 
ACS Synthetic Biology, 9, 10-18, doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.9b00347.
18. X. Liu, A. D. Silverman#, K. K. Alam#, E. Iverson, J. B. Lucks*, M. C. Jewett*, S. Raman* (2019). 
“Design of a transcriptional biosensor for the portable, on-demand detection of cyanuric acid.” ACS 
Synthetic Biology, 9, 84-94, doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.9b00348.
19. A. J. Meyer, I. Saaem, A. D. Silverman#, V. Varaljay, R. Mickol, S. M. Blum, A. V. Tobias, N. D. Schwalm, 
W. Mojadedi, E. Onderko, C. Bristol, S. Liu, A. Casini, R. Eluere, F. Moser, C. Drake, M. Gupta, N. 
Kelley-Lougnane, J. B. Lucks, K. L. Akingbade, M. W. Lux, S. M. Glaven, W. J. Crookes-Goodson, M. 
C. Jewett, B. Gordon, C. A. Voigt (2019). “Organism engineering for the bioproduction of the 
triaminotrinitrobenzene (TATB) precursor phloroglucinol (PG).” ACS Synthetic Biology, 8, 2746-2755, 
doi:10.1021/acssynbio.9b00393.
20. E. J. Strobel#*, L. Cheng#, K. Berman#, P. D. Carlson#, J. B. Lucks* (2019). “A ligand-gated strand 
displacement mechanism for ZTP riboswitch transcription control.” Nature Chemical Biology, 15, 
1067-1076, doi:10.1038/s41589-019-0382-7. News and Views: “A newborn RNA switches its fate.” M. L. 
Rogers, Y. Has and S. A. Woodson, Nature Chemical Biology, doi:10.1038/s41589-019-0391-6.
3

21. J. Kim, Y. Zhou, P. D. Carlson#, M. Teichmann, F. C. Simmel, P. A. Silver, J. J. Collins, J. B. Lucks, P. 
Yin, A. A. Green (2019). “De-novo designed translation-repressing riboregulators for multi-input cellular 
logic.” Nature Chemical Biology, 15, 1173-1182, doi: 10.1038/s41589-019-0388-1.
22. J. D. Yesselman, D. Eiler, E. D. Carlson, M. R. Gotrik, A. E. d’Aquino, A. N. Ooms, W. Kladawang, P. D. 
Carlson#, X. Shi, D. A. Constantino, D. Herschlag, J. B. Lucks, M. C. Jewett, J. S. Kieft, R. Das* (2019). 
“Computational design of three-dimensional RNA structure and function.” Nature Nanotechnology, 14, 
866-873, doi:10.1038/s41565-019-0517-8.
23. A. Y Xue, A. M Yu#, J. B. Lucks*, N. Bagheri* (2019). “DUETT quantitatively identifies novel events in 
nascent RNA structural dynamics from chemical probing data.” Bioinformatics, 35, 5103-5112, 
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btz449. (* = co-corresponding)
24. A. Yu#,  J. B. Lucks* (2019). “Tracking RNA structures as RNAs transit through the cell.” Nature 
Structural and Molecular Biology, 26, 256-257. doi:10.1038/s41594-019-0213-2.  
25. M. Verosloff#, J. Chappell#, K. L. Perry, J. R. Thompson, J. B. Lucks* (2019). “PLANT-Dx: A molecular 
diagnostic for point of use detection of plant pathogens.” ACS Synthetic Biology, 8, 902-905. doi: 
10.1021/acssynbio.8b00526.
26. P. D. Carlson#, J. B. Lucks* (2019). “Elements of RNA Design.” Biochemistry, 58, 1457-1459. doi: 
10.1021/acs.biochem.8b01129.
27. A. D. Silverman#, N. Kelley-Loughnane, J. B. Lucks, M. Jewett* (2019). “Deconstructing cell-free 
extract preparation for in vitro application of transcriptional genetic circuitry.” ACS Synthetic Biology, 8, 
403-414. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.8b00430.
28. A. M. Westbrook#, X. Tang, R. Marshall, C. S. Maxwell, J. Chappell#, D. K. Agrawal, M. J. Dunlop, V. 
Noireaux, C. L. Beisel, J. B. Lucks*, E. Franco* (2019). “Distinct timescales of RNA regulators enable 
the construction of a genetic pulse generator.” Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 116, 1139-1151. doi: 
10.1002/bit.26918.
29. P. D. Carlson#, M. E. Evans#, A. M Yu#, E. J. Strobel #, J. B. Lucks* (2018). “SnapShot: RNA Structure 
Probing Technologies.” Cell, 175, P600. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.024.
30. E. J. Strobel #, A. Yu#, J. B. Lucks* (2018). “High-throughput determination of RNA structures.” Nature 
Reviews Genetics, 19, 615-634. doi: 10.1038/s41576-018-0034-x. Cover article.
31. C. J. Glasscock#, L. E. Yates, T. Jaroentomeechai, J. D. Wilson, J. H. Merritt, J. B. Lucks, M. P. DeLisa* 
(2018). “A flow cytometric approach to engineering Eschericia coli for improved eukaryotic 
glycosylation.” Metabolic Engineering, 47, 488-495, doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.04.014.
32. C. Hu#, M. K. Takahashi#, Y. Zhang#%, J. B. Lucks* (2018). “Engineering a functional small RNA 
negative auto regulation network with model-guided design.” ACS Synthetic Biology, 7, 1507-1518, doi: 
10.1021/acssynbio.7b00440.
33. D. K. Agrawal, X. Tang, A. M. Westbrook#, R. Marshall, C. S. Maxwell, J. B. Lucks, V. Noireaux, C. L. 
Beisel, M. J. Dunlop*, E. Franco* (2018). “Mathematical modeling of RNA-based architectures for 
closed loop control of gene expression.” ACS Synthetic Biology, 7, 1219-1228, doi:10.1021/
acssynbio.8b00040.
34. K. E. Watters#, K. Choudhary, S. Aviran, J. B. Lucks, K. L. Perry, J. L. Thompson* (2017). “Probing of 
RNA structures in a positive sense RNA virus reveals selection pressures for structural elements.” 
Nucleic Acids Research, 46, 2573-2584, doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1273.
35. S. Meyer#, P. D. Carlson#, J. B. Lucks* (2017). “Characterizing the structure-function relationship of a 
naturally-occurring RNA thermometer.” Biochemistry, 56, 6629-6638, doi: 10.1021/
acs.biochem.7b01170.
36. J. Chappell#, A. Westbrook#, M. Verosloff#, J. B. Lucks* (2017). “Computational design of STARs for 
versatile and dynamic gene regulation.” Nature Communications, 8:1051, 1-12, doi:10.1038/
s41467-017-01082-6.
4

37. E. J. Strobel#, K. E. Watters#, Y. Nedialakov, I. Artismovitch, J. B. Lucks* (2017). “Distributed biotin-
streptavidin transcription roadblocks for mapping cotranscriptional RNA folding.” Nucleic Acids 
Research, 45, e109, doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx233.
38. A. Westbrook#, J. B. Lucks* (2017). “Achieving large dynamic range control of gene expression with a 
compact RNA transcription-translation regulator.” Nucleic Acids Research, 45, 5614-5624, doi: 10.1093/
nar/gkx215.
39. J. Chappell#, J. B. Lucks* (2016). “Turning it up to 11: Modular proteins amplify RNA sensors for 
sophisticated circuitry”, Cell Systems, 3, 509-511, doi:10.1016/j.cels.2016.12.004.
40. K. E. Watters#, E. J. Strobel#, A. Yu#, J. B. Lucks* (2016). “Cotranscriptional Folding of a Riboswitch at 
Nucleotide Resolution”, Nature Structural and Molecular Biology, 23, 1124-1131, doi:10.1038/
nsmb.3316. 
41. K. E. Watters#, J. B. Lucks* (2016). “Mapping RNA structure in vitro with SHAPE chemistry and next 
generation sequencing (SHAPE-Seq),” in “RNA Structure Determination,” D. Turner and D. Mathews 
(eds.) Methods in Molecular Biology, 1490, 135-162, doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-6433-8_9.
42. K. E. Watters#, A. Yu#, E. J. Strobel#, A. H. Settle#%, J. B. Lucks* (2016). “Characterizing RNA structures 
in vitro and in vivo with selective 2’-hydroxyl acylation analyzed by primer extension sequencing 
(SHAPE-Seq).” Methods, 103, 34-48, doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2016.04.002.
43. M. K. Takahashi#, K. E. Watters#, P. M. Gaspar, T. R. Abbott#%, P. D. Carlson#, A. A. Chen, J. B. Lucks* 
(2016). “Using in-cell SHAPE-Seq and simulations to probe structure-function design principles of RNA 
transcriptional regulators.” RNA, 22, 920-933, doi:10.1261/rna.054916.115.
44. E. J. Strobel#, K. E. Watters#,  D. Loughrey#, J. B. Lucks* (2016). “RNA systems biology: Uniting 
functional discoveries and structural tools to understand the global roles of RNAs,” Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 39, 182-191, doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2016.03.019. 
45. C. J. Glasscock#, J. B. Lucks, M. P. DeLisa* (2016). “Engineered Protein Machines: Emergent Tools for 
Synthetic Biology,” Cell Chemical Biology, 23, 45-56, doi:10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.12.004 .	 
46. K. E. Watters#, T. R. Abbott#%, J. B. Lucks* (2015). “Simultaneous characterization of cellular RNA 
structure and function with in-cell SHAPE-Seq.” Nucleic Acids Research, 44, e12, doi:10.1093/nar/
gkv879.
47. S. Meyer#, J. Chappell#, S. Sankar#%, R. Chew#%, J. B. Lucks* (2015). “Improving fold activation of 
small transcription activating RNAs (STARs) with rational RNA engineering strategies.” Biotechnology 
and Bioengineering, 113, 216-225, doi:doi:10.1002/bit.25693. Featured in Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering Spotlight Summary.
48. C. Y. Hu#, J. D. Varner, J. B. Lucks* (2015). “Generating effective models and parameters for RNA 
genetic circuits.” ACS Synthetic Biology, 4, 914-926, doi:10.1021/acssynbio.5b00077.
49. M. K. Takahashi#, C. A. Hayes, J. Chappell#, Z. Z. Sun, R. M. Murray, V. Noireaux*,  J. B. Lucks* 
(2015). “Characterizing and prototyping genetic networks with cell-free transcription-translation 
reactions.” Methods, 86, 60-72, doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2015.05.020.
50. J. Chappell#, K. E. Watters#, M. K. Takahashi#,  J. B. Lucks* (2015). “A renaissance in RNA synthetic 
biology: new mechanisms, applications and tools for the future.” Current Opinion in Chemical Biology, 
28, 47-56, doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2015.05.018.
51. J. Chappell#, M. K. Takahashi#, J. B. Lucks* (2015). “Creating small transcription activating RNAs.” 
Nature Chemical Biology, 11, 214-220, doi:10.1038/nchembio.1737. Research Highlight in Nature 
Methods “RNA that activates transcription” by N. Rusk (2015), 12, 290.
52. M. K. Takahashi#, J. Chappell#, C. A. Hayes, Z. Z. Sun, J. Kim, V. Singhal, K. J. Spring, S. Al-Khabouri, 
C. P. Fall, V. Noireaux, R. M. Murray, J. B. Lucks* (2015). “Rapidly characterizing the fast dynamics of 
RNA genetic circuitry with cell-free transcription-translation (TX-TL) systems.” ACS Synthetic Biology, 4, 
503-515, doi:10.1021/sb400206c. Cover article.
5

53. D. Loughrey#, K. E. Watters#, A. H. Settle#%, J. B. Lucks* (2014). “SHAPE-Seq 2.0: Systematic 
optimization and extension of high-throughput chemical probing of RNA secondary structure with next-
generation sequencing.” Nucleic Acids Research, 42, e165, doi:10.1093/nar/gku909.
54. J. Chappell#, M. K. Takahashi#, S. Meyer#, D. Loughrey#, K. E. Watters#, J. B. Lucks* (2013). “The 
centrality of RNA for engineering gene expression.” Biotechnology Journal, 8, 1379-1395, doi:10.1002/
biot.201300018.
55. M. K. Takahashi#, J. B. Lucks* (2013). “A modular strategy for engineering orthogonal chimeric RNA 
transcription regulators.” Nucleic Acids Research, 41, 7577-7588, doi:10.1093/nar/gkt452.
56. S. A. Mortimer, C. Trapnell, S. Aviran, L. Pachter, J. B. Lucks* (2012). “SHAPE-Seq: High-throughput 
RNA structure analysis.” Current Protocols in Chemical Biology, 4, 275-297, 
doi:10.1002/9780470559277.ch120019.
57. C. C. Liu, L. Qi, J. B. Lucks, T. H. Segall-Shapiro, D. Wang, V. K. Mutalik, A. P. Arkin* (2012). “An 
adapter from translational to transcriptional control enables predictable assembly of complex 
regulation.” Nature Methods, 9, 1088-1094, doi:10.1038/nmeth.2184.  Highlighted in commentary 
“Modular gene-circuit design takes two steps forward” by J. J. Tabor in Nature Methods News and 
Views (2012), 9, 1061-1063.
58. P. Cordero, J. B. Lucks, R. Das* (2012). “An RNA mapping database for curating RNA structure 
mapping experiments.” Bioinformatics, 28, 3006-3008, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts554.
59. V. K. Mutalik, L. Qi, J. C. Guimaraes, J. B. Lucks, A. P. Arkin* (2012). “Rationally designed families of 
orthogonal RNA regulators of translation.” Nature Chemical Biology, 8, 447-454, doi:10.1038/
nchembio.919. Highlighted in commentary “Automated Design of RNA Devices” by Farren Isaacs in 
Nature Chemical Biology.
60. L. Qi, J. B. Lucks, C. C. Liu, V. K. Mutalik, A. P. Arkin* (2012). “Engineering naturally occurring trans-
acting non-coding RNAs to sense molecular signals,” Nucleic Acids Research, 40, 5775-5786, 
doi:10.1093/nar/gks168. 
61. S. Aviran, J. B. Lucks, L. Pachter* (2011). “RNA structure characterization from chemical mapping 
experiments.”  In: Proceedings of the Forty-Ninth Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and 
Computing. Monticello, IL, 1743-1750 doi:10.1109/Allerton.2011.6120379.
62. J. B. Lucks*, S. A. Mortimer, C. Trapnell, S. Luo, S. Aviran, G. P. Schroth, L. Pachter, J. A. Doudna, A. 
P. Arkin* (2011). “Multiplexed RNA structure characterization with selective 2'-hydroxyl acylation 
analyzed by primer extension sequencing (SHAPE-Seq).” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 108, 11063-11068, doi:10.1073/pnas.1106501108. Highlighted in commentary “RNA structure 
probing dash seq” by Kevin Weeks in PNAS, and “A SHAPE in the Crowd” by M. Eisenstein in 
Biopolymers.
63. S. Aviran, C. Trapnell, J. B. Lucks, S. A. Mortimer, S. Luo, G. P. Schroth, J. A. Doudna, A. P. Arkin, L. 
Pachter* (2011). “Modeling and automation of sequencing-based characterization of RNA structure.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 11069-11074, doi:10.1073/pnas.1106541108. 
Featured on the cover.
64. S. L. Young, P. W. Sherman, J. B. Lucks, G. H. Pelto* (2011). “Why on Earth?: Evaluating hypotheses 
about the physiological functions of human geophagy.” Quarterly Review of Biology, 86, 97-120, 
doi:10.1086/659884.
65. J. B. Lucks, L. Qi, V. K. Mutalik, D. Wang, A. P. Arkin* (2011). “Versatile RNA-sensing transcriptional 
regulators for engineering genetic networks.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 
8617-8622, doi:10.1073/pnas.1015741108.
66. J. M. Skerker, J. B. Lucks, A. P. Arkin* (2009). “Evolution, ecology and the engineered organism: 
lessons for synthetic biology.” Genome Biology, 10, 114, doi:10.1186/gb-2009-10-11-114.
67. J. B. Lucks, L. Qi, W. R. Whitaker, A. P. Arkin* (2008). “Toward scalable parts families for predictable 
design of biological circuits.” Current Opinion Microbiology, 11, 567-573, doi:10.1016/j.mib.2008.10.002.
6

68. J. B. Lucks, D. R. Nelson, G. R. Kudla, J. B. Plotkin* (2008). “Genome landscapes and bacteriophage 
codon usage.” PLoS Computational Biology, 4, e1000001, doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000001. 
69. V. Vitelli, J. B. Lucks, D. R. Nelson* (2006). “Crystallography on curved surfaces.” Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 103, 12323-12328, doi:10.1073/pnas.0602755103. Featured on the 
cover.
70. J. D. Weeks, J. B. Lucks, Y. Kafri, C. Danilowicz, D. R. Nelson, and M. Prentiss* (2005). “Pause point 
spectra in DNA constant-force unzipping.” Biophysical Journal, 88, 2752-2765, doi:10.1529/
biophysj.104.047340.
71. J. B. Lucks, A. J. Cohen, N. C. Handy* (2002). “Constructing a map from the electron density to the 
exchange-correlation potential.” Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 4, 4612-4618, doi:10.1039/
B205854E.
72. P. W. Ayers, J. B. Lucks, R. G. Parr* (2002). “Constructing exact density functionals from the moments 
of the electron density.” Acta Univ. Debrecceniensis Series Physica et Chimica, XXXIV-XXXV, 223.
NON-PEER REVIEWED PUBLICATIONS
73. D. S. Clark, C. Fischbach-Teschl, D. A. Hammer, K. H. Lee, J. B. Lucks, C. Reinhart-King, M. 
Saltzman, A. Stroock, M. C. H. van der Muelen, J. D. Varner. (2018) “Michael L. Shuler Tribute.” 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 115, 1642-1645, doi:10.1002/bit.26716.
74. J. B. Lucks, A. P. Arkin (2011). “The hunt for the biological transistor.” IEEE Spectrum, 48, 38-43, 
doi:10.1109/MSPEC.2011.5719724. Cover story.
MANUSCRIPTS UNDER REVIEW OR REVISION
75. P. D. Carlson#, C. J. Glasscock#, J. B. Lucks* (2019). Toe-hold RNA repressors. BioRxiv: 
10.1101/501767. (In Revision Nature Communications).
76. J. D. Miller, C. Staddon, A. Salzberg, J. B. Lucks, W. B. De Bruin, S. L. Young* (2021). “Widespread 
global concern over harm in drinking water”. (In Revision).
77. D. M. Stranford, L. M. Simons, K. E. Berman#, L. Cheng#, J. B. Lucks, J. F. Hultquist, J. N. Leonard 
(2022). “Bioengineered multifunctional extracellular vesicles for targeted delivery of biologics to T cells”. 
(In Revision).
78. K. E. Berman#, R. Steans#, L. M. Hertz#, J. B. Lucks (2022). “Cotranscriptional RNA strand 
displacement underlies the regulatory function of the E. coli thiB TPP translational riboswitch.” (In 
Revision).
79. D. Z. Bushhouse, J. B. Lucks (2022). “Tuning strand displacement kinetics enables programmable ZTP 
riboswitch dynamic range in vivo.” (In Revision).
MANUSCRIPTS IN PREPARATION
80. C. Hu, J. B. Lucks* (2018). “Tuning the transfer functions of transcription factors.” (In Preparation)
81. A. Yu#, M. E. Evans #,  J. B. Lucks* (2018). “Estimating RNA structure chemical probing reactivities 
from reverse transcriptase stops and mutations”. BioRxiv: 10.1101/292532.
PATENT APPLICATIONS
1.
“Cell-free biosensors with DNA strand displacement circuits.” J. K. Jung, K. K. Alam, J. B. Lucks (2021). 
United States Patent Application 63/254,824.
7

2.
“Ultrasensitive and multiplexed cell-free biosensors using cascaded amplification and positive 
feedback.” A. D. Silverman, M. C. Jewett, J. B. Lucks (2019). United States Patent Application 
62/943,094.
3.
“Stabilization and preservation of in vitro transcription reactions through lyophilization.” J. B. Lucks, K. 
K. Alam, M. S. Verosloff, J. K. Jung, P. R. Clauer, J. W. Lee, J. J. Collins (2019). United States Patent 
Application 62/838,852.
4.
“Riboswitch-based fluoride sensing in cell-free extract.” J. B. Lucks, M. C. Jewett, A. D. Silverman, W. 
M. Thavarajah (2019). United States Patent Application 62/813,368.
5.
“Detection of analytes and target molecules using regulated in vitro transcription.” J. K. Jung, K. K. 
Alam, J. B. Lucks (2018). United States Patent Application 62/758,242.
6.
“Inducible feedback promoter systems and uses thereof.” K. E. Tyo, B. Biggs, D. Tullman-Ercek, J. 
Lucks, C. Glasscock (2018). United States Patent Application 62/730,720.
7.
“On demand, portable, cell-free molecular sensing platform.” M. Jewett, J. B. Lucks, A. D. Silverman, K. 
K. Alam (2018). United States Patent Application 62/714,427.
8.
“Small RNAs (sRNAs) that activate transcription.” J. B. Lucks, J. Chappell, M. K. Takahashi (2014). 
United States Patent Application 61/981,241.
9.
“Transcription elongation control elements and methods of use thereof.” A. P. Arkin, J. B. Lucks, L. Qi, 
W. P. Whitaker (2010). United States Patent Application 61/250,342.
INVITED PRESENTATIONS by JBL (69)
Universities/Institutes:
Institute of Quantitative Biology, Biochemistry, and Biotechnology, The University of Edinburgh, September 
2022
Center Seminar, The Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State University, May 2022
Phi Lambda Upsilon Award Lecture, Department of Chemistry, University of Lincoln, Nebraska, April 2022
Department Seminar, Bioengineering, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, October 2021
Department Seminar, Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, October 2021
RNA Club, City University of Hong Kong, October 2021
Department Seminar, Chemistry, Rutgers University, April 2021
Department Seminar, Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seol National University, South Korea, April 
2021
National Science Foundation Biotechnology/Bioeconomy Distinguished Lecture Series, March 2021
Department Seminar, Biological Sciences Division, Department of Chemistry, UNC Chapel Hill, November 	
          2020
Distinguished Alumni Talk, Junior/Senior Banquet, UNC Chapel Hill, November 2020
Engineering Biology Research Consortium Virtual Seminar Series, August 2020
Center for Synthetic Biology, Warwick University, UK, March 2020 (Postponed)
RNA Synthetic Biology Symposium, Imperial College, UK, March 2020 (Postponed)
Exploring Ethics: Across Art, Humanities and Science, Block Museum, Northwestern University, May 2019
Department Seminar, Biochemistry Biophysics and Mol. Bio., Iowa State, February 2019
Department Seminar, University at Washington St. Louis Medical School, February 2019
Department Seminar, Chemistry, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, September 2018
Center for Cancer Research RNA Initiative Seminar Series, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda MD, March 
          2018
Department Seminar, Chemistry, Marquette University, Marquette, WI, December 2017
Department Seminar, Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, November 2017
Department Seminar, Physics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, April 2017
Department Seminar, Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Il, April 2017
8

Department Seminar, Biophysics, Rockefeller University, New York, NY, March 2017
Department Seminar, Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California Berkeley, April 2016
Center Seminar, The Center for RNA Biology, Ohio State University, March 2016
Department Seminar, Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 
December 2015
Department Seminar, Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University, November 2015
Department Seminar, Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, October 2015
Department Seminar, Bioengineering, Caltech, April 2015
Department Seminar, Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, March 2015
Department Seminar, Bioengineering, Rice University, February 2015
Department Seminar, Chemical and Biological Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Feb. 2015
Department Seminar, Biology, Middlebury College, October 2014
Field Seminar, Microbiology, Cornell University, October 2014
Department Seminar, RNA Institute and Department of Chemistry, The University at Albany, October 2014
Field Seminar, Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, May 2014
Department Seminar, Applied Mathematics, Harvard University, April 2014
Department Seminar, Biology, Ithaca College, March 2014
Department Seminar, Laboratory for Atomic and Solid State Physics, Cornell University, March 2014
Keynote Lecture, CBE 4th Annual Graduate Research Symposium, Cornell University, October 2013
Field Seminar, Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell Biology, Cornell University, May 2013
Department Seminar, Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Rochester Medical Center, May 2013
Department Seminar, Computational Biology, MIT, April 2013
Center Seminar, Center for Computational Molecular Biology, Brown University, March 2013
Department Seminar, Molecular Medicine, Cornell University, March 2012
Conferences:
Gordon Research Conference on Nucleic Acid Nanotechnology, Venturi Beach, CA, Jan 2023
10th International mRNA Health Conference, Boston, MA, November 2022
UNC Water Meeting, UNC Chapel Hill, October 2022
Synthetic Biology Young Speaker Series, Pioneer Introduction of Boya Wang, Sept 2022
Cold Spring Harbor Asia Synthetic Biology Conference, Virtual, October, 2021
NSF Workshop: Cross Disciplinary Study of Post-Transcriptional and Post-Translational Modifications, 
Virtual, October, 2021
German Conference on Synthetic Biology, Virtual, September, 2021
Workshop on Nucleic Acids, Synthetic Biology and Artificial Life, Imperial College, UK, March 2021
Gordon Research Conference on Nucleic Acid Nanotechnology, Venturi Beach, CA, Jan 2021 (Postponed)
Seventh International Mammalian Synthetic Biology Workshop, Virtual, December 2020
Plenary Lecture, New York Academy of Sciences, “New Horizons in Synthetic Biology”, NYC November 
          2020
Cell Free Synthetic Biology Conference, Cambridge, MA, December 2019
Sixth International Mammalian Synthetic Biology Workshop, Northwestern University, May 2019
FASEB Meeting, San Diego, CA, April 2018
Innovation Session, Gates Foundation Grand Challenges Annual Meeting, Berlin, October 2018
American Institute of Chemical Engineers, Minneapolis, MN, October 2017
Compugenes Symposium, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany, June 2017
Gordon Research Conference on Nucleic Acid Nanotechnology, Venturi Beach, CA, Jan 2017
Award Lecture, ACS Synthetic Biology Young Investigator Award, Synthetic Biology Engineering Evolution 
          and Design (SEED) Meeting, Chicago, Il, June 2016
Inaugural Annual Retreat, Engineering Biology Research Consortium, Pasadena, CA, November 2016
9

Workshop, EU/US Biological Systems Standardization Workshop, Valencia, Spain, March 2015
Inaugural Meeting, Synthetic Biology: Engineering, Evolution and Design, Los Angeles, CA, July 2014
Symposium Presentation, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St Louis, MO, September 2012
Invited Lecture, Upstate New York Illumina Users Group Meeting, Ithaca NY, May 2012
Annual Retreat, Synthetic Biology Engineering Research Center Retreat, UC Berkeley, CA, March 2012
Inaugural Meeting, Cold Spring Harbor Asia Conference on the Design and Synthesis of Biological
          Systems, Suzhou, China, October 2011
Industry:
Seminar, Moderna, Cambridge MA, May 2022
Seminar, Biogen, Cambridge MA (Virtual), August 2021
Seminar, Translate Bio, Boston MA (Virtual), May 2021
Speaker, 2nd RNA-Targeted Drug Discovery Summit, Cambridge, MA, December 2019
Seminar, Synthetic Biology: A New Biotechnology Revolution, Kellogg Executive Education, Sept. 2019
Seminar, Arrakis TX, Cambridge, MA, May 2018
Seminar, Manus Biosynthesis, Cambridge, MA, October 2015
Seminar, DSM, Cambridge, MA, October 2016
CONTRIBUTED PRESENTATIONS and POSTERS by JBL or LUCKS GROUP MEMBERS (106)
2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2019, 2022 Synthetic Biology Evolution, Engineering and Design (SEED)
	
Presentations: ADS, KKA
	
Posters: KJJ, MKT, CYH (2), PDC (2) CJG (3), EJS, JEC, AMY, DAL, JEW, SIM, AMW, MV, JL
2019 Cell Free Synthetic Biology Meeting
	
Posters: MV, ADS, KJJ
2019 UNC Water Meeting
	
Posters: JBL
2019 Colorado WASH Symposium
	
Posters: MV, WT
2018 Computational Approaches to RNA Structure and Function
	
Presentations: JBL, AMY
2017 FASEB Machines on Genes Meeting
	
Presentations: EJS
2017 FASEB Transcription Meeting
	
Presentations: EJS
2017, 2019 Gordon Research Conference Nucleic Acids
	
Presentations: EJS
	
Posters: EJS, AMY
2016, 2017 Engineering Biology Research Consortium Retreats
	
Presentations: PDC
	
Posters: KA (2), AMW, CH, CJG, AMY, KEB, MV, ADS
2016,2019 Chicago RNA Club
            Presentations: EJS, MEE, AMY
2016 Mountain Lake Transcription Meeting
            Presentations: EJS
2016, 2017, 2019 Rustbelt RNA
            Presentations: EJS, AMY
            Posters: MEE, RAR, LMH, DZB, EDC
2011, 2013, 2015 International Conference on Biomolecular Engineering
	
Presentations: JBL (2); Posters: JBL
10

2012, 2014, 2015, 2020 AIChE National Meetings
	
Presentations: SIM (2), MKT (2), KEW (2), KJJ 
	
Posters: TRA (undergraduate)
2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016 Synthetic Biology Engineering Research Center Retreats
	
Presentations: MKT (2), KEW, JEC, AMW 
	
Posters: DAL (4), MKT (1), SIM (2), KEW (1), PDC (1), CJG (1), CYH (1), AW (2), AY (1)
2015 Cold Spring Harbor Genome Engineering Meeting
            Poster: KEW
2014, 2015, 2016 Annual RNA Science Symposium, Albany NY 
           Presentations: KEW
           Posters: KEW (2), EJS (1)
2014, 2020, 2022 RNA Society Meeting
           Poster: KEW, LMH (2), DZB, EKC
2013 Gordon Conference on Synthetic Biology, Mount Snow, VT
          Posters: DAL, SIM, MKT
2013 Mammalian Synthetic Biology Conference, MIT, MA
          Poster: KEW
2013 Hudson RNA Club Meeting
          Poster: KEW
2012, 2018 Benasque RNA Bioinformatics Meeting, Benasque, Spain
          Presentation: JBL (2), AMY
2011 Synthetic Biology 5.0, Stanford University, Palo Alto CA 
          Poster: DAL
2008 Synthetic Biology 4.0, Hong Kong, China 
          Presentation: JBL
2008 Pycon, Chicago, IL
          Presentation: JBL
2007 Microsoft Research eScience Workshop, Chapel Hill, NC
          Presentation: JBL
SUPERVISION OF POST-DOCTORAL SCHOLARS - Former: 5, Current: 1 (in parenthesis: present 
position)
1.
Yueting Zhuang, 2012-2013 (Associate Director, Project Management, Bristol Myers Squibb)
2.
James Chappell, 2013-2017 (Assistant Professor, Rice University Department of Biosciences)
3.
Khalid Alam, 2016-2019 (Co-Founder and CEO, Stemloop, Inc.)
4.
Eric Strobel, 2015-2020 (Assistant Professor, University at Buffalo Department of Biosciences)
5.
Molly Evans, 2017-2020 (Scientist, Abbott Laboratories, Diagnostics Division)
6.
Anibal Arce, 2022-
SUPERVISION OF PHD STUDENTS - Former: 12, Current: 9 (in parenthesis: present position)
1.
Melissa K. Takahashi, Ph.D. Chemical Engineering, Cornell University, 8/15/2010-6/15/2015 (Assistant 
Professor Cal State Northridge), Thesis title: “Developing design principles for engineering RNA 
transcription regulators and RNA synthetic networks.”
2.
David A. Loughrey, Ph.D. Chemical Engineering, Cornell University, 8/15/2010-12/15/2016 (Postdoc 
Dahlman Lab, Emory University), Thesis title: “Using SHAPE-Seq as a tool to understand RNA 
structure/function relationships."
11

3.
Kyle E. Watters, Ph.D. Chemical Engineering, Cornell University, 8/15/2011-6/15/2016 (Senior 
Scientist, Arbor Biosciences), Thesis title: “SHAPE-Seq technologies for analyzing, understanding, and 
designing RNA structures and functions.”
4.
Sarai I. Meyer, Ph.D. Chemical Engineering, Cornell University, 8/15/2011-6/15/2016 (Senior Scientist, 
Quantum-Si), Thesis Title: “Engineering and characterizing RNA genetic regulators.”
5.
Alexandra Westbrook, Ph.D. Chemical Engineering, Cornell University, 8/15/2013-6/15/2018 (Postdoc, 
El Samad Lab, UCSF), Thesis title: “Characterization of RNA genetic regulators and synthetic 
networks."
6.
Paul Carlson, Ph.D. Chemical Engineering, Cornell University, 8/15/2013-6/15/2018 (Senior Scientist, 
Affinia Therapeutics), Thesis title: “Uncovering the elements of RNA design.”
7.
Cameron Glasscock, Ph.D. Chemical Engineering, Cornell University, 8/15/2013-6/15/2019, Co-
Advised with Prof. Matt DeLisa (Washington Research Fellow, Baker Lab, University of Washington), 
Thesis title: “Genetic tools and approaches for engineering metabolism and metabolic pathways.”
8.
Chelsea Hu, Ph.D. Chemical Engineering, Cornell University, 8/15/2013-6/15/2018, Co-Advised with 
Prof. Jeff Varner (Postdoc, Murray Lab, Caltech), Thesis title: “Advancing RNA circuitry engineering with 
guidance of mathematical and computational models.”
9.
Angela Yu, Ph.D. Computational Biology and Medicine, Tri-Institutes Training Program, Cornell 
University, 8/15/2014-6/15/2020, Co-Advised with Christina Leslie, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
(Washington Research Fellow, Seelig Lab, University of Washington), Thesis title: “Computationally 
reconstructing RNA folding pathways from experimental data."
10. Mathew Verosloff, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 
7/1/2016-12/15/2020 (Scientist, Mammoth Biosciences), Thesis title: “Uncovering the Mechanism of 
Intrinsic Transcription Termination in Order to Develop Point-of-Care Diagnostics.”
11. Adam Silverman, Ph. D. Chemical Engineering, Northwestern University, 9/15/2016-6/1/2021, Co-
Advised with Prof. Mike Jewett (Scientist, Sherlock Biosciences), Thesis title: “Design and optimization 
of a field-deployable biosensing platform for measuring water quality.”
12. Luyi Cheng, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 9/15/2016-2/28/2022 
(Mirzayan Fellow, National Academies), Thesis title: “Investigating co-transcriptional folding in RNA-
based gene regulation.”
13. Kirsten Jung, Ph. D. Chemical Engineering, Northwestern University, 9/15/2017-4/15/2022 (Scientist, 
Mammoth Biosciences), Thesis title: “Engineering in vitro transcriptional biosensors for rapid and 
programmable molecular detection.”
14. Walter Thavarajah, Ph. D. Chemical Engineering, Northwestern University, 9/15/2017-6/30/2022 
(Scientist, Ginkgo Bioworks), Thesis title: “Strategies for the design and field deployment of cell-free 
biosensors.”
15. Katherine Berman, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 
7/1/2016-10/15/2022 (Scientist, Crayon Bio), Thesis title: “Investigating RNA structural dynamics for 
gene regulation.”
16. Rebecca Rassmussen, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 
9/15/2018-Present, Co-Advised with Prof. Tom O’Halloran
17. Chloé Archuleta, Ph. D. Chemical Engineering, Northwestern University, 9/15/2019-Present
18. David Bushhouse, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 9/15/2020-
Present
19. Laura Hertz, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 9/15/2020-Present
20. Jenni Li, Ph. D. Chemical Engineering, Northwestern University, 9/15/2020-Present
21. Dylan Brown, Ph. D. Chemical Engineering, Northwestern University, 9/15/2020-Present
22. Tyler Lucci, Ph. D. Chemical Engineering, Northwestern University, 9/15/2021-Present
23. Maram Naji, Ph. D. Chemical Engineering, Northwestern University, 9/15/2022-Present
24. Herma Demisse, Ph. D. Chemical Engineering, Northwestern University, 9/15/2022-Present
12

25. Siyuan Feng, Ph. D. Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University, 6/15/2023-Present
SUPERVISION OF MASTERS STUDENTS
1.
Karl Brennan, M.S. Chemical Engineering, Cornell University, 8/15/2014-6/15/2015 (Process Engineer, 
MSD Biotech).
2.
Olivia Meyer, Masters in Biotechnology, Northwestern University 9/15/2021-Present.
SUPERVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDENTS - Former: 23, Current: 2  %indicates published
(in parenthesis: present position)
1.
Jay Park, 2011-2013 (Medical School)
2.
Helen Tan, 2011-2013 (Process Engineer, Mondavi Wineries)
3.
Matt Carter, 2011-2014 (Scientist, Caribou Biosciences; Stanford BioE Grad School)
4.
Misha Baheti, 2011-2013 (Consultant) 
5.
Ruize Zhuang, 2012-2015 (Stanford PhD)
6.
Sitara Sankar%, 2012-2015 (GA Tech PhD)
7.
Tim Abbott%, 2012-2015 (NSF Graduate Fellow, Stanford PhD)
8.
Rebecca Chew%, 2012-2015 (UC Berkeley Masters)
9.
Alex Settle%, 2013-2016 (Scientist, Caribou Biosciences; Memorial Sloan Kettering Graduate School) 
10. Yan Zhang%, 2015-2016 (GA Tech Graduate School)
11. Elizabeth Weiss, 2015-2016 (Northwestern Medical Scientist Training Program)
12. Aron Coraor, 2015-2016 (NSF Graduate Fellow, Institute for Molecular Engineering University of 
Chicago Graduate School)
13. Jane Liao, 2015-2016 (Associate Scientist, GSK)
14. Raashed Raziuddin, 2015-2016 (Fermentation Process Development, Evelo Biosciences)
15. Phillip Clauer%, (Summer 2017, 2018, MIT Bioengineering Graduate School)
16. Kristen Shytel, 2017-2019 (Sherlock Biosciences)
17. Lulu Sun, 2017-2018 (Researcher, Seattle Children’s Hospital)
18. Jack Arnold%, 2017-2019 (University of Chicago PhD)
19. Katarina Cheronis, 2017-2018 (Research Specialist, University of Chicago)
20. Umut Akova%, 2018-2020 (Northwestern Masters Student)
21. Kevin Fitzgerald, (Summer 2019, NSF Graduate Fellow Northwestern University).
22. Paulina Tarsul, 2019 (Northwestern Undergraduate Student)
23. Russell Steans%, 2019-2022 (Post-Bac, NIH)
24. Kelly Gebman, 2019-2020
25. Crestelynne Ligo, 2021-2022
26. Stephanie Maynez, 2022-Present
27. Paul Bernhard, 2022-Present
ACHIEVEMENTS BY GROUP MEMBERS
Synthetic Biology Across Scales (SynBAS) Training Grant, Northwestern University: 2021 (Brown), 2022 
(Lucci)
RNA Society Poster Award: 2022 (Bushhouse)
NSF Graduate Fellowship Honorable Mention: 2022 (Li)
Northwestern International Institute of Nanotechnology Outstanding Researcher in Nanotechnology, 2021 	
       (Thavarajah, Jung)
NU ChBE Distinguished Graduate Researcher Award, 2020 (Jung)
Terminal Year Fellowship, Northwestern University, 2020 (Jung)
Presidential Fellowship, Northwestern University, 2019 (Silverman)
13

Ryan Fellowship, Northwestern University: 2018 (Silverman), 2019 (Jung), 2022 (Li); 2023 (Hertz)
Biotechnology Training Grant, Northwestern University: 2017 (Silverman), 2018 (Thavarajah, Jung), 2020 	
       (Hertz), 2022 (Li)
Molecular Biophysics Training Grant, Northwestern University: 2017 (Cheng), 2020, 2022 (Bushhouse)
Chemistry of Life Processes Training Grant, Northwestern University: 2019 (Rasmussen)
Best E-Poster, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, AAAS National Meeting, Seattle WA, 2020 (Cheng)
Poster Awards, Cell Free Synthetic Biology Conference, Boston MA, 2019 (Jung, Silverman)
Washington Research Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship 2019 (Glasscock), 2020 (Yu)
Short Talk Award, FASEB Machines on Genes Conference 2018 (Strobel)
Beckman Postdoctoral Fellowship 2017 (Strobel)
Best Talk, Rustbelt RNA Conference 2016 (Strobel), 2017 (Yu)
Inaugural Cornell CBE Fleming Graduate Scholar 2015 (Watters)
NSF Graduate Fellowships: 2011 (Takahashi), 2012 (Watters, Meyer), 2013 (Carlson) 2015 (Glasscock, 
      Abbott), 2016 (Zhuang), 2019 (Rasmussen), 2020 (Archuleta)
NDSEG Graduate Fellowships: 2020 (Archuleta)
Austin Hooey Graduate Award (2015 Takahashi, 2016 Watters, 2019 Carlson)
AIChE Women’s Initiative Committee Travel Award 2014 (Meyer, Takahashi)
Engineering Learning Initiatives Research Awards: 2012 (Tan), 2013 (Sankar, Abbott), 2014 (Chew, Abbott),   
       2015 (Chew)
Cornell Undergraduate Research Board Best Poster 2014 (Sankar)
Cornell Engineering Alumni Association Undergraduate Research Award 2014 (Abbott)
Genentech Scheele Outstanding Junior Awards: 2011 (Park), 2013 (Zhuang)
Amgen Research Scholarship 2013 (Zhuang)
Great Lakes National Scholarship 2012 (Watters)
PHD COMMITTEES
1.
Michael-Paul Robinson, Ph. D. Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, 
2010-2017
2.
Bill Bedell, Ph. D. Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, 2012-2016
3.
Erin Stephens, Ph.D. Biochemistry, Molecular and Cellular Biology, Cornell University, 2013-2018
4.
May Taw, Ph. D. Microbiology, Cornell University, 2013-2019
5.
Tara Srinivasan, Ph. D. Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, 2012-2016
6.
Daniel Tapias-Rojas, Ph. D. Microbiology, Cornell University, 2013-2018
7.
Thapakorn Jareontomeechai, Ph. D. Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, 
2014-2016
8.
Christine Rose Laramy, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 
2015-2018
9.
Do Soon Kim, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2016-2020
10. Alexis Amaris Reyes, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 2016-2022
11. Nolan Kennedy, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 2016-Present
12. Margarethe Boyd, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 2018-2022
13. Andrew Hunt, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2016-2022
14. Alex Prybutok, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2016-2022
15. Blaise Kimmel, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2017-2021
16. Katie Warfel, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2018-Present
17. Jack McGee, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2017-2022
18. Kate Dray, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2017-2022
19. Peter Tran, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2017-Present
14

20. Hailey Edelstein, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2019-Present
21. Will Corcoran, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 2019-Present
22. Sam Gowland, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2019-2022
23. Camilla Koffman, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2019-Present
24. Reese Richardson, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 2019-Present
25. Healther Calcaterra, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2019-
Present
26. Holly Ekas, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2019-Present
27. Brooke Angell, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 2020-Present
28. Eduardo Campos Chávez, Ph. D. Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences, Northwestern University, 2020-
Present
29. Maddie DeWinter, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2019-Present
30. James Coxon, Ph. D. Department of Pathology, Cambridge University, 2021 (External Examiner)
31. Katie Dreyer, Ph. D. Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, 2019-Present
32. Dalton Jun-da Huey, Ph. D. Driskoll Graduate Program, Northwestern University, 2019-Present
MS COMMITTEES - past and current
1.
Daniel Tien, M.S. Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, 2015-2016
EDUCATION EXPERIENCE and RECOGNITION
Mentor, Searle Center for Advanced Learning Teaching Certificate, Tae-Eun Kim, 2020-2021
Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar Award, Camille and Henry Dreyfus Foundation, 2017
Cornell College of Engineering Mr. and Mrs. Richard F. Tucker `50 Teaching Award, 2015
Professor, Northwestern University
Deconstructing Synthetic Biology, W21, W22, W23
Molecular Folding and Function, S21
Computational Biology, S22
Advanced Thermodynamics, S21
Associate Professor, Northwestern University
Advanced Thermodynamics (graduate), W17, W18, W19, W20
Advanced Principles of Biomolecular Engineering (graduate), S18, S19, S20
Graduate Student Professional Development Course (co-instructor), F16, F17, F18, F19, F20
Responsible Conduct of Research (co-instructor), F18, F19
Assistant Professor, Cornell University
Heat and Mass Transfer (undergraduate), F11, F12, F14, F15
Advanced Principles of Biomolecular Engineering (graduate), S13, S14, S15	 
Principles and Practices of Graduate Research (graduate), F11, F12, F14
Co-Creator and Instructor, Cold Spring Harbor Summer Course on Synthetic Biology, Su13, Su14, Su15.
The CSHL synthetic biology course is an international, intensive laboratory course consisting of real 
research projects in synthetic biology combined with talks and interactions with world class researchers. 
The course is emerging as a focal point for setting the research and teaching agenda for biomolecular 
engineering and synthetic biology.
Panel Participant, “Mastering Your Future - Learning to Read (Scientific Papers).” Cornell College of 
Engineering. February 2013
“How to write a grant proposal.” w/ Paulette Clancy. Cornell Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering 
      Graduate Students. S15, F15
SERVICE - CONFERENCE / SYMPOSIUM / COLLOQUIUM ORGANIZATION
15

1.
Synthetic Biology 5.0: The Fifth International Meeting on Synthetic Biology
• Co-organizer, June 15-17 2011, Stanford, Palo Alto, CA
2.
4th International Conference on Biomolecular Engineering
• Poster session co-chair, January 13-16 2013, Fort Lauderdale, FL
3.
American Institute for Chemical Engineering (AIChE) National Meeting
• Co-chair, “Gene Regulation Engineering” & “Paradigms in Systems and Synthetic Biology”, 
Section 15c, October 2013, San Francisco, CA
• Co-chair, Topical A “Paradigms in Systems and Synthetic Biology”, October 2014, Atlanta, GA
• Chair, Topical A “Emerging Frontiers in Systems and Synthetic Biology”, 2015, Salt Lake City, Utah
4.
Metabolic Engineering X Meeting
• Poster session co-chair, June 2014, Vancouver BC
5.
5th International Conference on Biomolecular Engineering
• Co-chair “High-Throughput Biological Design”, January 13-16 2014, Austin, TX
6.
The Nuts and Bolts of Bioengineered Systems: A Workshop on Standards in Synthetic Biology
• Meeting Co-organizer, March 8-12, 2015, Valencia Spain
7.
6th International Conference on Biomolecular Engineering
• Organizing Committee, January 13-16 2016, Singapore
8.
Synthetic Biology: Engineering, Evolution and Design (SEED) Conference
• Organizing Committee, July 2016, Chicago
• Organizing Committee, July 2017, Vancouver
• Organizing Committee, July 2018, Arizona
• Co-organizer, July 2019, New York
• Organizing Committee, July 2020, San Francisco
9.
Computational Approaches to RNA Structure and Function, Benasque, Spain
• 2018: Session Chair - Experimental Approaches
10. Cell Free Synthetic Biology Conference
• Co-Chair, 2021
SERVICE - PROFESSIONAL
1.
Synthetic Biology Engineering Research Center (SynBERC), Parts Thrust Co-Leader, 2010-2011
2.
Synthetic Biology Engineering Research Center (SynBERC), Affiliate Investigator, 2010-2016
3.
Synthetic Biology Engineering Research Center (SynBERC), Leadership Task Force, 2014-2016
4.
US Chair, EU/US Biotechnology Task Force Synthetic Biology Working Group, 2014-2016
5.
Board of Directors, Engineering Biology Research Consortium, 2015-2017
6.
Chicago RNA Club, Co-organizer, 2016-
7.
Founding Council Member, Engineering Biology Research Consortium, 2017-2020
8.
Founding Chair, Individual Membership Committee, Engineering Biology Research Consortium, 
2017-2019
9.
Member, Education Working Group, Engineering Biology Research Consortium, 2019-Present
10. Research Roadmapping Participant, Engineering Biology Research Consortium, 2019-Present
11. AIChE Chemical Engineering Diversity Equity and Inclusion Working Group, 2021-
12. National Academies Panel: Toward Sequencing and Mapping RNA Modifications, 2022-2024
SERVICE - PROPOSAL AND MANUSCRIPT REVIEW
1.
National Science Foundation
• CBET ad hoc reviewer, 2011, 2015, 2018
• MCB ad hoc reviewer, 2014, 2018, 2019, 2021
16

• SBIR ad hoc reviewer, 2020
2.
National Institutes of Health
• MSFB ad hoc reviewer, 2018
3.
Journal Advisory and Editorial Boards
• GEN Biotechnology, 2021-
• Nucleic Acids Research, 2015-2021
• ACS Synthetic Biology, 2011-Present
• bioRxiv, 2014-Present
4.
Journal Reviews
ACS Chemical Biology, ACS Synthetic Biology, Biophysical Journal, Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 
Cell, Journal of Biological Engineering, Molecular Cell, Molecular Systems Biology, Nature 
Biotechnology, Nature Chemical Biology, Nature Communications, Nature Methods, Nature Protocols, 
Nature Reviews Microbiology, Nature Structural and Molecular Biology, Nucleic Acids Research, PLoS 
ONE, PLoS Pathogens, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, Science, WIREs RNA
SERVICE - OUTREACH
1.
J. B. Lucks*, M. K. Takahashi#, J. Saathoff. “An Introduction to Chemical and Biomolecular 
Engineering”. CATALYST Academy for Under Represented Minorities, Cornell University, Ithaca NY, 
June 2011)
2.
J. B. Lucks*, S. I. Meyer#, K. E. Watters#. “An Introduction to Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering”. 
CATALYST Academy for Under Represented Minorities, Cornell University, Ithaca NY, June 2012
3.
J. B. Lucks*. “Optimization of Biosynthetic Pathways”. NSF GK-12 Grass Roots: Advancing Education 
in Renewable Energy and Cleaner Fuels through Collaborative Graduate Fellow/Teacher/Grade-School 
Student Interactions, Cornell University, Ithaca NY, July 2012
4.
J. B. Lucks. “Mastering Your Future - Learning to Read (Scientific Papers).” Cornell College of 
Engineering. Panelist, February 2013
5.
Cold Spring Harbor Course on Synthetic Biology
• Co-organizer, July-August 2013, 2014, 2015
6.
NSF Building with Biology Project Developer/Participant
• Developed ‘Microbe Match’ card game with the Sciencenter, Ithaca NY, 2015
• ‘Showtime!’ on Synthetic Biology, Sciencenter, Ithaca NY, 2015
• Participated in ‘SynBio Day’ at the Sciencenter, Ithaca NY, September 2015
• Community forum on ‘Building with Biology’, Ithaca Generator, Ithaca NY, September 2015.
7.
Northwestern Center for Synthetic Biology
• Western Springs Elementary School Synthetic Biology Demonstration, Evanston, IL 2018
• Host-Laboratory, Expanding Your Horizons Synthetic Biology Demonstration, Evanston, IL 2019
SERVICE - UNIVERSITY
1.
Northwestern University, Chair, Faculty Search Committee Chemical and Biological Engineering, 
2022-2023
2.
Northwestern University, Limited Submission Advisory Committee (LSAC) Member, 2022-Present
3.
Northwestern University, McCormick School of Engineering Faculty Appeals Committee, 2021-Present
4.
Northwestern University, Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences (IBiS) Advisory Committee, 2021-Present
5.
Northwestern University, McCormick School of Engineering DEI Leaders Committee, 2020-Present
6.
Northwestern University, Limited Submission Advisory Committee (LSAC) Reviewer, 2021
7.
Northwestern University, Chair ChBE Anti-racism, Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Committee, 2020-
Present
17

8.
Northwestern University, International Institute for Nanotechnology, Faculty Search Committee, 2020
9.
Northwestern University, Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences (IBiS) Curriculum Committee, 2019-2020
10. Northwestern University, Exploring Ethics: Across Art, Humanities, and Science - May 8 2019
11. Northwestern University, Internal Program Review - Materials Science and Engineering, 2019
12. Northwestern University, Associate Chair of Chemical and Biological Engineering, 2019-Present
13. Northwestern University, Co-Chair, Graduate Student Experience Committee, 2019-Present
14. Northwestern University, Member, Alumni Relations Committee, 2019-2020
15. Northwestern University, Member, Biophysics Training Grant Steering Committee, 2018-Present
16. Northwestern ChBE Awards Committee, 2016-Present (Chair, 2017-Present)
17. Northwestern ChBE Faculty Search Committee, 2016, 2020
18. Cornell CBE Graduate Field Committee, 2011-2014, 2016
19. Cornell CBE Faculty Search Committee, 2012
20. Cornell CBE Awards Committee, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016
21. Cornell CBE Policy Committee, 2012-2013
22. Cornell CBE Seminar Series Coordinator, 2014, 2015
23. Cornell CBE Director’s Search Committee 2016
24. Cornell MBG Faculty Search Committee, 2013-2014
25. Cornell CBE Undergraduate Academic Advisor, 2012-2016
26. Cornell Churchill Scholarship Internal Selection Committee, 2013-2016
MEDIA COVERAGE AND RESEARCH HIGHLIGHTS
Media Coverage
1.
E. Check Hayden (2011). Life hackers seek new tools, Nature 474, 261. 
2.
S. Cohen (2012). The Scientist: Prof. Lucks Researches RNA to Build Biological Circuitry. Cornell Daily 
Sun, September 12 2012.
3.
A. Dy (2016). SEED 2016: Welcome to Chicago! PLoS Blogs, July 29, 2016.
4.
NIH NIGMS Biomedical Beat Blog. Interview with a Scientist: Julius Lucks, Shape Seeker, July 18, 
2018. https://biobeat.nigms.nih.gov/2018/07/interview-with-a-scientist-julius-lucks-shape-seeker/ , 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QLiCQ5KrigA&feature=youtu.be
5.
Planet Forward. Researchers bring biotech to farmers worldwide with Plant-Dx, February 8, 2019, 
https://www.planetforward.org/idea/researchers-bring-biotech-to-farmers-worldwide-with-plant-dx
6.
Northwestern University Scientists Sprint to Develop New Kind of Rapid Coronavirus Test (2020). 
Chicago Tribune. https://www.chicagotribune.com/coronavirus/ct-coronavirus-northwestern-university-
coronavirus-test-research-20200421-wzqacvbbh5fezll6lm67bk2zta-story.html
7.
Northwestern Engineering synthetic biologists aim to create one-step diagnostic test for COVID-19 
(2020). The Daily Northwestern. https://dailynorthwestern.com/2020/05/18/campus/northwestern-
engineering-synthetic-biologists-aim-to-create-one-step-diagnostic-test-for-covid-19/#photo
8.
Sewage may help predict future virus outbreaks. Chicago researchers aim to test hundreds or 
thousands of manholes at a time (2020). Chicago Tribune. https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/
environment/ct-coronavirus-tracking-sewage-20200530-4zpb3hn2prb5vj4ksz7i67bnha-story.html
9.
Using sewage to track COVID-19 (2020). The 21st show. https://will.illinois.edu/21stshow/story/using-
sewage-to-track-covid-19
10. A one-drop test for water contamination (2020). Axios Future. https://www.axios.com/newsletters/axios-
future
18

11. Local researchers developing at-home kit for faster water contamination testing (2020). WGN. https://
wgntv.com/news/medical-watch/local-researchers-developing-at-home-kit-for-faster-water-
contamination-testing/
12. Toxin Tester (2020). National Science Foundation Discovery Files. https://www.nsf.gov/news/mmg/
mmg_disp.jsp?med_id=186632&from=
13. Northwestern researchers hope to democratize drinking water tests through ROSALIND (2020). The 
Daily Northwestern. https://dailynorthwestern.com/2020/07/12/campus/northwestern-researchers-hope-
to-democratize-drinking-water-tests-through-rosalind/
14. Every toilet flush reveals a clue in fight to stop COVID-19 (2020). Chicago Tribune. https://
www.chicagotribune.com/news/environment/ct-covid-sewage-monitoring-20201117-
rgi5wgme75h5lb2qxdi6rnr6lq-story.html
15. DNA finds pollutants in green-glowing water test (2020). Scientific American. https://
www.scientificamerican.com/article/dna-finds-pollutants-in-green-glowing-water-test/
16. RNA ties itself into knots, then unties itself in mesmerizing video (2021). Live Science. https://
www.livescience.com/new-high-resolution-rna-videos.html . Picked up by MSN (https://www.msn.com/
en-au/news/techandscience/rna-ties-itself-in-knots-then-unties-itself-in-mesmerizing-video/ar-
BB1cRdZh) and Yahoo (https://uk.news.yahoo.com/rna-ties-itself-knots-then-120050426.html)
17. Ground-breaking films show RNA’s complex curves take shape (2021). Nature. https://www.nature.com/
articles/d41586-021-00126-8
18. Using R2D2 to understand RNA folding (2021). NIH Director’s Blog. https://directorsblog.nih.gov/
2021/02/25/using-r2d2-to-understand-rna-folding/
19. This cheap ‘DNA computer’ finds water toxins within minutes (2022). The Daily Beast. https://
www.thedailybeast.com/new-dna-computer-is-fast-cheap-way-to-measure-water-quality?ref=wrap 
20. Scientists develop device to test if water is safe to drink - it shows results in minutes (2022). The 
Independent. https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/water-drink-safety-device-test-dna-
b2018898.html?amp 
21. Gadget ‘tastes’ water to tell you if it is safe to drink (2022). Metro. https://metro.co.uk/2022/02/18/
gadget-tastes-water-to-tell-you-if-its-safe-to-drink-16124989/ 
22. Sci-fi tech could solve world’s water crisis (2022). WebMD. https://www.webmd.com/a-to-z-guides/
features/sci-fi-tech-could-solve-worlds-water-crisis?src=rss_public 
23. Learn how the device works (2022). Northwestern Magazine Youtube cartoon on ROSALIND. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=k5YOEzEUd4g 
Research Highlights
24. K. M. Weeks (2011). RNA structure probing dash seq. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 108, 10933-10934.
25. M. Eisenstein (2011).  A SHAPE in the Crowd. Biopolymers, 95, iii-iv.
26. J. J. Tabor (2012). Modular gene-circuit design takes two steps forward. Nature Methods, 9, 1061-1063.
27. Cornell Engineering ‘Breaking the Rules’ web and video stories (2014). http://
www.engineering.cornell.edu/brand/independent/
28. L. Cahoon (2014). Code Breaker: Julius Lucks Unlocks the Secrets of RNA to Advance Human Health. 
Cornell Engineering Magazine, Summer, 2014.
29. S. Adams (2015). Cornell’s new genetic “switch” could detect deadly diseases. IthacaWeek, http://
www.ithacaweek-ic.com/cornell-researchers-engineer-on-switch-for-genes/ .
30. N. Rusk (2015). RNA that activates transcription. Nature Methods, 12, 290.
19

31. Sharing Science: Watching the STARS (Small Transcription Activating RNAs). NSF MCB Blog, April 10, 
2015. https://nsfmcb.wordpress.com/2015/04/01/sharing-science-watching-the-stars-small-transcription-
activating-rnas/ 
32. Inexpensive kit could let anyone test water for fluoride. New Atlas, Dec 16, 2019. https://newatlas.com/
science/inexpensive-test-kit-water-fluoride/
Op-Ed
33. S. L. Young, J. B. Lucks, What’s really in your water?, Scientific American (2021), April 18. https://
www.scientificamerican.com/article/whats-really-in-your-water/
Quoted/Featured In
34. DARPA to Offer $30 Million to Jump-Start Cellular Factories, Science Insider (2011), June 29.
35. Tailor-Made Genome, The Scientist (2011), July 14.
36. Defense Research Agency Hunts for Biotech Innovators, The Chronicle of Higher Education (2013), 
October 7.
37. What Are Genetically Recoded Organisms?, Popular Science (2013), October 17.
38. Synthetic Biologists Create Paper-Based Diagnostic for Ebola, MIT Technology Review (2014), October 
24.
39. Bringing Synthetic Biology to (Freeze-Dried) Paper, Biotechniques (2014), December 3.
40. A new paper-based test for the Zika virus, MIT News (2016), May 6.
41. Group seeks to overturn patent ruling on breakthrough gene technology, The Wall St. Journal (2017), 
April 14.
42. Bacterial photography goes technicolor, The Scientist (2017), May 22.
43. Complex Biological Computer Commands Living Cells, IEEE Spectrum (2017), July 26.
44. Synthetic Biology Sparks Promise of Medical, Energy Advances, Arizona State Full Circle (2018) https://
fullcircle.asu.edu/research/synthetic-biology-sparks-promise-medical-energy-advances/ .
45. The Next Albert Einstein (2021). https://www.facebook.com/The-next-Albert-Einstein-105406344835349
46. 50th Synthetic Biology Rising Star Series Talk featuring Professor Julius Lucks and Dr. Boya Wang 
(2022) Link.
20

Jean-Fran¸cois Gaillard
Contact
Information
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Office: +1 847 467-1376
McCormick School of Engineering and Applied Science
Fax: +1 847 491-4011
Northwestern University
Laboratory: +1 847 467-1074
2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208-3109
e-mail: jf-gaillard@northwestern.edu
Research
Interests
Environmental Geochemistry, Aquatic Chemistry, Metal Speciation, Biogeochemical Cycles,
Sediments, Early Diagenesis, Synchrotron Radiation, X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy
Education
Universit´e Paris 7 & Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, France
Docteur `Es Sciences Physiques: Chimie-G´eochimie
June 1987
• Title: About some Processes in Early Diagenesis
• Advisor: Professor Gil Michard
Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris VI, France
Docteur 3ieme Cycle: Water Sciences,
September 1982
• Title: Early Diagenesis in Canadian Shield Lakes
• Advisor: Professor Gil Michard
Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris VI, France
Diplˆome d’Etudes Approfondies: Sciences de l’Eau,
June 1980
• MS in Water Sciences
• Project: Modeling Silica Dynamics in Lake L´eman (Lake Geneva)
Universit´e Savoie Mont Blanc, Chamb´ery, France
Maˆıtrise de Sciences et Techniques Air et Eau,
June 1979
• BS in Environmental Engineering: Air and Water
Professional
Experience
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA
Assistant, Associate, and then Professor
September 1995 – present
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, and
Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA
Visiting Professor and then Assistant Professor
August 1991 – August 1995
Department of Civil Engineering and Geological Sciences
Universit´e Paris 7 & Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, Paris, France
Maˆıtre de Conf´erences
September 1989 – July 2023
Laboratoire de G´eochimie des Eaux,
Unit´e de Formation et de Recherche de Chimie.
Universit´e de Gen`eve, Gen`eve, Switzerland
Maˆıtre Assistant
September 1988 – August 1989
D´epartement de Chimie Min´erale Analytique et Appliqu´ee
Universit´e Paris 7 & Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, Paris, France
Assistant des Universit´es
September 1982 – August 1989
Laboratoire de G´eochimie des Eaux,
Unit´e de Formation et de Recherche de Chimie.
1

Honours and
Awards
Research Initiation Awards, National Science Foundation, 1993-1996
IUPAC Fellow (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry), 2007
Elected Member: Sigma Xi (Scientific Research Honor Society), 2019 -.
Publications
Wallace S.M., Zhang Y., Zhou L., Ma Q., Guise W.E., Denslow N.D., Bonzongo J.-C., Gaillard
J.-F. (2023) The Diversity of Aluminum-Based Drinking Water Treatment Residuals for Use in
Environmental Remediation. Environmental Science: Water Research & Technology, 9 935 - 947.
Elsamadony M., Elreedy A., Mostafa A., Fujii M., Gescher J., Shakeri Yekta S., Schn¨urer A.,
Gaillard J.-F., Pant D.(2021) Perspectives on potential applications of nanometal derivatives in
gaseous bioenergy pathways: mechanisms, life cycle, and toxicity. ACS Sustainable Chemistry &
Engineering, 9, 29 9563–9589.
Vargas, A. Alsina M.A., Gaillard J.-F., Past´en P., Lopez M. (2021) Copper entrapment and im-
mobilization during cement hydration in concrete mixtures containing copper tailings. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 312, 127547
Wallace S.M., Alsina, M.A., Gaillard J.-F. (2021) An algorithm for the automatic deglitching of
X-ray absorption spectroscopy data. Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, 28,4 1178–1183
Zhou L., Wallace S.M., Kroll K.J., Denslow N.D., Gaillard J.-F., Meyer P., Bonzongo J.-C. (2021)
Acute and Chronic Toxicity Testing of Drinking Water Treatment Residuals in Freshwater Systems.
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 40(7), 2003-2012.
Wu S., Gaillard J.-F., Gray K.A. (2021) The impacts of metal-based engineered nanomaterial
mixtures on microbial systems: A review. Science of the Total Environment, 780, 146496.
Zhou L., Wallace S.M., Denslow N.D., Gaillard J.-F., Meyer P., Bonzongo J.-C. (2021) A Screening
Approach for the Selection of Drinking Water Treatment Residuals (DWTRs) for their Introduction
to Marine Systems. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 40(4), 1194–1203.
Desmau M., Alsina M.A., Gaillard J.-F. (2021) XAS study of Sn speciation in toothpaste. Journal
of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 36, 407–415
Chen X., Wilke C.M., Gaillard J.-F., Gray K.A. (2020) Combined toxicity of nano-CuO/nano-
TiO2 and CuSO4/nano−TiO2 on Escherichia coli in aquatic environments under dark and light
conditions.Nanoimpact, 19, 100250.
Jung J.K., Alam K.K., Verosloff M.S., Capdevila D.A., Desmau M., Clauer P.R., Lee J.K.,
Nguyen P.Q., Past´en P.A., Matiasek S.J., Gaillard J.-F., Giedroc D.P., Collins J.J., Lucks J.B.
(2020) Cell-free biosensors for rapid detection of water contaminants.
Nature Biotechnology,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0571-7
Montecinos M., Coquery M., Alsina M.A., Bretier M., Gaillard J.-F., Dabrin A., Past´en P.A.
(2020) Partitioning of copper at the confluences of Andean rivers. Chemosphere, 259, 127318.
Thomas S.A, Catty P., Hazemann J.-L., Michaud-Soret I., Gaillard J.-F. (2019) The role of cysteine
and sulfide in the interplay between microbial Hg(II) uptake and sulfur metabolism. Metallomics,
11, 1219-1229.
Huang R., Huo G., Song S., Li Y., Xia L., Gaillard J.-F. (2019) Immobilization of mercury using
high-phosphate culture-modified microalgae. Environmental Pollution, 254, 112966
Myers C.P., Pappas I., Makwana E., Begum-Gafur R., Utgikar N., Alsina M.A., Fitzgerald M.,
Trivedi H.M., Gaillard J.-F., Masters J.G., Sullivan R.J. (2019) Solving the Problem With Stannous
Fluoride: Formulation, Stabilization, and Antimicrobial Action. Journal of the American Dental
Association, 150, (4 suppl), S5-S13.
2

Wilke C.M., Petersen C., Alsina M.A., Gaillard J.-F., Gray K.A. (2019) Photochemical interactions
between n-Ag2S and n-TiO2 amplify their bacterial stress response. Environmental Science: Nano,
6, 115-126.
Xie M., Alsina M.A., Yuen J., Packman A.I., Gaillard J.-F. (2019) Effects of resuspension on
the mobility and chemical speciation of zinc in contaminated sediments. Journal of Hazardous
Materials, 364: 300-308.
Thomas S.A., Rodby K. E., Roth E.W., Wu J., Gaillard J.-F. (2018) Spectroscopic and Microscopic
Evidence of Biomediated HgS Species Formation from Hg(II)-Cysteine Complexes: Implications
for Hg(II) Bioavailability. Environmental Science & Technology, 52: 10030-10039.
Alsina M. A., Gaillard J.-F. (2018) Structural characterization of metal complexes in aqueous
solutions: A XAS study of stannous fluoride. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 20,12727–
12735.
Wilke C.M., Wunderlich B., Gaillard J.-F., Gray K.A. (2018) Synergistic Bacterial Stress Re-
sults from Exposure to Nano-Ag and Nano-TiO2 Mixtures under Light in Environmental Media.
Environmental Science & Technology, 52 (5), 3185-3194.
Wilke C.M., Gaillard J.-F., Gray K.A. (2018) The critical role of light in moderating microbial
stress due to mixtures of engineered nanomaterials. Environmental Science: Nano, 5, 96-102.
Xie M., Wang N., Gaillard J.-F., Packman A.I. (2018) Interplay between Flow and Bioturbation
Enhances Metal Efflux from Low-Permeability Sediments. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 341,
304-312.
Thomas S.A., Gaillard J.-F. (2017) Cysteine Addition Promotes Sulfide Production and 4-Fold
Hg(II)-S Coordination in Actively Metabolizing Escherichia coli Environmental Science & Tech-
nology, 51, 4642-4651.
Alsina M. A., Gaillard J.-F., Keten S. (2016) Conformational changes during the permeation of
Na+ through a modified cyclic peptide nanotube promote energy landscape roughness. Physical
Chemistry Chemical Physics, 18, 31698-31710.
Wilke C.M., Tong T., Gaillard J.-F., Gray K.A. (2016) Attenuation of Microbial Stress due to
n-Ag and n-TiO2 Interactions under Dark Conditions. Environmental Science & Technology, 50,
11302-11310.
Wang N., Tong T., Xie M., Gaillard J.-F. (2016) Lifetime and Dissolution Kinetics of Zinc Oxide
Nanoparticles in Aqueous Media. Nanotechnology, (invited contribution), 32, 324001.
Thomas S.A., Ma Q., Gaillard J.-F. (2016) Probing changes in Hg(II) coordination during its
bacterial uptake. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 712(1), 012078.
Xie M., Wang N., Gaillard J.-F., Packman A.I. (2016) Hydrodynamic Forcing Mobilizes Cu in
Low-Permeability Estuarine Sediments. Environmental Science & Technology, 50 (9), 4615-4623.
Binh C.T.T., Adams E., Vigen E., Tong T., Alsina, M.A., Gaillard J.-F., Gray K.A., Peterson
C.G., Kelly J.J. (2016) Chronic addition of a common engineered nanomaterial alters biomass,
activity and composition of stream biofilm communities.
Environmental Science: Nano, 3(3),
619-630.
Ozaki, A., Adams E., Binh C.T.T., Tong T., Gaillard J.-F., Gray K.A., Kelly J.J. (2016) One-time
addition of nano-TiO2 triggers short-term responses in benthic bacterial communities in artificial
streams. Microbial Ecology, 71(2), 266-275.
Tong T., Wilke C.M., Wu J., Binh C.T.T., Kelly J.J., Gaillard J.-F., Gray K.A. (2015) Combined
Toxicity of nano-ZnO and nano-TiO2: From Single to Multinanomaterial Systems. Environmental
Science & Technology, 49 (13), 8113-8123.
3

Webb, S.M., and Gaillard J.-F. (2015) Zinc speciation in contaminated sediments: Quantitative
determination of zinc coordination by x-ray absorption spectroscopy. Aquatic Geochemistry, 21
(2-4), 295-312.
Xie M., Jarrett B.A., Da Silva-Cadoux C., Fetters K.J., Burton G.A., Gaillard J.-F., Packman A.I.
(2015) Coupled Effects of Hydrodynamics and Biogeochemistry on Zn Mobility and Speciation in
Highly Contaminated Sediments. Environmental Science & Technology, 49 (9), 5346-5353.
Binh C.T.T., Petersen C.G., Tong T., Gaillard J.-F., Gray K.A., and Kelly J.J. (2015) Comparing
acute effects of a nano-TiO2 pigment on cosmopolitan freshwater phototrophic microbes using
high-throughput screening. PLoS One, 10(4), e0125613.
Thomas S.A., Gaillard J.-F. (2015) The Molecular Structure of Aqueous Hg(II)-EDTA As Deter-
mined by X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy. Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 119 (12), 2878-2884.
Tong T., Hill, A.N., Alsina M.A., Wu J., Shang K.Y. , Kelly J.J., Gray K.A., Gaillard J.-F. (2015)
Spectroscopic characterization of TiO2 polymorphs in wastewater treatment and sediment samples.
Environmental Science & Technology Letters, 2(1), 12-18.
Thomas S.A., Tong T., and Gaillard J.-F. (2014) Hg(II) bacterial biouptake: The role of anthro-
pogenic and biogenic ligands present in solution and spectroscopic evidence of ligand exchange
reactions at the cell surface. Metallomics, (6), 2213-2222.
Alsina M.A., L. Zanella L., C.A. Hoel, G.E. Pizzaro, J.-F. Gaillard, and P.A. Pasten (2014) Arsenic
Speciation in Sinter Mineralization from a Hydrothermal Channel of El Tatio Geothermal Field,
Chile. Journal of Hydrology, 518, 434-446.
Binh C.T.T., Tong T., Gaillard J.-F., Gray K.A., and Kelly J.J. (2014) Acute Effects of TiO2
Nanomaterials on the Viability and Taxonomic Composition of Aquatic Bacterial Communities
Assessed via High-Throughput Screening and Next Generation Sequencing.
PLoS One, 9(8),
e106280.
Tong, T., Fang, K.Q., Thomas, S.A ., Kelly, J.J., Gray, K.A., and Gaillard, J.-F. (2014) Chemical
Interactions between Nano-ZnO and Nano-TiO2 in a Natural Aqueous Medium. Environmental
Science & Technology, 48(14), 7924-7932.
Binh C.T.T., Tong T., Gaillard J.-F., Gray K.A., and Kelly J.J. (2014) Common Freshwater
Bacteria Vary in their Responses to Short–Term exposure to nano–TiO2 in Natural Surface Waters.
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 33(2), 317-327.
Tong T., Shereef A., Wu J., Binh C.T.T., Kelly J.J., Gaillard J.-F., and K.A. Gray (2013) Effects
of Material Morphology on the Phototoxicity of Nano-TiO2 to Bacteria. Environmental Science
& Technology, 47(21), 12486-12495.
Tong T., C.T.T. Binh, J.J. Kelly , J.-F. Gaillard, and K.A. Gray (2013) Cytotoxicity of commercial
nano-TiO2 to Escherichia coli assessed by high-throughput screening: Effects of environmental
factors. Water Research, 47, 2352-2362.
Da Silva-Cadoux C., L. Zanella, and J.-F. Gaillard (2012) Selecting reference compounds for de-
termining chemical speciation by X-ray absorption spectroscopy. Journal of Analytical Atomic
Spectrometry, 27, 957-965.
Dahl A.L., J. Sanseverino, and J.-F. Gaillard (2011) Bacterial Bioreporter Detects Mercury in the
Presence of Excess EDTA. Environmental Chemistry, 58, 552-560.
Hoel C.A., S. Xie, C. Benmore, C.D. Malliakas, J.-F. Gaillard, and K.R. Poeppelmeier (2011)
Evidence for Tetrahedral Zn in Amorphous In2−2xZnxSnxO3 (a-ZITO). Zeitschrift f¨ur anorganische
und allgemeine Chemie, 637(7-8), 885-894.
4

Zanella L., F. Casadio, K.A. Gray, R. Warta, Q. Ma, and J.-F. Gaillard (2011) The Darkening
of Zinc Yellow: XANES Speciation of Chromium in Artist’s Paints after Light and Chemical
Exposures. Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 26, 1090-1097.
Hoel C.A., J.M. Gallardo Amores, E. Mor´an, M.A. ´Alario-Franco, J.-F. Gaillard, and K.R. Poep-
pelmeier (2010) High-Pressure Synthesis and Local Structure of Corundum-Type In2−2xZnxSnxO3
(x ≤0.7). Journal of the American Chemical Society, 132, 16479-16487.
Chen C., A. I. Packman, D. Zhang, and J.-F. Gaillard (2010) A multi-scale investigation of inter-
facial transport, pore fluid flow, and fine particle deposition in a sediment bed. Water Resources
Research, W11560.
Hoel C.A., T.O. Mason, J.-F. Gaillard, and Poeppelmeier K.R. (2010) Transparent Conducting
Oxides in the ZnO −In2O3 −SnO2 System. Chemistry of Materials, 22, 3569-3579.
Hoel C.A., J.-F. Gaillard, and Poeppelmeier K.R. (2010) Probing the local structure of crystalline
ZITO: In2−2xSnxZnxO3 (x ≤0.4). Journal of Solid State Chemistry, 183, 761-768.
Chen C., A.I. Packman, and J.-F. Gaillard (2009) Using x-ray microtomography and pore-scale
modeling to quantify sediment mixing and fluid flow in a developing streambed.
Geophysical
Research Letters, 36, L08403.
Chen C., A.I. Packman, and J.-F. Gaillard (2009). Temporal evolution of pore geometry, fluid flow,
and solute transport resulting from colloid deposition. Water Resources Research, 45, W06416.
Petkov V., Y. Ren, I. Saratovsky, P. Pasten, S. Gurr, M. Hayward, K. Poeppelmeir and J-F.
Gaillard (2009), Atomic-scale structure of biogenic materials by total XRD: a study of bacterial
and fungal MnOx. ACS-Nano, 3(2), 441-445.
Gough H.L, Dahl A.L, Tribou, E., Noble, P.A., Gaillard, J.-F., Stahl, D.A. (2008), Elevated sulfate
reduction in metal-contaminated freshwater lake sediments. Journal of Geophysical Research -
Biogeosciences, 113, G04037.
Chen C., Packman A.I., Gaillard, J.-F. (2008) Pore-scale analysis of permeability reduction result-
ing from colloid deposition. Geophysical Research Letters, 35, L07404.
Gough H.L, Dahl A.L, Nolan M.A., Gaillard, J.-F., Stahl, D.A. (2008), Metal impacts on micro-
bial biomass in the anoxic sediments of a contaminated lake. Journal of Geophysical Research -
Biogeosciences, 113, G02017.
Alsina M., Saratovksy, I., Gaillard J.-F., and Pasten P.A. (2008), Arsenic Speciation in Solid Phases
of Geothermal Fields. Chapter 15 in Adsorption of Metals by Geomedia II: Variables, Mechanisms,
and Model Applications, Volume 7, edited by M. O Barnett and D. B. Kent, Elsevier, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, pp 417-440.
Gaillard, J.-F., Chen, C., Stone, S., Lau, B., Keane, D.T., and Packman, A.I. (2007), Imaging
of colloidal deposits in granular porous media by x-ray difference micro-tomography. Geophysical
Research Letters, 34, L18404.
Smit, J.P., Kim H.-S., Saratovsky, I., Stark, K.B., Fitzgerald, G., Zajac, G.W., Gaillard, J-F.,
Poeppelmeier, K.R., Stair, P.C. (2007) A Spectroscopic and Computational Investigation of the
Vanadomolybdate Local Structure in the Lyonsite Phase Mg2.5VMoO8. Inorganic Chemistry, 46,
6556-6564.
Sahai, N., Lee Y.J., Xu H., Ciardelli M., Gaillard J.-F. (2007) Role of Fe(II) and Phosphate in
Arsenic Uptake by Coprecipitation. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 71, 3193-3210.
Gaillard J.-F. (2007) Probing Environmental Particles and Colloids with X-Rays. In Environmental
Particles and Colloids: Behaviour, Structure, and Characterisation, Eds. K.J. Wilkinson and J.R.
Lead. IUPAC Series on Analytical and Physical Chemistry of Environmental Systems. Wiley,
Chichester, pp 613-666.
5

Packman A.I., Marion A., Zaramella M., Chen C., Gaillard J-.F., Keane D.T. (2006) Development
of layered sed- iment structure and its effects on pore water transport and hyporheic exchange.
Water, Air, and Soil Pollution: Focus, 6, 433-442.
Saratovksy, I., Wightman P.G., Pasten P.A., Gaillard J.-F., Poeppelmeier K.R. (2006) Manganese
Oxides: Par- allels between Abiotic and Biotic Structures. Journal of the American Chemical
Society, 128, 11188-11198.
Peltier, E.F., Dahl.
A.L., Gaillard, J-F. (2005) Metal Speciation in Anoxic Sediments: When
Sulfides can be Construed as Oxides. Environmental Science & Technology, 39, 311-316.
Santschi, P.H., Burd, A.B., Gaillard, J.-F., and Lazarides A.L. (2005) Transport of Materials and
Chemicals by Nano-scale Colloids and Micro to Macro-scale Flocs in Marine, Freshwater, and
Engineered Systems. In Flocculation in Natural and Engineered Environmental Systems, Eds I.
Droppo, G. Leppard, S. Liss, and J. Milligant, CRC Press, pp 191-209.
Kim, H.-S., Pasten, P.A., Gaillard, J.-F., Stair, P.C. (2003) Nanocrystalline Todorokite-like Man-
ganese Oxide Produced by Bacterial Catalysis. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 125,
14284-14285.
Webb, S. M., Gaillard, J.-F., Ma L.Q., Tu, C. (2003) XAS Speciation of Arsenic in an Hyperaccu-
mulating Fern. Environmental Science & Technology, 37, 754-760.
Peltier E.F., Webb, S. M., Gaillard, J.-F. (2003) Zinc and lead sequestration in an impacted
wetland system. Advances in Environmental Research, 8, 103-112.
Taillefert, M., MacGregor B.J., Gaillard J.-F., Lienemann C.-P., Perret D., Stahl D.A. (2002)
Evidence for a Dynamic Cycle Between Mn and Co in the Water Column of a Stratified Lake.
Environmental Science & Technology, 36, 468-476.
Nolan M.A., and Gaillard J.-F. (2002) Probing Zinc Speciation in Contaminated Sediments by
Square Wave Vol- tammetry at a Hg-Ir Microelectrode. In Environmental Electrochemistry: Anal-
yses of Trace Element Biogeochemistry, Eds M. Taillefert and T. Rozan, ACS Symposium Series
No 811, 210-226.
Taillefert, M., Gaillard, J.-F. (2002) Reactive Transport Modeling of Trace Elements in the Water
Column of a Stratified Lake: Iron Cycling and Metal Scavenging. Journal of Hydrology, 256,
16-34.
Webb, S.M., Gaillard, J.-F., Jackson. B. E., Stahl D.A. (2001) An EXAFS study of zinc coordi-
nation in microbial cells. Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, 8, 943-945.
Gaillard, J.-F, Webb, S.M., Quintana J.P.G. (2001) Quick X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy for
Determining Metal Speciation in Environmental Samples. Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, 8,
928-930.
Perret D., Gaillard J.-F., Dominik J., Atteia O. (2000) The Diversity of Natural Hydrous Iron
Oxides. Environmental Science & Technology, 34, 3540-3546.
Webb S.M., Leppard G.G., Gaillard J.-F. (2000) Zinc Speciation in a Contaminated Aquatic
Environment: Characterization of Environmental Particles by Analytical Electron Microscopy.
Environmental Science & Technology, 34, 1926-1933.
Taillefert M., C.-P. Lienemann, J.-F. Gaillard, and D. Perret (2000) Speciation, Reactivity, and
Cycling of Fe and Pb in a Meromictic Lake. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 64, 169-183.
Taillefert M. and J.-F. Gaillard (1999) Tentacle Ion Exchange Separation of Pb-NOM in Aquatic
Samples. Environmental Science & Technology, 33, 4107-4111.
Sigman D.M., Altabet M.A., Francois R., McCorkle D.C., Gaillard J.-F. (1999) The isotopic com-
position of diatom-bound nitrogen in Southern Ocean sediments. Paleoceanography, 14, 118-134.
6

Banaszak J.E., S. M. Webb, B. E. Rittmann, J.-F. Gaillard, and D. T. Reed (1999) Fate of
Neptunium in an Anaerobic, Methanogenic Microcosm.
in Scientific Basis for Nuclear Waste
Management, Material Research Society Symposium Proceedings, vol. 556, 1141-1149.
MacGregor B. J., M. Taillefert, J.-F. Gaillard, D. A. Stahl, and C.-P. Lienemann (1998) Molecular
Characterization of Microbial Populations in the Water Column of a Stratified Lake (Paul Lake,
Michigan) related to chemical zonation. Mineralogical Magazine, 62A, 933-934.
Rabouille C., J.-F. Gaillard, J.-C. Relexans, P. Tr´eguer, M.-A. Vincendeau (1998) Recycling of
Organic Matter in Antarctic Sediments: A Transect through the Polar Front in the Southern
Ocean. Limnology and Oceanography, 43, 420-432.
Perret D., J.-F. Gaillard, J. Dominik, and O. Atteia (1998) Aquatic Hydrous Oxide Colloids:
Evidencing the Ambiguities. Mineralogical Magazine, 62A, 1151-1152.
Taillefert M. and J.-F. Gaillard (1998) The Chemical Speciation of Pb in the Water Column of
Paul Lake (MI). Mineralogical Magazine, 62A, 1490-1491.
Taillefert M., E. Rose, and J.-F. Gaillard (1997). Trace Metal Cycling in a Meromictic Lake: The
Influence of Hydrous-Iron Particles and Dissolved Organic Matter. In Contaminated Soils, Third
International Conference on the Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements, R. Prost Ed., Les Colloques
de l’INRA, 85, 289-302.
Rabouille C., J.-F. Gaillard, P. Tr´eguer, and M.-A. Vincendeau (1997) Biogenic silica recycling
in surficial sediments across the Polar Front of the Southern Ocean (Indian Sector). Deep-Sea
Research II, 44, 1151-1176.
Gaillard J.-F. (1997) ANTARES -1: A Biogeochemical Study of the Indian Sector of the Southern
Ocean. Deep-Sea Research II, 44, 951-961.
Lienemann C.-P., M. Taillefert, D. Perret, and J.-F. Gaillard (1997) Association of cobalt and
manganese in aquatic systems: chemical and microscopic evidence. Geochimica et Cosmochimica
Acta, 61, 1437-1446.
Relexans J-C., J. Deming, A. Dinet, J.-F. Gaillard, and M. Sibuet (1996) Sedimentary Organic
Matter and Micro-Meiobenthos with Relation to Trophic Conditions in the Tropical North Atlantic,
Deep-Sea Research, 43, 1343-1368.
Van Cappellen P., and Gaillard J.-F. (1996). Biogeochemical dynamics in aquatic sediments.In
Reactive transport in porous media. Litchner P.C., Steefel C. I., and Oelkers E.H. Eds. Reviews in
Mineralogy and Geochemistry, Vol 34, pp 335-376.
Auffret G., T. Richter, J.-L. Reyss, C. Organo, E. Deloule, J.-F. Gaillard, B. Denneilou, C. Muller,
B. Thomas, P. Watrenez, F. Grousset, A. Boelaert, P. Cambon, and J. Etoubleau (1996) Record
of hydrothermal activity in sediments from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge south of the Azores. Comptes
Rendus de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, 323, 583-590.
Sarazin G., J.-F. Gaillard, L. Philippe, and C. Rabouille (1995). Chemical Diagenesis and Nutrients
Fluxes at the Sediment-Water Interface of an Eutrophic Lake. Hydrobiologia, 315, 95-118.
Gaillard, J.-F. (1995). Principes et Processus Chimiques. In Limnologie G´en´erale. (R. Pourriot
and M. Meybeck Eds.), Masson, Paris, 115-156.
Rabouille C., and J.-F. Gaillard (1994). Simulation of the Sediment Behavior During a Benthic
Chamber Deployment on the Deep-Sea Floor. Oceanologia Acta, 17, 405-416.
Jahnke R.A., D. B. Craven, and J.-F. Gaillard (1994). The Influence of Organic Matter Diagenesis
on CaCO3 Dissolution at the Deep Sea Floor. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 2799-2809.
7

Gaillard, J.-F. (1994). Early Diagenetic Modeling: A critical need for process studies, kinetics rates,
and numerical methods. In Trends in Chemical Geology, Research Trends, Council of Scientific
Information, Trivandrum, India, 239-252.
Gaillard J.-F. (1993). Early Diagenesis in Canadian Shield Lakes. Chemical Geology, 107, 453-456.
Sarazin G., J.-F. Gaillard, L. Philippe and C. Rabouille (1993). Organic Matter Mineralization
and Nutrient Fluxes at the Sediment-Water Interface of a Eutrophic Lake (Aydat Lake, Puy de
Dˆome, France). Chemical Geology, 107, 471-476.
Kump, L. R., R. A. Berner, D. E. Canfield, K.B. Follmi, J.-F. Gaillard, J. Lelieveld, and F. T.
Mackenzie (1993) C, N, P, and S Biogeochemical Dynamics and Cycling in the Geologic Record.
In Interactions of C, N, P, and S Biogeochemical Cycles (Eds R. Wollast, F.T. Mackenzie, & L.
Chou), Springer Verlag, pp 491-493.
Van Cappellen P., J.-F. Gaillard, and C. Rabouille (1993). Biogeochemical Transformations in
Sediments: Kinetic Models of Early Diagenesis. In Interactions of C, N, P, and S Biogeochemical
Cycles (R. Wollast, F.T. Mackenzie, & L. Chou, Eds.), Springer Verlag, pp 401-446.
Rabouille C., P. Crassous, A. Kripounoff, J.-F. Gaillard, R. Jahnke, C. Pierre, and J-C. Relexans
(1993). A model of Early Diagenesis in the Tropical North Atlantic: Processes and Mass Balances
in the Sediments of the EUMELI Program. Chemical Geology, 107, 463-466.
Rabouille C., J.-F. Gaillard, M. Sibuet, and C. Beaucaire, P. Bont´e, P. Crassous, R. Jahnke, A.
Khripounoff, F. Legleux, J. Laureillard, L. M´ejanelle, C. Pierre, J-C. Relexans, J-L. Reyss (1993)
Sediment Geochemistry in the Three EUMELI Sites in the Tropical North-East Atlantic: General
Presentation and First Results. Annales de l’Institut Oc´eanographique, 69, 35-42.
Sibuet M., P. Albert, S. Charmasson, J. Deming, A. Dinet, J. Galeron, L. Guidi-Guilvard, M.-L.
Mahaud, P. Buat-M´enard, G. Cahet, P. Crassous, J.-F. Gaillard, P. Geistdoerfer, R. A. Jahnke,
A. Kripounoff, J. Laureillard, L. M´ejanelle, R. Perron, C. Pierre, J.-C. Relexans, G. Rowe, M.
Segonzag, A. Vangriesheim (1993) The Benthic Ecosystem in the Three EUMELI Sites in the
Northeast Tropical Atlantic: General Perspectives and Initial Results on Biological Abundance
and Activities. Annales de l’Institut Oc´eanographique, 69, 21-33.
Auffret G., Geistdoerfer P., Gaillard J.-F., Reyss J-L., Rabouille C., Voisset M., Coutelle A.,
Muller C., Kerbrat R., Monti S., Ondreas H., Mauviel A. (1992). Preliminary sedimentological
and biological assessment of EUMELI project sites. Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des Sciences,
314, 187-194.
Gaillard, J.-F. and C. Rabouille (1992). Using Monod-Kinetics in Models of Early Diagenesis. In
Deep-Sea Food Chains and the Global Carbon Cycle , Ed. G. T. Rowe and V. Pariente, Kluwer
Academic, pp 309-324.
Rabouille C., and J.-F. Gaillard (1991). Towards the EDGE: Early Diagenetic Global Explanation.
A Model Depicting the Early Diagenesis of Organic Matter, O2, NO3, Mn and PO4. Geochimica
et Cosmochimica Acta, 55, 2511-2525.
Rabouille C., and J.-F. Gaillard (1991). A Coupled Model Representing the Deep-Sea organic
carbon mineralization and oxygen consumption in surficial sediments.
Journal of Geophysical
Research, 96, 2761-2776.
Gaillard, J.-F. (1991). Preparing for ANTARES: Flux of Biogenic Silica in the Southern Ocean:
Water Column and Sediments. La Mer, 29, 194-200.
Rabouille C., and J.-F. Gaillard (1990). The Validity of Steady-State Calculations in Early Dia-
genesis: A Computer Simulation of Deep-Sea Silica Diagenesis. Deep-Sea Research, 37, 625-646.
Simonin J-P., P. Turq, E. Soualhia, G. Michard, and J.-F. Gaillard (1989). Transport Coupling of
Ions: Influence of Ion Pairing and pH-Gradient. Chemical Geology, 78, 346-356.
8

Gaillard J.-F., H. Pauwels, and G. Michard (1989). Chemical Diagenesis in Coastal Marine Sedi-
ments. Oceanologia Acta, 12(3), 175-187.
Simonin J-P., J.-F. Gaillard, P. Turq, and E. Soualhia (1988). Diffusion Coupling in Electrolyte
Solutions: I. Transient Effects on a Tracer Ion, Sulfate. Journal of Physical Chemistry, 92, 1696-
1700.
Gaillard J.-F., G. Sarazin, H. Pauwels, L. Philippe, D. Lavergne, and G. Blake (1987). Interstitial
Water and Sediment Chemistries of Aiguebelette Lake (Savoy, France). Chemical Geology, 63,
73-84.
Span D., and J.-F. Gaillard (1986). An Investigation of a Procedure for Determining Carbonate
Bound Trace Metals. Chemical Geology, 56, 135-141.
Gaillard J.-F., C. Jeandel, G. Michard, E. Nicolas, and D. Renard (1986).
Interstitial Water
Chemistry of Villefranche Bay Sediments: Trace Metals Diagenesis. Marine Chemistry, 18, pp
233-247.
Deloule E., and J.-F. Gaillard (1986).
A Computation Method for Drawing Mineral Stability
Diagrams on a Microcomputer. In Microcomputer Applications in Geology, Computer and Geology,
(J. T.Hanley and D. F. Merriam Eds.), Vol. 5, Pergamon Press, pp 189-198.
Westerlund, S., Anderson, L., Gaillard, J.-F. (1985).
Porvattenkemi i och kring en fiskodling.
Svenska Havsforskningsforeningen,20, 132-140.
Deloule E., and J.-F. Gaillard (1984). A New Computation Method for Mineral Stability Diagrams.
In Computers in Earth Sciences for Natural Resources Characterization, (J. J. Royer Ed.), CNRS
publication, pp 623-634.
Nriagu, J.O., and J.-F. Gaillard (1984). The Speciation of Pollutant Metals in Lakes Near the
Smelters at Sudbury, Ontario. In Environmental Impacts of Smelters, (Ed. J.O.Nriagu), J. Wiley
& Sons, pp 349-374.
9

SERA L. YOUNG
1819 Hinman Avenue, Evanston, IL 60208 :: T 607.351.0172
sera.young@northwestern.edu :: www.serayoung.org :: www.WISEscales.org :: @profserayoung
M A J O R  P R O F E S S I O N A L  I N T E R E S T S
I am an applied nutritional anthropologist who explores how vulnerable populations, especially women and 
children, adapt to challenges to their health and well-being. 
Keywords: Nutritional anthropology; medical anthropology; global health; international nutrition; maternal and 
child nutrition; pica; food insecurity; water insecurity; HIV; infant and young child feeding.
C U R R E N T  A P P O I N T M E N T S
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL :: Anthropology & Global Health,  Associate Professor— September 2019
— present; Assistant Professor — August 2016-August 2019. Affiliations: Institute for Policy Research Faculty 
Fellow; Global Health Studies; Center for Synthetic Biology; Buffett Institute for Global Studies; Northwestern 
Center for Water Research; Buehler Center for Health Policy and Economics; Northwestern International Institute 
for Nanotechnology; Program in African Studies; Third Coast Center for AIDS.
The Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL :: Adjunct Curator — October 2016-present.
McGill University, Montreal, Canada :: Professor of Practice — February 2020-present.
P R E V I O U S  A P P O I N T M E N T S
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY :: Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostics, Assistant Professor of 
Global Health and Nutrition— August 2015-July 2016; Adjunct Assistant Professor of Global Health and 
Nutrition— August 2016-December 2019.
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY :: Division of Nutritional Sciences, Research Scientist — July 2011-July 2015.
University of California, San Francisco :: Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, 
Reproductive Infectious Diseases Fellow — 2010-2011.
University of California, Davis, CA :: Department of Pediatrics, Assistant Researcher — 2008-2011.
University of California, Berkeley, CA :: School of Public Health, Assistant Researcher — 2008.
E D U C AT I O N
Cornell University :: Ithaca, NY — 2003-2008
PhD in Nutritional Anthropology. Division of Nutritional Sciences. Chair: Gretel Pelto.
University of Amsterdam :: Amsterdam, the Netherlands — 2001-2002
MA in Medical Anthropology. Highest Honors. Advisor: Sjaak van der Geest.
Taasisi Institute of Kiswahili and Foreign Languages :: Zanzibar, Tanzania — 2000
Introduction, Intermediate, and Advanced Swahili Courses. 
University of Michigan :: Ann Arbor, MI — 1995-1999
BA in Anthropology. High Honors.  Secondary Level Teaching Certificate. 
Katholieke Universiteit of Leuven :: Leuven, Belgium — 1996-1997
Junior Year Abroad Program through the University of Pennsylvania.
 of 
1
39
Rev. June 14, 2023

United World College of the Atlantic :: Wales, UK — 1993-1995
International Baccalaureate.
C U R R E N T  S U P P O RT
National Institute of Mental Health :: “Understanding the Synergistic Roles of Water and Food Insecurity in the 
health of Mexican Adults”— Sera Young (PI). 2023-2025 ($160,000)
Swiss Water and Sanitation Consortium :: “Developing a Tool to Measure Experiences of WASH Services in In-
stitutions” — Sera Young (PI).160 2022-2023 ($50,000)
Buffett Global Working Group :: “Making Water Insecurity Visible” — Sera Young (PI) & Julius Lucks (co-PI). 
2023-2025 ($300,00)
Northwestern University :: Provost COVID-19 Research Recovery Grant. 2023 ($25,000)
National Science Foundation (NSF) Convergence RAISE :: “Systems Approaches for Vulnerability Evaluation 
and Urban Resilience” — Aaron Packman (PI) & Sera Young (co-PI). 2018-2023 ($1,050,500)
C O M P L E T E D  G R A N T S  A N D  F E L L O W S H I P S
Northwestern University :: Provost Grants for Research in Humanities, Social Sciences and the Arts. 2022-2023 
($5000) 
Institute for Policy Research :: Seed Grant, Using experiential food and water insecurity data for improved sci-
ence and policy in Latin America and the Caribbean, IPR Seed Grant (off-cycle), 2023 ($10,000) 
National Science Foundation (NSF) :: RCN: Building a Community of Practice for Household Water Insecurity 
(HWISE) Research — Wendy Jepson (PI), Sera Young (co-PI), Amber Wutich (co-PI), & Justin Stoler (co-PI). 
2018-2023 ($355,000)
Institute for Policy Research ::  Seed Grant:: “Understanding the accuracy and usability of at-home flﬂuoride test-
ing in Nakuru County, Kenya” 2022 ($5,000)
Carnegie Foundation :: “A New Way to Think About Water: Household Water Insecurity” — Sera Young (PI) 
2019-2022 ($200,000) 
Crown Family Center for Jewish and Israel Studies (Northwestern University) :: “A field-ready tool to assess 
the health consequences of water insecurity in the West Bank” — Sera Young (PI) & Yaakov Garb (co-PI). 
2019-2021 ($12,000) 
United State Agency for International Development Cooperative Agreement (AID-OAA-L-14-00006 via Kansas 
Sustainable Intensification Innovation Lab) :: How does household water insecurity relate to household water 
quality, food security, and COVID-infections?: Health, agriculture, and policy implications using nationally repre-
sentative data — Lori Post (PI), Sera Young (co-PI). 2020-2021 ($294,597) 
The Nature Conservancy :: Monitoring human well-being after natural infrastructure installation: A NatureNet 
Fellowship — Sera Young (PI), Vidya Venkataramanan (Fellow). 2019-2021 ($22,100)
United State Agency for International Development Cooperative Agreement (AID-OAA-L-14-00006 via Rutgers 
University Policy Research Consortium) :: “A novel indicator of household water insecurity and household food 
insecurity in East Africa: health, agriculture, and policy implications” — Lori Post (PI), Sera Young (co-PI) 
($200,000)
Crown Family Center for Jewish and Israel Studies (Northwestern University) :: “Simple tools to measure 
water insecurity in Israel: A collaboration across the social, physical, and biological sciences” — Sera Young (PI), 
Julius Lucks (co-PI), & Noam Weisbrod (co-PI). 2018-2020 ($29,000)
Resnick Family Social Impact Fund (Northwestern University Institute for Sustainability & Energy) :: To 
support the Household Water Insecurity Experiences study and an urban flﬂooding project in Chicago — Sera 
Young (PI). 2017-2020 ($25,000)
 of 
2
39

Innovative Metrics in Nutrition and Agriculture (IMMANA) :: “A novel tool for the assessment of household-
level water insecurity: scale refinement, validation, and manual development” — Sera Young (PI), Phelgona 
Otieno (co-I) & Amber Wutich (co-I). 2016-2018 ($359,625)
Finite Earth:: Incorporating social science data and metrics into life cycle assessment :: — Jennifer Dunn (PI), Sera 
Young (co-PI). 2019-2021 ($45,000)
McKnight Foundation :: “Singida Nutrition and Agroecology Project (SNAP)” — Rachel Bezner Kerr (PI), Sera 
Young (co-PI), & Elias Mtinda (co-PI). 2015-2019 ($674,800); http://bit.ly/farm4change 
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) :: R21 “Health Consequences of Water Insecurity for HIV+ Women 
& Their Infants” — Sera Young (PI) & Maricianah Onono (co-I). 2016-2018 ($337,214) 
Water Collaboration Seed Funds :: To pursue measurement of household water insecurity in Israel and Taiwan 
— Sera Young (PI) & Noam Weisbrod (co-PI). 2017-2018 ($25,000) 
Crown Family Middle East Research Travel Award :: Water Insecurity among Syrian refugees in Lebanon — 
Sera Young (PI). 2017-2018 ($15,000) 
National Institutes of Health (NIMH) :: K01 Health Consequences of Food & Nutrition Insecurity for HIV+ 
Women & Their Infants — Sera Young (PI). 2012-2018 ($853,970) 
Northwestern Institute for Policy Research (IPR) :: Support for workshop entitled “Household Water Insecurity: 
Measurement, Consequences, and Policy Implications” — Sera Young (PI). 2016-2017 ($20,000) 
Center for Water Research Conference Award :: To support the Household Water Insecurity Scale Development 
Workshop — Sera Young (PI). 2017 ($5,000)
Buffett Conference Award :: To support the Household Water Insecurity Scale Development Workshop — Sera 
Young (PI). 2017 ($4,000) 
Northwestern Third Coast Center for AIDS Research (CFAR) :: “Coalition building between Northwestern 
University, Pamoja Community-Based Organization, and Kenya Medical Research Institute/Research Care and 
Training Program-Family AIDS Care and Educational Services”— Sera Young (PI), Patrick Mbullo (co-I), & 
Pauline Wekesa (co-I). 2016-2017 ($5,000)
Atkinson Center for Sustainable Future Venture Fund :: A novel assay for simultaneous multiplex detection of 
diarrhea-causing viruses, bacteria, and protozoa in drinking water and deployment in Kenyan and Honduran 
households — Ruth Richardson (PI) & Sera Young (co-PI). 2015-2017 ($132,558)
CARE/Atkinson Center for Sustainable Future Impact through Innovation Fund :: A pilot study of the effects of 
performance-based incentives on the provision of PMTCT services in Inhassoro District, Inhambane Province, 
Mozambique — Sera Young (PI) & Delphine Pinault (co-I). 2012-2014 ($200,000)
Atkinson Center for Sustainable Future Venture Fund :: Healthy Soil + Fertile Land + Food Security — Rachel 
Bezner Kerr (PI), Sera Young (co-I), David Wolfe (co-I), & Laurie Drinkwater (co-I). 2014-2016 ($143,344)
Seed Grants for Collaborations Between Cornell University-Ithaca and Weill Cornell Medical College 
Faculty :: Food insecurity as a novel diagnostic screening tool for poor nutritional and psychosocial outcomes 
among HIV-infected and -uninfected lactating Ugandan women and their infants — Sera Young (PI) & Nicole 
Sirotin (co-PI). 2013-2014 ($50,000)
Cornell Population Center :: “Development of appropriate methodologies for estimating dietary intake among 
nutritionally vulnerable women and infants in rural and peri-urban Kenya” — Sera Young (PI). 2013-2014 
($2,500)
Pears Seed Grant Program, Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University :: Food Insecurity and Nutritional status of 
patients Infected with Tuberculosis and Human Immunodeficiency Virus in Gulu, Northern Uganda — Rachel 
Bezner Kerr (PI) & Sera Young (co-I). 2013-2014 ($5,500)
National Institutes of Health (NICHD) :: P01 Novel Strategies to Prevent Malaria and Improve HIV Outcomes in 
Africa — 2011-2013 (sub-contract PI, $63,700) 
 of 
3
39

Campbell Foundation :: Clinical study of Flash heating breastmilk to decrease morbidity, improve growth, and 
reduce HIV transmission in HIV-exposed infants — Caroline Chantry (PI) & Sera Young (co-PI). 2010-2011 
($50,000)
National Institutes of Health (NICHD) :: R34 Planning grant to fund the preparation of a large multi-disciplinary 
study of Flash-heating of breastmilk by HIV+ women to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV — Caroline 
Chantry (PI) & Sera Young (Co-I). 2010-2011 ($63,700)
Thrasher Research Fund :: Early Career Award — Sera Young (PI). 2009-2010 ($26,000) 
American Psychological Association :: HIV Cybermentor Travel and Research Award — 2009-2011
Population Center Research Award :: UC Berkeley — Sera Young (co-PI). 2009
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation :: Health Disparities Small Grant — Sera Young (co-PI). 2008 ($10,000)
University of California Institute for Mexico and the United States (UC MEXUS) :: Pilot grant — Lia Fernald 
(PI) & Sera Young (co-PI). 2008 ($1,500)
University of California, Berkeley :: Professional Development Grant — 2008
Division of Nutritional Sciences Small Grant :: Cornell University — 2004, 2005, 2007
Mario Einaudi International Research Travel Grant :: Cornell University — 2004, 2005
Sigma Xi Research Grant :: Cornell University — 2004
R E S E A R C H  AWA R D S
Leverhulme Visiting Professor :: Leverhulme Foundation — 2023-2024. “Water insecurity: bringing a human 
voice to a global crisis” at London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
Norman Kretchmer Memorial Award in Nutrition and Development :: American Society for Nutrition — 2022. 
In recognition of a substantial body of independent research in the field of nutrition and development with 
potential relevance to improving child health.
Andrew Carnegie Fellow :: Carnegie Corporation — 2019-2022
Society for Applied Anthropology :: Fellow — 2018-present
Margaret Mead Award :: American Anthropological Association and the Society for Applied Anthropology — 
2013. In recognition of exemplary skills in broadening the impact of anthropology.
Dissertation Award :: Society for Medical Anthropology — 2009. In recognition of the outstanding dissertation in 
the field of medical anthropology.
Allan Rosenfield Scholar & New Investigator in Global Health :: Global Health Council — 2009. 
For outstanding research on reproductive and family health.
Distinguished Poster :: International Congress of Nutrition — 2009. 
For the poster “Flash-heating breastmilk is feasible in Dar es Salaam Tanzania”. 
Sugar Award :: One Laptop Per Child —  2007. For the development of the best educational children’s software.
Rudolf Virchow Award :: Honorable Mention : American Anthropological Association — 2003. Presented by 
the Society for Medical Anthropology for advancing critical perspectives in medical anthropology.
Christine Wilson Award :: American Anthropological Association — 2002. Presented by the Council on 
Nutritional Anthropology. 
Student-Intern Teacher of the Year Honorable Mention :: State of Michigan — 1999. For the demonstration of 
outstanding potential as an educator.
P U B L I C AT I O N S
 of 
4
39

PEER-REVIEWED ARTICLES (**Graduate/medical student advisee, *Undergraduate advisee, ^Post-doctoral 
advisee)
1. Connors K, Jaacks L, Awasthi A, Becker K, Bezner Kerr R, Fivian E, Gelli A, Harris-Fry H, Heckert J, Kadiyala S, 
Martinez E, Santoso M, Young SL, Bliznashka L. (2023) Women’s Empowerment, Production Choices, and Crop 
Diversity: a secondary analysis of cross-sectional data from four low- and middle-income countries. (2023). Lancet 
Planetary Health. Accepted. 
2. Thavarajah W, Mbullo PM**, Awuor DR, Kiprotich K, Aggarwal R*, Lucks JB, Young SL. (2023) “The accuracy 
and usability of point-of-use flﬂuoride biosensors in rural Kenya. npj Clean Water. 6:5; https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41545-023-00221-5
3. Young SL, Bethancourt HJ^, Frongillo EA, Viviani S, Cafiero C. (2023) Adults experiencing water insecurity are 
more likely to experience food insecurity in nationally representative samples of 25 low-and middle-income 
countries. Bulletin WHO. http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.22.288771
4. Young SL, Bethancourt HJ^, Ritter ZR, Frongillo EA. (2022) Estimating national, demographic, and 
socioeconomic disparities in water insecurity experiences in low- and middle-income countries in 2020-2021: a 
cross-sectional, observational study, using nationally representative data. Lancet Planetary Health. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S2542-5196(22)00241-8
5. Rickman R, Young SL, Lane C, Collins SM**, Miller JD**, Nichols A, Foster S, Widen E. (2023) Body 
composition trajectories during the first 23 months of life differ by HIV exposure among infants in western Kenya: 
a prospective study. J Nutrition. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tjnut.2022.11.010
6. Ford L, Bethancourt HJ, Swanson Z, Nzunza R, Wutich A, Brewis A, Young SL, Almeida D, Douglass M, 
Ndiema E, Braun D, Pontzer H, Rosinger A. Water insecurity, water borrowing and psychosocial stress among 
Daasanach pastoralists in northern Kenya. Water International. https://doi.org/10.1080/02508060.2022.2138050
7. Bethancourt HJ^, Frongillo EA, Young SL. (2022) Validity of an abbreviated Individual Water Insecurity 
Experiences (IWISE-4) Scale for measuring the prevalence of water insecurity in low- and middle-income 
countries. J Wat San Hyg Devp. https://doi.org/10.2166/washdev.2022.094
8. Mao F, Miller JD**, Young SL, Krause S, Hannah DM, HWISE-RCN. (2022) Inequality of household water 
security follows a Development Kuznets Curve. Nature Commun. 2022 Aug 8;13(1):4525. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-022-31867-3
9. Rosinger AY, Bethancourt HJ^, Young SL. (2022) Tap Water Avoidance Is Associated with Lower Food Security 
in the United States: Evidence from NHANES 2005-2018. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 2022. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jand.2022.07.011
10. Bethancourt HJ^, Swanson ZS, Nzunza R, Young SL, Lomeiku L, Douglass MJ, et al. (2022) The co-occurrence 
of water insecurity and food insecurity among Daasanach pastoralists in northern Kenya. Public Health 
Nutrition. 2022 Aug 9;1–11. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980022001689
11. Miller JD**, Collins SM,** Boateng GO,^ Widen EM,^ Natamba B,** Achoko W, Acidri D, Young SL, Martin 
SL. (2022) Pathways linking social support, self-efficacy, and exclusive breastfeeding among women in northern 
Uganda. Global Public Health. 2022 Aug 12;1–13. https://doi.org/10.1080/17441692.2022.2110918
12. Wutich, A, Rosinger AY, Brewis A, Beresford M, Young SL, Household Water Insecurity Experiences-Research 
Coordination Network. (2022) Water sharing is a distressing form of reciprocity: Shame, upset, anger, and conflﬂict 
over water in 20 cross-cultural sites. American Anthropologist. https://anthrosource.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
epdf/10.1111/aman.13682 
13. Oehmke JF, Young SL, Heinemann AW, Rukuni M, Lyambabaje A, Post LA. (2022) A novel measure of 
developing countries’ agricultural and food policy readiness. World Development. Oct;158:105920. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2022.105920
 of 
5
39

14. Young SL, Bethancourt HJ^, Ritter Z, Frongillo EA. (2021) The Individual Water Insecurity Experiences 
(IWISE) Scale: Reliability, equivalence, and validity of an individual-level measure of water security. BMJ Global 
Health 2021;6:e006460. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2021-006460
15. Rosinger AY, Bethacourt HJ^, Young SL, Schultz AF. (2021) The embodiment of water insecurity: Injuries and 
chronic stress in lowland Bolivia. Social Science & Medicine. Dec 291: 114490 https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.socscimed.2021.114490
16. Bamana G., Miller JM**, Young SL, Dunn, J. (2021) Addressing the social life cycle inventory analysis data gap: 
Insights from a case study of cobalt mining in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Dec One Earth. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2021.11.007
17. Stoler, J. et al., (consortium co-author). (2021) The Household Water Insecurity Experiences (HWISE) Scale: 
Comparison Scores from 27 Sites in 22 Countries. Journal of Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Development. 11(6): 
1102–1110. https://doi.org/10.2166/washdev.2021.108
18. Nagata JM, Miller JD**, Cohen CR, Frongillo EA, Weke E, Burger R, Wekesa P, Sheira LA, Mocello AR, Otieno 
P, Butler LM, Bukusi EA, Weiser SD, Young SL. (2021) Water insecurity is associated with lack of viral 
suppression and greater odds of AIDS-defining illnesses among adults with HIV in western Kenya. AIDS and 
Behavior. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10461-021-03410-w 
19. Young SL. (2021) Viewpoint: The measurement of water access and use is key for more effective food and 
nutrition policy. Food Policy. Oct 1;104:102138 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2021.102138
20. Miller JD, Workman CL, Panchang SV, Sneegas G, Adams EA, Young SL, Thompson, A. (2021) Water Security 
and Nutrition: Current Knowledge and Research Opportunities. Adv Nutr. 12(6): 2525–2539 http://
academic.oup.com/advances/advance-article/doi/10.1093/advances/nmab075/6322255
21. Santoso MV**, Bezner Kerr RN, Kassim N, Martin H, Mtinda E, Njau P, Young, SL. (2021) A Nutrition-
Sensitive Agroecology Intervention in Rural Tanzania Increases Children’s Dietary Diversity and Household Food 
Security But Does Not Change Child Anthropometry: Results from a Cluster-Randomized Trial. The Journal of 
Nutrition July;151(7): 2010–2021. https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/nxab052 *Selected as Editor’s Choice by the journal 
Science 
22. Cetrone HM*, Santoso MV**, Kerr RB, Petito L, Blacker L*, Nonga T, Martin, HD, Kassim, N, Mtinda, E. Young 
SL. (2021) Food security mediates the decrease in women’s depressive symptoms in a participatory nutrition-
sensitive agroecology intervention in rural Tanzania. Public Health Nutrition. Oct: 4682 - 4692. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S1368980021001014 *Selected as paper of the month, https://www.cambridge.org/core/blog/
2021/07/09/how-a-nutrition-sensitive-agroecological-intervention-improved-womens-mental-health/
23. Samburu BM**, Kimiywe J, Young SL, Wekesah FM, Wanjohi MN, Muriuki P, et al. (2021) Realities and 
challenges of breastfeeding policy in the context of HIV: a qualitative study on community perspectives on 
facilitators and barriers related to breastfeeding among HIV positive mothers in Baringo County, Kenya. 
International Breastfeeding Journal. May 8;16(1):39. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13006-021-00385-1
24. Guevara Alvarez G**, Miller JD*, Santoso MV^, Wekesa P, Mbullo Owuor P**, Onono M, Young, S.L. (2021) 
Prevalence and Covariates of Food Insecurity Across the First 1000 Days Among Women of Mixed HIV Status in 
Western Kenya: A Longitudinal Perspective. Food Nutr Bull. May 20;037957212199902. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0379572121999024
25. Pearson AL, Mack EA, Ross A, Marcantonio R, Zimmer A, Bunting EL, et al. Interpersonal Conflﬂict over Water 
Is Associated with Household Demographics, Domains of Water Insecurity, and Regional Conflﬂict: Evidence from 
Nine Sites across Eight Sub-Saharan African Countries. (2021) Water. Jan;13(9):1150. (Consortium co-author)
26. Miller, J.D.,** Frongillo, E.A., Weke, E., Burger, R., Wekesa, P., Sheira, L., Mocello, R., Bukusi, E., Otieno, P., 
Cohen, C., Weiser, S., Young, S.L. (2021) Household Water and Food Insecurity Are Positively Associated with 
Poor Mental and Physical Health among Adults Living with HIV in Western Kenya. Journal of Nutrition. https://
doi.org/10.1093/jn/nxab030
 of 
6
39

27. Stoler, J., Miller, J.,** Brewis, A., Freeman, M., Harris, L., Jepson, W., Pearson, A. Rosinger, A., Shah, S., 
Staddon, C., Workman, C., Wutich, A., Young, S.L. (2021) Household Water Insecurity Will Complicate the 
Ongoing COVID-19 Response: Evidence from 29 Sites in 23 Low- and Middle-Income Countries. International 
Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2021.113715
28. Young, S.L., Frongillo, E.A., Jamaluddine, Z., Melgar-Quiñonez, H., Pérez-Escamilla, R., Ringler, C., Rosinger, 
A. Y. (2021). The importance of water security for ensuring food security, good nutrition, and well-being. Advances 
in Nutrition. https://doi.org/10.1093/advances/nmab003 *Based on plenary session at Nutrition 2020
29. Young, S.L., Miller, J.D.,** Frongillo, E.A., Boateng, G.,^ Jamaluddine, Z., Neilands, T., HWISE-RCN. (2021). 
Validity of a Four-Item Household Water Insecurity Experiences Scale for Assessing Water Issues Related to 
Health and Well-Being. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.20-0417
30. Workman, C.L., Brewis, A., Wutich, A. Young, S.L., Stoler, J., Kearns, J. (2021) Understanding Biopsychosocial 
Health Outcomes of Syndemic Water and Food Insecurity: Applications for Global Health. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 
104(1) 8-11. https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.20-0513
31. Butler MS**, Young SL, Tuthill EM. (2021) Perinatal depressive symptoms and breastfeeding behaviors: A 
systematic literature review and biosocial research agenda. J Affect Disorders. 283: 441-471. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jad.2020.11.080 
32. Pebsworth PA, Gruber T, Miller JD**, Zuberbuhler K, Young SL. (2021) Selecting between iron‐rich and clay‐
rich soils: a geophagy field experiment with black‐and‐white colobus monkeys in the Budongo Forest Reserve, 
Uganda. Primates 62:133–142  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10329-020-00845-y
33. Venkataramanan, V.,^ Geere, J., Thomae, B.,* Stoler, J., Hunter, P., Young, S.L., HWISE-RCN. (2020). In pursuit 
of ‘safe’ water: the burden of personal injury from water fetching in 21 low-income and middle- 
income countries. BMJ Global Health, https://gh.bmj.com/content/5/10/e003328
34. Hannah, D., Lynch, I., Mao, F., Miller, J.,* Young, S.L., & Krause, S. (2020). Water and sanitation for all in a 
pandemic. Nature Sustainability. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-020-0593-7
35. Staddon, C., Everard, M., Mytton, J., Octavianti, T., Powell, W., Quinn, N., Uddin, S, Young, S.L., Miller, J.,* 
Budds, J., Geere, J., Meehan, K., Charles, K., Stevenson, E., Vonk, J., & Mizniak, J. (2020). Water insecurity 
compounds the global coronavirus crisis. Water International. doi: 10.1080/02508060.2020.1769345
36. Samburu, B.,** Young, S.L., Wekesah, F., Wanjohi, M., Kimiywe, J., Muriuki, P.; Griffiths, P., McGarvey, S.T., 
Madise, N., Kimani-Murage, E. W. (2020). Effectiveness of the baby-friendly community initiative in promoting 
exclusive breastfeeding among HIV negative and positive mothers: a randomized controlled trial in Koibatek 
Sub-County, Baringo, Kenya. International Breastfeeding Journal,  https://doi.org/10.1186/s13006-020-00299-4
37. Tuthill, E.,^ Miller, J.,** Collins, S.**; Widen, E.^; Onono, M., Young, S.L. (2020). HIV infection, hunger, 
breastfeeding self-efficacy, and depressive symptoms are associated with exclusive breastfeeding to six months 
among women in western Kenya: a longitudinal observational study. International Breastfeeding Journal, https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13006-019-0251-8
38. Meehan, K., Jepson, W., Harris, L., …. Young, S.L. (2020). Exposing the myths of household water insecurity in 
the global north: A critical review. WIRES Water. https://doi.org/10.1002/wat2.1486
39. Rosinger, A., Brewis, A., Wutich, A., Jepson, W., Staddon, C., Stoler, J., Young, S.L., & HWISE RCN. (2020). 
Water borrowing is consistently practiced globally and is associated with water-related system failures across 
diverse environments. Global Environmental Change. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2020.102148
40. Tuthill, E., Maltby, A., Conteh, J., Sheira, L., Miller, J.,** Onono, M., Weiser, D., & Young, S.L. (2020). Persistent 
food insecurity, but not HIV,  is associated with depressive symptoms among perinatal women in Kenya: a 
longitudinal perspective. AIDS & Behavior. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10461-020-03047
41. Venkataramanan, V.,^ Collins, S.,** Clark, K.,* Yeam, J.,* Nowakowski, V.,* & Young, S.L. (2020). Coping 
strategies for individual and household-level water insecurity: A systematic review. WIREs Water. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1002/wat2.1477
 of 
7
39

42. Wang, M.,* Miller, J.D.,** Collins, S.M.,** Santoso, M.V.,** Wekesa, P., Okochi, H., Onono, M., Weiser, S., 
Gandhi, M., Young, S.L. (2020) Social Support Mitigates Negative Impact of Food Insecurity on Antiretroviral 
Adherence Among Postpartum Women in Western Kenya. Aids & Behavior. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10461-020-02839-9 
43. Rosinger, A. & Young, S.L. (2020). In‐Home Tap Water Consumption Trends Changed Among U.S. Children, 
but Not Adults, Between 2007 and 2016. Water Resources Research. doi: 10.1029/2020WR027657
44. Lane, C., Widen, E.,^ Collins, S.,** & Young, S.L. (2020). HIV-exposed, uninfected infants in Uganda 
experience poorer growth and body composition trajectories than HIV-unexposed infants. JAIDS. doi: 10.1097/
QAI.0000000000002428
45. Samburu, B.,** Young, S.L., Wekesa, F., Wanjohi, M., Kimiywe, J., Muriuki, P., Griffiths, P., McGarvey, S., 
Madise, N., & Kimani-Murage, E. (2020). Effectiveness of the baby-friendly community initiative in promoting 
exclusive breastfeeding among HIV negative and positive mothers: a randomized controlled trial in Koibatek 
Sub-County, Baringo, Kenya. International Breastfeeding Journal. doi: 10.1186/s13006-020-00299-4
46. Rosinger, A. & Young, S.L. (2020). The toll of household water insecurity on health and human biology: 
Current understandings and future directions. WIREs Water. doi: 10.1002/wat2.1468
47. Bethancourt, H., Swanson, Z., Nzunza, R., Huanca, T., Conde, E., Kenney, W. L., Young, S.L., Ndiema, E., 
Braun, D., Pontzer, H., & Rosinger, A. (2020). Hydration in Relation to Water Insecurity, Heat Index, and Lactation 
Status in Two Small-Scale Populations in Hot-Humid and Hot-Arid Environment. American Journal of Human 
Biology. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.23447
48. Boateng, G.,^ Workman, C., Miller, J.,** Onono, M., Neilands, T., & Young, S.L. (2020). The syndemic effects of 
food insecurity, water insecurity, and HIV on depressive symptomatology among Kenyan women. Social Science & 
Medicine. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2020.113043
49. Miller, J.,** Vonk, J., Staddon, C., & Young, S.L. (2020). Is household water insecurity a link between water 
governance and well-being? A multi-site analysis. Journal of Water, Sanitation & Hygiene for Development. doi: 
10.2166/washdev.2020.165
50. Finkelstein, J.L., Herman, H.S., Plenty, A., Mehta, S., Natureeba, P., Clark, T.D., Kamya, M.R., Ruel, T., 
Charlebois, E.D., Cohan, D., Havlir, D., & Young, S.L. (2020). Anemia and Micronutrient Status during Pregnancy, 
and Their Associations with Obstetric and Infant Outcomes among HIV-Infected Ugandan Women Receiving 
Antiretroviral Therapy. Current Developments in Nutrition. doi: 10.1093/cdn/nzaa075
51. Tesfaye, Y., Maes, K., Abesha, R., Young, S.L., Snyder, J., Gebremariam, A., & Freeman, M. (2020). How do 
rural Ethiopians rate the severity of water insecurity scale items? Implications for water insecurity measurement 
and interventions. Human Organization. doi: 10.17730/1938-3525.79.2.95
52. Wies, J., Mays, A., Collins, S.,** & Young, S.L. (2020). “As long as we have the mine, we’ll have water”: 
Exploring water insecurity in Appalachia. Annals of Anthropological Practice. doi: 10.1111/napa.12134
53. Venkataramanan, V.,^ Lopez, D.,* McCuskey, D.,* Keifus, D.,* McDonald, R., Miller, W., Packman, A., & 
Young, S.L. (2020). Knowledge, attitudes, intentions, and behavior related to green infrastructure for flﬂood 
management: A systematic literature review. Science of the Total Environment. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.137606
54. Benzaken, C.,* Miller, J.,* Onono, M., & Young, S.L. (2020). Development of a cumulative metric of vaccination 
adherence behavior and its application among a cohort of 12-month-olds in western Kenya. Vaccine. doi: 10.1016/
j.vaccine.2020.03.011 (preprint: 10.31235/osf.io/4s76n)
55. Thavarajah, W., Verosloff, M., Jung, J., Alam, K., Miller, J.,* Jewett, M., Young, S.L., & Lucks, J. (2020). A primer 
on emerging field-deployable synthetic biology tools for global water quality monitoring. npj Clean Water. doi: 
10.1038/s41545-020-0064-8
56. Tuthill, E., Miller, J.,* Collins, S.,** Widen, E.,^ Onono, M., & Young, S.L. (2020). HIV infection, hunger, 
breastfeeding self-efficacy, and depressive symptoms are associated with exclusive breastfeeding to 6 months 
among women in western Kenya: A longitudinal observational study. International Breastfeeding Journal. doi: 
10.1186/s13006-019-0251-813006_2019_251
 of 
8
39

57. Schuster, R.,** Butler, M.,** Wutich, A., Miller, J.,* Young, S.L., & HWISE Research Coordination Network. 
(2020). “If there is no water, we cannot feed our children”: The far-reaching consequences of water insecurity on 
infant feeding practices and infant health across 16 low- and middle-income countries. American Journal of Human 
Biology. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.23357 **cover article 
58. Brewis, A., Workman, C., Wutich, A., Jepson, W., Young, S.L., & HWISE Research Coordination Network. 
(2020). Household water insecurity is a plausible driver of food insecurity: Evidence from 27 sites in low- and 
middle-income countries. American Journal of Human Biology. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.23309
59. Stoler, J., Pearson, A., Staddon, C., Wutich, A., Mack, E., Brewis, A., Rosinger, A., & HWISE Research 
Coordination Network [including Young, S.L.]. (2019). Cash water expenditures are associated with household 
water insecurity, food insecurity, and perceived stress in study sites across 20 low- and middle-income countries. 
Science of the Total Environment. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.135881
60. Young, S.L., Godfred, B.O.,^ Jamaluddine, Z, Miller, J.D.,* Frongillo, E., Neilands, T., Collins, S.M.,** Wutich, 
A., Jepson, W., Stoler, J., & HWISE Research Coordination Network. (2019). The Household Water InSecurity 
Experiences (HWISE) Scale: development and validation of a household water insecurity measure for low-income 
and middle-income countries. BMJ Global Health. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2019-001750
61. Venkataramanan, V.,^ Packman, A., Peters, D.,* Lopez, D.,* McCuskey, D.,* McDonald, R., Miller, W., & Young, 
S.L. (2019). A systematic review of the human health and social well-being outcomes of green infrastructure for 
stormwater and flﬂood management. Journal of Environmental Management. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.05.028
62. Murnane, P., Miller, J.,* Tuthill, E., Collins, S.,** Neilands, T., Onono, M., Cohen, C., Weiser, S., Laudenslager, 
M., & Young, S.L. (2019). Perinatal food insecurity and postpartum psychosocial stress are positively associated 
among Kenyan women of mixed HIV status. AIDS and Behavior. doi: 10.1007/s1046 1-019-02676-5
63. Miller, J.D.,* Fitzgerald, K.G., Smith, A.L., & Young, S.L. (2019). Geophagy among a cohort of Kenyan women 
with mixed HIV status: A longitudinal analysis. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. doi: 10.4269/
ajtmh.19-0149
64. Pebsworth, P.A.,^ Hillier, S., Wendler, R., Glahn, R., Ta, C.A.K., Arnason, J.T., & Young, S.L. (2019). Geophagy 
among East African Chimpanzees: consumed soils provide protection from plant secondary compounds and 
bioavailable iron. Environmental Geochemistry and Health. doi: 10.1007/s10653-019-00366-8
65. Heimburger, D.C., Hermann, M., McClung, J.P., McGuire, M.K., Rasmussen, K.M., Troy, L.M., & Young S.L. 
(2019). History and perspectives on the Dannon Institute Early-Career Nutrition Leadership Institute. Nutrition 
Today. doi: 10.1097/NT.0000000000000353
66. Miller, J.D.,* Young, S.L., Boateng, G.O.,^ Oiye, S., & Owino, S. (2019). Greater household food insecurity is 
associated with lower breast milk intake among infants in western Kenya. Maternal & Child Nutrition. doi: 
10.1111/mcn.12862
67. Fiorella, K.J.,^ Desai, P.,* Miller, J.D., Okeyo, N.O., & Young, S.L. (2019). A review of transactional sex for 
natural resources: Under-researched, overstated, or unique to fishing economies? Global Public Health. doi: 
10.1080/17441692.2019.1625941
68. Chung, E.O., Mattah, B., Hickey, M., Salmen, C.R., Milner, E.M., Bukusi, E.A., Brashares, J.S., Young, S.L., 
Fernald, L.C.H., & Fiorella, K.J.^ (2019). Characteristics of pica behavior among mothers around Lake Victoria, 
Kenya: A cross-sectional study. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. doi: 10.3390/ijerph16142510
69. Santoso, M.V.,** Bezner Kerr, R., Hoddinott, J., Garigipati, P.,* Olmos, S.,* & Young, S.L. (2019). Role of 
women’s empowerment in child nutrition outcomes: A systematic review. Advances in Nutrition. doi: 10.1093/
advances/nmz056
70. Boateng, G.,^ Martin, S., Tuthill, E., Collins, S.M.**, Dennis, C., Natamba, B.**, Young, S.L. (2019). Adaptation 
and psychometric evaluation of the breastfeeding self-efficacy scale to assess exclusive breastfeeding. BMC 
Pregnancy & Childbirth. doi: 10.1186/s12884-019-2217-7
71. Young, S.L. & Miller, J.D.* (2019). Medicine Beneath Your Feet: A Biocultural Examination of the Risks and 
Benefits of Geophagy. Clay and Clay Minerals. doi: 10.1007/s42860-018-0004-6
 of 
9
39

72. Young, S.L., Collins, S.M.,** Boateng, G.,^ Neilands, T.B., Jamaluddine, Z., Miller, J.D.,*, Brewis, A., Frongillo, 
E.A., Jepson, W., Melgar-Quiñonez, H., Schuster, R., Stoler, J.B., Wuitch, A., & HWISE Research Coordination 
Network. (2019). Development and validation protocol for an instrument to measure household water insecurity 
across cultures and ecologies: the Household Water InSecurity Experiences (HWISE) Scale. BMJ Open. doi: 
10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023558 
73. Brewis, A., Rosinger, A., Wutich, A., Adams, E., Cronk, L., Pearson, A., Workman, C., Young, S.L., & HWISE 
Consortium. (2019). Water sharing, reciprocity, and need: A comparative study of interhousehold water transfers 
in sub‐Saharan Africa. Economic Anthropology. doi: 10.1002/sea2.12143
74. Bezner Kerr, R., Young, S.L., Young, C., Santoso, M.V.,** Magalasi, M., Entz, M., Lupafya, E. Dakishoni, L., 
Morrone, V., Wolfe, D., Snapp, S. (2019). Farming for change: developing a participatory curriculum on 
agroecology, nutrition, climate change and social equity in Malawi and Tanzania. Agriculture and Human Values 
http://bit.ly/farm4change
75. Chung, Y., Bezner Kerr, R., & Young, S.L. (2019). Rethinking the value of unpaid care work: lessons from 
participatory visual research in central Tanzania. Gender, Place & Culture. doi: 10.1080/0966369X.2018.1556611
76. Stoler, J., Brewis, A., Harris, L., Wutich, A., Pearson, A., Rosinger, A., Schuster, R., & Young, S.L. (2018). 
Household water sharing: a missing link in international health. International Health. doi: 10.1093/inthealth/
ihy094/5253751
77. Pebsworth, P.,  Huffman, M., Lambert, J., & Young, S.L. (2018). Geophagy among non-human primates: A 
systematic review of current knowledge and suggestions for future direction. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology. 
doi: 10.1002/ajpa.23724
78. Collins, S.,** Mbullo, P.,** Miller, J.,* Boateng, G.,^ Wekesa, P., Onono, M., & Young, S.L. (2018). ‘I know how 
stress it is to lack water!’ Exploring the lived experiences of household water insecurity among pregnancy and 
postpartum women in western Kenya. Global Public Health. doi: 10.1080/17441692.2018.1521861 
79.Widen, E., Tsai, I.,* Collins, S.M.,** Wekesa, P., China, J., Krumdieck, N., Miller, J.,* Weiser, S., Onono, M., & 
Young, S.L. (2018). HIV and increased food insecurity are associated with adverse body composition changes 
among pregnant and lactating Kenyan women. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. doi: 10.1038/
s41430-018-0285-9
80. Wutich, A., Budds, J., Jepson, W., Harris, L., Adams, E., Brewis, A., Cronk, L., DeMyers, C., Maes, K., Marley, 
T., Miller, J.,* Pearson, A., Rosinger, A., Schuster, R.,** Stoler, J., Staddon, C., Wiessner, P., Workman, C., Young, 
S.L. (2018). Household water sharing: A review of water gifts, exchanges, and transfers across cultures. Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews – Water. doi: 10.1002/wat2.1309
81. Schuster, R.,** de Sousa, O, Reme, A., Vopelak, C., Pelletier, D. L., Johnson, L. M., Mbuya, M., Pinault, D., & 
Young, S. L. (2018). Performance-Based Financing Empowers Health Workers Delivering Prevention of Vertical 
Transmission of HIV Services and Decreases Desire to Leave in Mozambique. International Journal of Health Policy 
and Management. doi: 10.15171/ijhpm.2017.137
82. Rosinger, A., Young, S. L., Collins, S. M.,** Haider, S. R., Mishra, P., Nagai, H. T., Petro, M., & Downs, J. A. 
(2018). Schistosomiasis and hydration status: Schistosoma haematobium, but not Schistosoma mansoni increases urine 
specific gravity among rural Tanzanian women. American Journal of Physical Anthropology. doi: 10.1002/ajpa.23479
83. Fox, E.,** Pelto, H., Bar, H., Rasmussen, K. M., Young, S. L., Debrosse, M. G., Rouzier, V. A., Pape, J. W., & 
Pelletier, D. L. (2018). Capturing changes in HIV-infected, breastfeeding mothers’ cognitive processes from before 
delivery to five months postpartum: An application of the pile sorting technique in Haiti. Current Developments in 
Nutrition. doi: 10.1093/cdn/nzy017
84. Miller, J. D.,* Collins, S. M.,** Omotayo, M., Martin, S. L., Dickin, K. L., & Young, S. L. (2018). Geophagic earths 
consumed by women in western Kenya contain dangerous levels of lead, arsenic, and iron. American Journal of 
Human Biology. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.23130
 of 
10
39

85. Boateng, G.B.,^ Neilands, T.B., Frongillo, E.A., Melgar-Quinonez, H, & Young, S. L. (2018). Best Practices for 
Developing and Validating Scales for Health, Social and Behavioral Research: A Primer. Frontiers. doi: 10.3389/
fpubh.2018.00149
86. Boateng, G.B.,^ Collins, S.M.,** Mbullo, P.,** Wekesa, P., Onono, M., Neilands, T.B., & Young, S. L. (2018). A 
Novel Household Water Insecurity Scale: Procedures and Psychometric Analysis among Postpartum Women in 
Western Kenya. PLoS ONE.
87.Boateng, G.,^ Martin, S., Collins, S.,** Natamba, B.,** & Young, S. L. (2018). Measuring exclusive breastfeeding 
social support: Scale development and validation in Uganda. Maternal & Child Nutrition. doi: 10.1111/mcn.12579
88. Geubbels, E., Williams, A., Ramaiya, A., Tancredi, D., Young, S. L., Chantry, C. (2018). HIV status disclosure 
among postpartum women in rural Tanzania: predictors, experiences and uptake of a nurse-facilitated disclosure 
intervention. AIDS Care, 1-9. doi: 10.1080/09540121.2018.1428724
89. Dumas, S. E.,** Kassa, L., Young, S. L., & Travis, A. J. (2018). Examining the association between livestock 
ownership typologies and child nutrition in the Luangwa Valley, Zambia. PLoS ONE. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0191339
90.Dumas, S. E.,** Maranga, A.,* Mbullo, P.,** Collins, S.,** Wekesa, P., Onono, M., Young, S.L. (2017). “Men Are in 
Front at Eating Time, but Not When It Comes to Rearing the Chicken”: Unpacking the Gendered Benefits and 
Costs of Livestock Ownership in Kenya. Food & Nutrition Bulletin. doi: 10.1177/0379572117737428
91. Oehmke, J. F., Young, S. L., Bahiigwa, G., Keizire, B. B., Post, L. A. (2017). The Behavioral Economics Basis of 
Mutual Accountability to Achieve Food Security. Politics & Policy. doi: 10.1111/polp.12244
92.Ta, C. A. K., Pebsworth, P.,^ Liu, R., Hillier, S., Gray, N., Arnason, J. T., & Young, S. L. (2017). Soil eaten by 
chacma baboons adsorbs polar plant secondary metabolites representative of those found in their diet. 
Environmental Geochemistry and Health. doi: 10.1007/s10653-017-0025-4
93. Familiar, I., Collins, S. M.,** Sikorskii, A., Ruisenor-Escudero, H., Natamba, B.,** Bangirana, P., Widen, E. M.,^ 
Achidri, D., Achola, H., Onen, D., Boivin, M., Young, S. L. (2017). Quality of caregiving is positively associated 
with neurodevelopment during the first year of life among HIV-exposed uninfected children in Uganda. Journal of 
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes. doi: 10.1097/QAI.0000000000001599
94. Roy, A., Fuentes-Afflﬂick, E., Fernald, L. C. H., & Young, S.L. (2017). Pica is prevalent and strongly associated 
with iron deficiency among Hispanic pregnant women living in the United States. Appetite, 120, 163–170. doi: 
10.1016/j.appet.2017.08.033 
95. Wutich, A., J. Budds, L. Eichelberger, J. Geere, L. Harris, J. Horney, W. Jepson, E. Norman, K. O’Reilly, A. 
Pearson, S.H. Shah, J. Shinn, K. Simpson, C. Staddon, J. Stoler, M. Teodoro, S.L. Young. (2017). Advancing 
methods for household water insecurity research: Studying entitlements and capabilities, socio-cultural 
dynamics, and political processes, institutions and governance. Water Security, 2, 1-10. doi: 10.1016/
j.wasec.2017.09.001
96.Vaidya, A., Bhosale, R., Samarey, P., Suryavanshi, N., Young, S.L., Mave, V., Kanade, S., Kulkarni, V., 
Deshpande, P., Balasubramanian, U., Elf, J., Gupte, N., Gupta, A., Mathad, J.S. (2017). Household food insecurity 
is associated with low interferon-gamma levels in pregnant Indian women. The International Journal of Tuberculosis 
and Lung Disease. doi: 10.5588/ijtld.16.0718
97. Jepson, W., Budds, J., Eichelberger, L., Harris, L., Norman, E., O’Reilly, K., Pearson, A., Shah, S., Shinn, J., 
Staddon, C., Stoler, J., Wutich, A., Young, S.L. (2017). Advancing human capabilities for water security: A 
relational approach. Water Security, 1, 46-52. doi: 10.1016/j.wasec.2017.07.001
98. Jepson, W., Wutich, A., Boateng, G.,^ Collins, S.,** Young, S.L. (2017). Progress in Household Water Insecurity 
Metrics: A Cross-Disciplinary Approach in the Social Sciences. WIREs Water, 4(3). doi: 10.1002/wat2.1214
99. Brooks, Y.,^ Collins, S.,** Mbullo, P., Boateng, G.,^ Young, S.L., Richardson, R. (2017). Evaluating human 
sensory perceptions and the Compartment Bag Test assays as proxies for the presence and concentration of 
Escherichia coli in drinking water in western Kenya: Suggestions for monitoring SDGs in low-resource settings. 
American Journal of Tropical Medicine & Hygiene, 97(4), 1005-1008. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0878
 of 
11
39

100. Powell, B.,^ Bezner Kerr, R., Young, S. L., Johns, T. (2017). The determinants of dietary diversity and 
nutrition: ethnonutrition knowledge of local people in the East Usambara Mountains, Tanzania. Journal of 
Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine. 13(1). doi: 10.1186/s13002-017-0150-2.
101. Widen, E.M.,^ Collins, S.M.,** Khan, H.,* Biribawa, C., Acidri, D., Achoko, W., Achola, H., Ghosh, S., 
Griffiths, J.K., Young, S.L. (2017). Food insecurity, but not HIV-infection status, is associated with adverse changes 
in body composition during lactation in Ugandan women of mixed HIV status. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. doi: 10.394/ajcn.116.142513
102. Casal, C. S.,* Lei, A.,* Young, S.L., Tuthill, E.^ (2017). A Critical Review of Instruments Measuring 
Breastfeeding Attitudes, Knowledge, and Social Support. Journal of Human Lactation. 33(1): 21-47. doi: 
10.1177/0890334416677029
103. Natamba, B.,** Mehta, S., Achan, J., Stoltzfus, R.J., Griffiths, J.K., Young, S.L. (2016). The association between 
food insecurity and depressive symptoms severity among pregnant women differs by social support category: a 
cross-sectional study. Maternal and Child Nutrition. doi: 10.1111/mcn.12351
104. Tuthill, E.L.^, Pellowski, J.A., Young, S.L., Butler, L.M. (2016). Prenatal depression predicts lower rates of 
exclusive breastfeeding among HIV-infected women in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. AIDS and Behavior. doi: 
10.1007/s10461-016-1557-9
105. Krumdieck, N.,** Collins, S.,** Wekesa, P., Mbullo, P., Boateng, G.,^ Onono, M., Young, S.L. (2016). 
Household water insecurity is associated with a range of negative consequences among pregnant Kenyan women 
of mixed HIV status. Journal of Water and Health. doi: 10.2166/wh.2016.079
106. Achan, J., Kakuru, A., Ikilezi, G., Mwangwa, F., Plenty, A., Charlebois, E., Young, S.L., Havlir, D., Kamya, M., 
Ruel, T. (2016). Growth recovery among HIV-infected children randomized to Lopinavir/ritonavir or Non-
nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor-based antiretroviral therapy. Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal. doi: 
10.1097/INF.0000000000001318
107.Williams, A.,** Chantry, C., Young, S.L., Achando, B.S., Allen, L.H., Arnold, B.A., Colford, J.M., Dentzl, H.N., 
Hampel, D., Kiprotich, M., Lin, A., Null, C., Nyambane, G., Shabab-Ferdows, S., Stewart, C. (2016). Breastmilk 
vitamin B-12 concentrations are low and are not associated with reported household hunger, recent animal source 
food or vitamin B-12 intake among women in rural Kenya. Journal of Nutrition. doi: 10.3945/jn.115.228189
108. Schuster, R.,** de Sousa, O., Rivera, J., Olson, R., Pinault, D., & Young, S. L. (2016). Performance-based 
incentives may be appropriate to address challenges to delivery of prevention of vertical transmission of HIV 
services in rural Mozambique: a qualitative investigation. Human Resources for Health. doi: 10.1186/
s12960-016-0157-0
109. Seim, G.,* Tako, E., Ahn, C.,* Glahn, R., Young, S.L. (2016). A Novel in Vivo Model for Assessing the Impact 
of Geophagic Earth on Iron Status. Nutrients. doi: 10.3390/nu8060362
110. Schuster, R.,** McMahon, D.,* Young, SL. (2016). A comprehensive review of the barriers and promoters 
health workers experience in delivering prevention of vertical transmission of HIV services in sub-Saharan Africa. 
AIDS Care. doi: 10.1080/09540121.2016.1139041 
111. Williams, A.,** Chantry, C., Geubbels, E., Ramaiya, A.,** Shemdoe, A. Tancredi, D., Young, SL. (2016). 
Breastfeeding and Complementary Feeding Practices among HIV-Exposed Infants in Coastal Tanzania. Public 
Health Nutrition. 32(1), 112–122. doi: 10.1177/0890334415618412
112. Martin, S.,** Seim, G.,* Wawire, S., Chapleau, G., Young, S.L., Dickin, K. (2016). Translating Formative 
Research Findings into a Behavior Change Strategy to Promote Antenatal Calcium and Iron and Folic Acid 
Supplementation in Western Kenya. Maternal and Child Nutrition. doi: 10.1111/mcn.12233
113. Koss, C. A.,** Natureeba, P., Nyafwono, D., Plenty, A., Mwesigwa, J., Nzarubara, B., Clark, T., Ruel, T., Achan, 
J., Charlebois, E., Cohan, D., Kamya, M., Havlir, D., Young, S.L. (2015). Food Insufficiency is Associated with Lack 
of Sustained Viral Suppression among HIV-Infected Pregnant and Breastfeeding Ugandan Women. Journal of 
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes. doi: 10.1097/QAI.0000000000000860 
 of 
12
39

114. Kimani-Murage, E. W., Kimiywe, J., Kabue, M., Wekesah, F., Matiri, E., Muhia, N., Wanjohi, M., Muriuki, P., 
Samburu, B.,** Kanyuira, J.N. Young, S.L., Griffiths, P.L., Madise, N., McGarvey, S. (2015). Feasibility and 
effectiveness of the baby friendly community initiative in rural Kenya: study protocol for a randomized controlled 
trial. Trials. 16(1), 431. doi: 10.1186/s13063-015-0935-3 
115. Tuthill, E. L.,** McGrath, J.M., Graber, M. Cusson, R.M., Young, S. L. (2015). Breastfeeding Self-efficacy: A 
Critical Review of Available Instruments. Journal of Human Lactation. doi: 10.1177/0890334415599533 
116. Young, S.L., Natamba, B,.** Luwedde, F., Nyafwono, D., Okia, B., Osterbauer, B., Natureeba, P., Johnson, L., 
Michel, C., Zheng, A.,* Robine, M.,* Achan, J., Charlebois, E., Cohan, D., Havlir, D. (2015). ”I have remained 
strong because of that food": Acceptability and use of lipid-based nutrient supplements among pregnant HIV-
infected Ugandan women receiving combination antiretroviral therapy. AIDS and Behavior. doi: 10.1007/
s10461-014-0947-0
117. Bartelink, I. H., Savic, R. M., Dorsey, G., Ruel, T., Gingrish, D., Scherpbier, H., Capparelli, E., Julien, V., Young, 
S., Achan, J., Plenty, A., Charlebois, E., Kamya, M., Havlir, D., Aweeka, F. (2015) The Effect of Malnutrition on the 
Pharmacokinetics and Virologic Outcomes of Lopinavir Efavirenz and Nevirapine in Food Insecure HIV-Infected 
Children in Tororo, Uganda. Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal. doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000000603
118. Miao, D.,* Young, S.L., & Golden, C.D. (2015). A meta-analysis of pica and micronutrient status. American 
Journal of Human Biology. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.22598 **cover article
119. Lumish, R.A.,* Young, S.L., Lee, S., Cooper, E., Pressman, E., Guillet, R., O’Brien, K.O. (2014). Gestational Iron 
Deficiency is Associated with Pica Behaviors in Adolescents. Journal of Nutrition. doi: 10.3945/ jn.114.192070
120. Natamba, B. K.,** Achan, J., Arbach, A.,** Oyok, T. O., Ghosh, S., Mehta, S., Stoltzfus, R.J., Griffiths, J., Young, 
S.L. (2014). Reliability and validity of the center for epidemiologic studies-depression scale in screening for 
depression among HIV-infected and -uninfected pregnant women attending antenatal services in northern 
Uganda: a cross-sectional study. BMC Psychiatry. 14(1), 303. doi: 10.1186/s12888-014-0303-y
121. Natamba, B.,** Kilama, H., Arbach, A.,** Achan, J., Ghosh, S., Griffiths, J., & Young, S. L. (2014). Reliability 
and validity of an individually-focused food insecurity access scale for assessing perceived food access among 
pregnant Ugandan women of mixed HIV status. Public Health Nutrition. doi: 10.1017/S1368980014001669
122. Lin, J.,* Temple, L.,* Trujillo, C., Mejia-Rodriguez, F., Goldman Rosas, L., Fernald, L., & Young, S. L. (2014). 
Pica during pregnancy among Mexican-born women: a formative study. Maternal and Child Nutrition. doi: 
10.1111/mcn.12120
123. Young, S. L., Plenty, A., Luwedde, F., Natamba, B.,** Natureeba, P., Achan, J., et al. (2014). Household food 
insecurity, maternal nutritional status, and infant feeding practices among HIV-infected Ugandan women 
receiving combination antiretroviral therapy. Maternal and Child Health. 18(9):2044-53. doi: 10.1007/
s10995-014-1450-y
124. Nagata, J. M.,** Cohen, C. R., Young, S. L., Wamuyu, C., Armes, M. N., Otieno, B. O., Leslie, H.H., Dangu, M., 
Stewart, C., Bukusi, E.A., Weiser, S.D. (2014). Descriptive characteristics and health outcomes of the Food by 
Prescription nutrition supplementation program for adults living with HIV in Nyanza Province, Kenya. PLoS 
One. 9(3), e91403. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091403.t003
125. Jones, A.D., Ngure, F.M., Pelto, G., Young, S.L. (2013). What are we assessing when we measure food 
security?: A compendium and review of current metrics. Advances in Nutrition. 4, 481-505, doi: 10.3945/ 
an.113.004119
126. Bartelink, I. H., Savic, R. M., Mwesigwa, J., Achan, J., Clark, T., Plenty, A., Charlebois, E., Kamya, M., Young, 
S.L., Gandhi, M., Havlir, D., Cohan, D., Aweeka, F.  (2013). Pharmacokinetics of lopinavir/ritonavir and efavirenz 
in food insecure HIV-infected pregnant and breastfeeding women in Tororo, Uganda. Journal of Clinical 
Pharmacology. doi: 10.1002/jcph.167
127. Tuthill, E.,** McGrath, J., Young, S.L. Commonalities and differences in infant feeding attitudes and practices 
in the context of HIV in Sub-Saharan Africa: a Metasynthesis. (2013). AIDS Care. doi: 
10.1080/09540121.2013.813625.
 of 
13
39

128. Young, S.L., Wheeler, A., McCoy, A., Weiser, S. (2013). A review of the role of food insecurity in adherence to 
care and treatment among adult and pediatric populations living with HIV and AIDS. AIDS and Behavior. 
doi:10.1007/s10461-013-0547-4
129. Seim, G.L.,* Ahn, C.I.,* Bodis, M.S., Luwedde, F., Miller, D., Tako, E., Glahn, R., Young, S.L. (2013). 
Bioavailability of iron in geophagic earths and clay minerals, and their effect on dietary iron absorption using an 
in vitro digestion/Caco-2 cell model. Food and Function. 4(8), 1263–1270. doi: 10.1039/c3fo30380b
130. Pebsworth, P.,^ Seim, G.,* Huffman, M., Glahn, R., Hillier, S., Tako, E., Young, S.L. (2013). Soil consumed by 
chacma baboons is low in bioavailable iron and high in clay. Journal of Chemical Ecology. 39(3), 447–449. 
doi:10.1007/s10886-013-0258-3
131. Young, S. L., Leshabari, S., Arkfeld, C.,* Singler, J., Chantry, C.J. et al. (2013). Barriers to and promoters of 
home-based breastmilk pasteurization: an ethnographic investigation. Breastfeeding Medicine. 8(3), 321–326. 
doi:10.1089/bfm.2012.0044
132. Nagata, J. M.,** Magerenge, R. O., Young, S.L., Oguta, J. O., Weiser, S. D., & Cohen, C. R. (2012). Socio-
demographic and health associations with BMI at the time of enrollment to HIV care in Nyanza Province, Kenya. 
AIDS Care. 24(6), 728–736. doi: 10.1080/09540121.2011.630358
133. Wilkinson, L.,* Sheng, X., & Young, S. L. (2012). Understanding infant and young child feeding challenges in 
China. China Health Review. 3(2), 9–20.
134. Golden, C. D.,* Rasolofoniaina, B. J. R., Benjamin, R., Young, S. L. (2012). Pica and amylophagy are common 
among Malagasy men, women and children. PLoS One. 7(10): e47129. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047129
135. Young, S., Murray, K., Mwesigwa, J., Natureeba, P., Osterbauer, B., Achan, J., Arinaitwe, E., Clark, T., Ades, 
V., Charlebois, E., Ruel, T., Kamya, M., Havlir, D., Cohan, D. (2012). Maternal nutritional status predicts adverse 
obstetric & fetal outcomes among HIV-infected rural Ugandan women receiving combination ART. PLoS One. 7(8) 
e41934. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041934.t003
136. Patil, C. and Young, S.L. (2012). Biocultural considerations of food cravings and aversions: An introduction. 
Ecology of Food and Nutrition. 51(5), 365–373. doi: 10.1080/03670244.2012.696007
137. Patil, C. R., Steinmetz, A.R,* Abrams, E.T. and Young, S.L. (2012). Appetite sensations and nausea and 
vomiting of pregnancy: An overview of the explanations. Ecology of Food and Nutrition. 51(5), 394–417. 
doi:10.1080/03670244.2012.696010
138. Steinmetz, A.R.,* Abrams, E.T., Young, S.L. (2012). Patterns of gustatory and olfactory aversions and nausea 
and vomiting during pregnancy on Pemba Island, Zanzibar, Tanzania. Ecology of Food and Nutrition. 51(5), 418–
430. doi: 10.1080/03670244.2012.696011
139.  Arinaitwe, E., Gasasira, A., Verret, W., Homsy, J., Wanzira, H., Kakuru, A., Sandison, T., Young, S., Tappero, 
J., Kamya, M., Dorsey, G. (2012). The association between malnutrition and the incidence of malaria among young 
HIV-infected and -uninfected Ugandan children: a prospective study. Malaria Journal. 
11:90 doi:10.1186/1475-2875-11-90
140. Chantry, C. J., Young, S. L., Rennie, W., Ngonyani, M., Mashio, C., Israel-Ballard, K., Peerson, J., et al. (2012). 
Feasibility of using Flash-heated breastmilk as an infant feeding option for HIV-exposed, uninfected infants after 
6 months of age in urban Tanzania. JAIDS. 60(1):43-50. doi: 10.1097/QAI.0b013e31824fc06e
141. Nagata, J.,* Magarende, R, Young, S.L., Weiser, S.D., Cohen, C.R. (2011). Social determinants, lived 
experiences, and consequences of household food insecurity among persons living with HIV/AIDS in Suba 
District, Kenya. AIDS Care. doi: 10.1080/09540121.2011.630358
142. Weiser, S.D., Young, S.L.,  Cohen, C.R., Tsai, A.C., Tien, P.C., Hatcher, A.M., Frongillo, E.A., Bangsberg, D.R. 
(2011). Conceptual framework for understanding the bidirectional links between food insecurity and HIV/AIDS. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 94(6) 1729S-1739S. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.111.012070
 of 
14
39

143. Young, S.L., Mbuya, M.M., Chantry, C.J., Geubbels, E., Israel-Ballard, K., Cohan, D. Latham, M. (2011). 
Current knowledge and future research on infant feeding in the context of HIV: basic, clinical, behavioral and 
programmatic perspectives. Advances in Nutrition. 2:225-243. doi: 10.3945/an.110.000224
144. Young, S.L., Sherman, P.W., Lucks, J, Pelto, G. (2011). Why on earth?: Evaluating hypotheses about the 
physiological functions of human geophagy. Quarterly Review of Biology. 86(2):97-120. doi: 10.1086/659884
145. Young, S.L. (2010). Pica in Pregnancy: New Ideas About An Old Condition. Annual Review of Nutrition. 30: 
403-422. doi: 10.1146/annurev.nutr.012809.104713
146. Young, S.L., Israel-Ballard, K., Dantzer, E., Nyambo, M., Ash, D., Chantry, C.J. (2010). Infant feeding practices 
among HIV-positive women in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania indicate a need for more intensive infant feeding 
counseling. Public Health Nutrition. 29:1-7. doi: 10.1017/S1368980010001539 
147. Young, S.L., Khalfan, S., Farag, T., Kavle, J., Rasmussen, K., Pelto, G., Ali, S. M., Hamadi, B.,  Tielsch, J., 
Stoltzfus, R. (2010). Pica is associated with anemia and gastrointestinal distress among pregnant Zanzibari 
women. American Journal of Tropical Medicine & Hygiene. 83(1):144-151. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.2010.09-0442
148. Young, S.L., Hernandez Cordero, S., Blanco, I., Pelto, G. H., & Neufeld, L. M. (2010). Organoleptic properties, 
ease of use, and perceived health effects are determinants of acceptability of micronutrient supplements among 
poor Mexican women. Journal of Nutrition. 140 (3):605-611. doi: 10.3945/jn.109.113498. **selected by editor as the 
article of interest for March 2010
149. Young, S.L., Wilson, M.J., Hillier, S., Delbos, E. (2010). Differences and commonalities in physical, chemical 
and mineralogical properties of Zanzibari geophagic soils. Journal of Chemical Ecology. 36(1): 129-140. doi: 10.1007/
s10886-009-9729-y
150. Young, S.L., Beckham, S, and Ali, S. M. (2009). The potential role of private pharmacies in maternal iron 
supplementation in rural Tanzania. Food & Nutrition Bulletin. 30(1):16-23. doi: 10.1177/156482650903000102
151. Young, S.L., Wilson, M. J., Hillier, S., & Miller, D. D. (2008). Toward a comprehensive approach to the 
collection and analysis of pica substances, with emphasis on geophagic materials. PLoS One. 3(9): e3147. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0003147
152. Young, S. L., D. Goodman, T. H. Farag, S. M. Ali, M. R. Khatib, S. S. Khalfan, J. M. Tielsch, and R. J. Stoltzfus 
(2007). Geophagia is not associated with Trichuris or hookworm transmission in Zanzibar, Tanzania. Transactions of 
the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 101(8): 766-72. doi: 10.1016/j.trstmh.2007.04.016
153. Young, S. L., and S. M. Ali. (2005). Linking traditional treatments of material anemia to iron supplement use: 
an ethnographic case study from Pemba Island, Zanzibar. Maternal and Child Nutrition. 1(1): 51-58. doi: 10.1111/
j.1740-8709.2004.00002.x
154.
BOOK
155. Young, S.L. (2011) “Craving earth: Understanding pica” Columbia University Press. 
Reviewed by: New York Times, Barnes & Noble (starred review), American Journal of Human Biology, Athol Daily 
News, Atlanta Journal-Constitution, Daily Democrat, Fresno Bee, Gastronomica, Health and Medicine Week, 
Sacramento News and Review, Sydney Morning Herald, Times Higher Chronicle
INVITED COMMENTARIES & LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
156. Young, SL. (2022) The Value of Children's Voices in Public Health Research. Journal of Nutrition 152(9) pp 
2011-2012. https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/nxac145 (selected as Editor’s Choice)
157. Young, SL and Miller, JD. (2022) Water Insecurity in the United States: Quantifying an Invisible Crisis. Journal 
of Nutrition 152(5) pp 1183-1184. https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/nxac048 (selected as Editor’s Choice)
 of 
15
39

158. Young, S.L. (2020). The Human Experience of Water Security and What It Means for Food Security. Center for  
Strategic and International Studies. https://www.csis.org/analysis/human-experience-water-security-and-what-it-
means-food-security
159. Young, S.L., Miller, J., Staddon, C. (2020) New World Risk Poll Provides Critical Insights into the Global 
Water Crisis https://wrp.lrfoundation.org.uk/world-risk-poll-global-water-crisis/
160. Young, S.L. & Miller, J.* (2018). If ‘Water is Life,’ Shouldn’t We Know How to Measure It? Anthropology News. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/AN.796
161. Miller, J.,* Fiorella, K., Wekesa, P., Boateng, G., Collins, S., Young, S. (2017) “An inquiry into a recent paper on 
pica in western Kenya” NFS Journal. doi: 10.1016/j.nfs.2017.01.001  
162. Young, S.L. Invited commentary on Wutich, A. and Brewis, A. (2014) “Food, water, and scarcity: Toward a 
Broader Anthropology of Resource Insecurity,” Current Anthropology. 55(4) 461-462.
163. Young, S., Tuthill, E., Pelto, G. (2013) “Ethnography as a tool for formative research and evaluation in public 
health nutrition” Nestlé Foundation Report. 38-39.
164. Chantry, C.J., Hanson, C.V., Israel-Ballard, K., and Young, S.L. Policy on Infant Feeding and Transmission of 
HIV Cites Outdated Information About Breastmilk Pasteurization. Pediatrics.
165.Young, S. L., Chantry, C. J., Vosti, S. A., Rennie, W. (2009). Infant feeding counseling: a neglected strategy for 
the reduction of MTCT. AIDS. 23(18):2543-2544.
166.Young, S. L.(2004). On the role of the individual in the MEAH framework. Medische Antropologie. 16 (2): 280-1.
BOOK CHAPTERS
167. Kordas, K., Young, S.L., & Golding, J. (2020). Measuring the lifetime environment in LMICs: Perspectives 
from epidemiology, environmental health, and anthropology. In Transforming Global Health. K. Smith and P. Ram 
(Eds.). Springer Nature. pp. 19-34.
168. Young, S.L. (2017). Pica. In Encyclopedia of Abnormal and Clinical Psychology. Sage Publishing. pp. 2578-2579.
169. Young, S. L., & Tuthill, E. (2017). Ethnography as a tool for formative research and evaluation in public health 
nutrition: illustrations from the world of infant and young child feeding. In Research Methods for Anthropological 
Studies of Food and Nutrition, J. Brett & J. Chrzan (Eds.). Bergahn Books. pp. 92-108.
170. Young, S.L., Baker, S., Klemm, R. (2016). The power of people-centered nutrition interventions. In Good 
Nutrition: Perspectives for the 21st Century. Karger Press. pp. 197-208.
171. Weiser, S., Palar, K., Hatcher, A., Young, S., Frongillo, E., Laraia, B. (2015). Food Insecurity and Health: A 
Conceptual Framework. In Food Insecurity and Public Health. L. Ivers (Ed.). CRC Press. pp. 23-50.
172.Young, S.L. (2015). Pica. In The Oxford Companion to Sugar and Sweets, D. Goldstein (Ed.). Oxford University 
Press. pp. 531-532.
173. Young, S. L. and G. H. Pelto. (2015). Evaluative Ethnography for Maternal and Child Nutrition Interventions. 
In Ethnographic Research in Maternal and Child Health, F. Dykes and R. Flacking (Eds.). pp. 157-178.
174. Young, S.L. (2015). Pica: A biocultural approach to curious and compelling cravings. In Understanding and 
Applying Medical Anthropology, P. Brown & S. Closser (Eds.). pp. 58-72. 
175. Young, S. L. and G. H. Pelto. (2011). Core Concepts in Nutritional Anthropology. In Nutritional Health: 
Strategies for Disease Prevention. T. Wilson and N. Temple (Eds.). Humana Press. pp. 523-537.
176. Young S.L. (2007). Evidence for the Consumption of the Inedible: Who, what, when, where, and why. In 
Consuming the Inedible: Cross-disciplinary approaches. J. MacClancy, J. Henry, and H. MacBeth (Eds.). Berghahn 
Press. pp. 17-30.
 of 
16
39

177. Young, S. L. (2007). A Vile Habit? The Potential Biological Consequences of Geophagia, with special attention 
to iron. In Consuming the Inedible: Cross-disciplinary approaches. J. MacClancy, J. Henry, and H. MacBeth (Eds.). 
Berghahn Press. pp. 67-79.
178. Young, S. L. and G. H. Pelto. (2005). Core Concepts in Nutritional Anthropology. In Nutritional Health: 
Strategies for Disease Prevention. T Wilson and N. Temple (Eds.). Humana Press. pp. 425-437.
DISSERTATION & THESES
179. Young, S.L. (2008). A biocultural study of the relationship between pica and anemia. PhD Dissertation in 
Nutritional Sciences. Cornell University.
180. Young, S. L. (2002). “Listen, Without Blood There is No Life”: An ethnography of anemia during pregnancy 
in Pemba, Zanzibar. MA Thesis in Medical Anthropology. University of Amsterdam. 
181. Young S. L. (1999). Religious Conversion by Dogon Women: A strategy for reproductive success? BA Honors 
Thesis. University of Michigan.
POLICY BRIEF
Slaymaker, T., Johnston, R., Young, S.L., Miller, J.,* & Staddon, C. (2020). Detailed Review of a Recent Publication: 
An innovative measure of the experience of water insecurity can help identify vulnerable households and 
evaluate interventions. UNC Water Institute - WaSH Policy Research Digest. https://waterinstitute.unc.edu/files/
2020/07/Issue_15_final.pdf
REPORT
United Nations Standing Committee on Nutrition. Ringler, C., Dias, P., Chase, C., Choufani, J., Lundqvist, J., 
Barron, J., Dickens, C., Mateo-Sagasta, J., McCartney, M., Young, S.L., & de Souza, M. (2020). Water and nutrition: 
Harmonizing actions for the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition and the United Nations Water Action 
Decade. https://www.unscn.org/uploads/web/news/document/Water-Paper-EN-WEB-2mar.pdf
CLINICAL GUIDELINES
Young, S.L. and Cox, J. (2015, revised 2018, 2020) UptoDate entry on Pica. UptoDate is a subscription medical 
reference used by 1,100,000 million clinicians in 180 countries and almost 90% of academic medical centers in the 
United States. *Recognized as “Outstanding Author” for 2016.
OPEDs
Young, SL. (2022) Invisible no more— Bringing a Human Voice to Water Insecurity. Newsweek. https://
www.newsweek.com/invisible-no-morebringing-human-voice-water-insecurity-opinion-1757132
Young, S.L. & Lucks, J.B. (2021). What’s Really in Your Water? Rapid at-home tests for contaminants are on the 
way. Scientific American. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/whats-really-in-your-water/
Miller, J.* & Young, S.L. (2020). 'Wash your hands and stay home' is impossible for millions. The Hill.  
Young, S.L. (2019). The risks of water insecurity. Scientific American. https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/
observations/the-risks-of-water-insecurity/
Young, S.L. (2019). How often do you worry about water? U.S. News & World Report. https://www.usnews.com/
news/best-countries/articles/2019-03-20/commentary-a-better-way-to-measure-household-water-insecurity
Young, S.L. (2018). US water security falls short. The Hill. https://thehill.com/opinion/energy-environment/
417229-us-water-security-falls-short
 of 
17
39

C O N F E R E N C E  P O S T E R S ,  P R E S E N TAT I O N S ,  &  PA N E L S  
 (**Graduate/medical student advisee, *Undergraduate advisee, ^Post-doctoral advisee)
182.Bethancourt H^, Frongillo E, Young SL. Global Health Insights from Experiential Measures of Water 
Insecurity. Gallup World Poll Global Insights, October 2022.
183. Bethancourt H^, Frongillo E, Young SL. “Household water insecurity is positively associated with household 
food insecurity in low- and middle-income countries.” UNC Water Institute, October 2022. Oral session. 
184.Tallman P, Workman C, Brogan J, Steiner C, Miller J, Bethancourt H, Young S. “Measuring human experiences 
with water to reveal disparities, inform policy, and prioritize action: The Water Insecurity Experiences Scales” 
UNC Water Institute, October 2022. Side event.
185. Thavarajah W, Mbullo PM**, Awuor DR, Kiprotich K, Aggarwal R*, Lucks JB, Young SL.  “The accuracy and 
usability of point-of-use flﬂuoride biosensors: a field study in Nakuru County, Kenya. UNC Water Institute, 
October 2022. Oral session.
186. “Valuing human experiences with water to reveal disparities, prioritize action” and “Water Security Data: 
going beyond collection to making impact”. Stockholm World Water Week, Sweden, August 2022. Oral session.
187. With Asian Development Bank “Mainstreaming Water and Sanitation Resilience Where It Matters Most: 
Supporting Water and Sanitation Entities on the Ground in Asia and the Pacific; Pinpointing WASH resilience 
needs by measuring human experiences with water”. Bangkok, Thailand, August 2022. Oral session.
188. “The Water Insecurity Experiences Scales” World Water Forum, Senegal, July 2022.
189. Bethancourt H^, Frongillo E, Young SL. “Water Insecurity is Positively Associated with Food Insecurity in 
Low- and Middle-Income Countries”. American Society for Nutrition, June 2022. 
190. Bethancourt H^, Frongillo E, Young SL. “Water Insecurity is Positively Associated with Food Insecurity in 
Low- and Middle-Income Countries”. International Fund for Rural Development. Rome, May 2022. Oral Session.
191. Young SL, Bethancourt H^, Melgar-Quinonez H, Frongillo, E. Experiences of water insecurity in half the 
world’s population. UNC Water Institute, October 2021. Oral session.
192. Young SL, Bethancourt H^, Melgar-Quinonez H, Frongillo, E. Benchmarking water security experiences 
globally: implications for health and food. Stockholm World Water Week, August 2021. Invited session.
193. Bethancourt H^, Frongillo E, Young S. Water Insecurity Is Prevalent and Associated With Constrained Food 
Choices in Low- and Middle-Income Countries. American Society for Nutrition, June 2021.
194. Miller JM, Young SL, Bryan E, Ringler C. Household water insecurity is common and associated with higher 
odds of hunger and lower dietary diversity across households in rural sub-Saharan Africa and Nepal. American 
Society for Nutrition, June 2021.
195. Rickman R, Lane C, Collins S, Miller J, Nichols A, Foster S, Young, S.L., et al. Disentangling the Role of HIV 
Exposure on Linear Growth Among Mother-Infant Dyads in Western Kenya: A Comparison of Three Growth 
Models. American Society for Nutrition, June 2021.
196. Hannah, D., Krause, S., Young, S.L., et al.  Handwashing and water security in the context of a pandemic. 
Session ITS1.1/NP0.2 European Geosciences Union 2021. 
197. Bakker, K., Edwardes, A., Mondardini, R., Young, S.L., et alia. How big data, citizen science data, and survey 
data can be effective in monitoring progress and decision-making around SDG 6 (ensuring availability and 
sustainable management of water and sanitation for all). United Nations World Data Forum. Bern, Switzerland. 
October 2020. (Oral session)
198. Young, S. L. et alia. Metropolitan & Household Water Insecurity: Novel Tools for Achieving SDG 6. 
Stockholm World Water Week. Stockholm, Sweden. September 2020. (Oral session) https://
www.ipr.northwestern.edu/our-work/research-tools-apps/water-insecurity/index.html
 of 
18
39

199. Miller, J.M.* & Young, S.L. The Household Water Insecurity Experiences (HWISE) Scale:  
Implications for Nutrition & Agriculture. Water Scarcity in Agriculture at the Food and Agriculture Organization. 
Rome, Italy. September 2020. (Oral presentation)
200. Young, S.L., Rosinger, A., Jamaluddine, Z., & Ringler, C. Household Water Insecurity and its Importance for 
Ensuring Food, Nutrition and Well-Being. American Society for Nutrition. June 2020. (Plenary session)
201. Young, S.L. & Staddon, C. The Household Water Insecurity Experiences Scale: a simple questionnaire for 
generating high-resolution data on water security. Cairo Water Week. Cairo, Egypt. October 2019. (Oral 
presentation)
202. Young, S.L., Whinner, J., Miller, J.,* Staddon, C., & HWISE Research Coordination Network. Development of 
a cross-culturally validated scale to measure household water insecurity experiences and implementation in 
urban, cholera-prone areas of Lusaka, Zambia. Water and Health Conference. Chapel Hill, NC. October 2019. 
(Oral presentation)
203. Young, S.L. Development and testing of a household water insecurity measure that is equivalent across 
countries. Agriculture, Nutrition & Health Academy Annual Meeting. Hyderabad, India. June 2019. (Oral 
presentation)
204. Balka, S.,* Santoso, M.V.,** Bezner Kerr, R., & Young, S.L. A Participatory Investigation of Dietary Diversity 
Amplifies Knowledge Coproduction and Participant Involvement in an Agroecological Intervention in Rural 
Tanzania. American Society for Nutrition. Baltimore, MD. June 2019. (Oral presentation)
205. Santoso, M.V.,** Bezner Kerr, R., Kassim, N., Martin, H., Mtinda, E., Mtei, K., & Young, S.L. Production 
Diversity, Men's Help with Household Tasks, & Lower Women's Depression Mediate Impact of an Agriculture 
Intervention on Child's Dietary Diversity in Tanzania. American Society for Nutrition. Baltimore, MD. June 2019. 
(Oral presentation)
206. Wang, M.,* Miller, J.,* Collins, S.,** Santoso, M.V.,** Wekesa, P., Onono, M., Gandhi, M., & Young, S.L. 
Increased Social Support Mitigates the Negative Impact of Food Insecurity on Antiretroviral Adherence Among 
Postpartum Women in Western Kenya. American Society for Nutrition. Baltimore, MD. June 2019. (Poster 
presentation)
207. Cramer, J., Jallow, M., Miller, J.D.,* & Young, S.L. Geophagy in The Gambia: An exploration of the motivators 
for eating earth among men and women. Human Biology Association. Cleveland, OH. March 2019. (Poster 
presentation)
208. Benzaken, C.,* Miller, J.D.,* Smith, A., & Young, S.L. Higher maternal depression is associated with lower 
vaccination adherence among infants in western Kenya. Human Biology Association. Cleveland, OH. March 2019.  
(Poster presentation)
209. Young, S.L. & HWISE RCN. Development & Uses of a Transdisciplinary Scale To Measure Household Water 
Insecurity. AAAS. Washington, DC. February 2019. (Oral presentation)
210. Murnane, P., Miller, J.,* Collins, S.,** Neilands, T., Cohen, C., Laudenslager, M., Weiser, S., Onono, M., & 
Young, S.L. Food insecurity is associated with postpartum stress in Kenyan women of mixed HIV status. AIDS 
Conference. Amsterdam, Netherlands. July 2018. (Poster presentation.)
211. Harris, J.,* Santoso, M.,** Bezner Kerr, R., Kassim, M., Mollay, C., Martin, H., Mtei, K., Kalonga, J., Mtinda, E., 
& Young, S.L. A Women’s Hours of Household and Non-farming Work, But Not Agriculture Work, is Positively 
Associated with Child’s Dietary Diversity Scores in Rural Tanzania. American Society of Nutrition Annual 
Meeting. Boston, MA. June 2018. **Finalist for the American Society for Nutrition’s Emerging Leaders in Global 
Nutrition Poster Competition (Poster presentation) 
212. Lin, A.,* Santoso, M.,** Collins, S.,** Bezner Kerr, R., Kassim, M., Mollay, C., Martin, H., Mtei, K., Kalonga, J., 
Mtinda, E., & Young, S.L. He said, she said: intra-household disparities in water insecurity experiences between 
men and women in Tanzania. American Society of Nutrition Annual Meeting. Boston, MA. June 2018. (Poster 
presentation) 
 of 
19
39

213. Smith, S.,* Santoso, M.,** Bezner Kerr, R., Kassim, M., Mollay, C., Martin, H., Mtei, K., Kalonga, J., Mtinda, E., 
& Young, S.L. Timely participatory dissemination improves study implementation and data interpretation: 
lessons from an agriculture and nutrition participatory study in Tanzania. American Society of Nutrition Annual 
Meeting. Boston, MA. June 2018. (Poster presentation) 
214. Olmos, S.,* Santoso, M.,** Garigipati, P.,* Benzaken, C.,* Beck, A.,* Umuhire, E.,* & Young, S.L. Systematic 
literature review of the relationship between women’s empowerment and child nutrition indicates women’s 
empowerment is important but poorly defined and measured. American Society of Nutrition Annual Meeting. 
Boston, MA. June 2018. (Poster presentation) 
215. Hassan, B.,* Santoso, M.,** Bezner Kerr, R., Kassim, M., Mollay, C., Martin, H., Mtei, K., Kalonga, J., Mtinda, 
E., & Young, S.L. Male attendance at antenatal care clinic visits is not associated with involvement in childcare of 
child dietary diversity in Singida, Tanzania. American Society of Nutrition Annual Meeting. Boston, MA. June 
2018. (Poster presentation)  
216. Clark, K.,* Santoso, M.,** Miller, J.,* Collins, S.,* Onono, M., & Young S.L. Food insecurity is positively 
associated with infant morbidity symptoms at three months of age in Nyanza, Kenya. American Society of 
Nutrition Annual Meeting. Boston, MA. June 2018. (Poster presentation) 
217. Santoso, M.,** Bezner Kerr, R., Kassim, M., Mollay, C., Martin, H., Mtei, K., Kalonga, J., Mtinda, E., & Young, 
S.L. Food insecurity exacerbates depression among women more than among men in rural Tanzania. American 
Society of Nutrition Annual Meeting. Boston, MA. June 2018. **Finalist for the American Society for Nutrition’s 
Emerging Leaders in Global Nutrition Poster Competition at ASN (Oral presentation)
218. Santoso, M.,** Bezner Kerr, R., Kassim, M., Mollay, C., Martin, H., Mtei, K., Kalonga, J., Mtinda, E., & Young, 
S.L. A Participatory Agroecological Intervention Amongst Rural Tanzanian Farmers Increases Crop Diversity, 
Food Security, and Maternal Dietary Diversity: A Midline Evaluation. Agriculture for Nutrition and Health 
Academy Week. Accra, Ghana. June 2018. (Oral presentation)
219. Young, S.L. & HWISE Research Coordination Network. Development and testing of a household water 
insecurity measure that is equivalent across countries. Agriculture for Nutrition and Health Academy Week. 
Accra, Ghana. June 2018. (Oral presentation)
220.Young, S.L. & Miller, J.* Medicine beneath your feet: A biocultural examination of the risks and benefits of 
geophagy. Clay Minerals Society. Urbana-Champaign, IL. June 2018. (Oral presentation)
221. Young, S.L. & Miller, J.* The Household Water Insecurity Experiences (HWISE) Scale: A Cross-Culturally 
Valid Tool for the Measurement of Household-Level Water Insecurity. Agricultural & Applied Economics 
Association Annual Meeting. Washington, D.C. June 2018. (Oral presentation)
222. Young, S.L. “You are alert all the time just in case you hear rumors that there is water somewhere”: Lived 
experiences of water insecurity during pregnancy and lactation in western Kenya. American Anthropological 
Association. Washington, D.C. November 2017. (Oral presentation.)
223. Blacker, L.*, Santoso, M.V.**, Harnett, L.*, Kassim, N., Mollay, C., Martin, H., Mtinda, E., Mtei, K., Kalonga, J., 
Bezner Kerr, R., Young, S.L. Household food insecurity and gender inequity are associated with high prevalence 
of maternal depression amongst female farmers in rural Tanzania. Experimental Biology. Chicago, IL. April 2017. 
**Received Second Place in the American Society for Nutrition’s Emerging Leaders in Nutrition Poster 
Competition (Poster presentation.)
224. Collins, S.M.**, Miller, J.D.*, Mbullo, P., Boateng, G.O.^, Wekesa, P., Onono, M., Young, S.L. “You take the cash 
meant for beans and you buy water” : The multi-faceted consequences of water insecurity for pregnant and 
postpartum women of mixed HIV status. Experimental Biology. Chicago, IL. April 2017. (Poster presentation.)
225. Boateng, G.O.^, Onono, M., Collins, S.M.**, Baughan, E.*, Wekesa, P., Familiar, I., Widen, E.M., Young, S.L. 
Early childhood learning activities buffer adverse effects of HIV exposure on infant cognitive development: a 
longitudinal study. Experimental Biology. Chicago, IL. April 2017. (Poster presentation.) **Received First Place in 
the American Society for Nutrition’s Emerging Leaders in Nutrition Poster Competition
 of 
20
39

226. Boateng, G.O.^, Collins, S.M.**, Mbullo, P., Wekesa, P., Krumdieck, N.R., Johnson, M., Onono, M., Neilands, 
T.B., Young, S.L. A novel tool for the assessment of household water insecurity: scale development and validation 
in western Kenya. Experimental Biology. Chicago, IL. April 2017. (Poster presentation.)
227. Collins, S.M.**, Widen, E.M.^, Santoso, M.V.**, Martin, S.L., Hoke, M.K., Tuthill, E.L.^, Wekesa, P., Boateng, 
G.O.^, Onono. M., Young, S.L. Biological and psychosocial determinants of sustained exclusive breastfeeding 
among women of mixed HIV status in Western Kenya. Human Biology Association. New Orleans, LA. April, 
2017. (Poster presentation.)
228. Miller, J.*, Boateng, G.^, Collins, S.**, Wekesa, P., Onono, M. Young, S.L.  Perinatal geophagy is associated 
with HIV and anemia among women in western Kenya. Human Biology Association. New Orleans, LA. April 
2017. (Poster presentation.) **Won Hilde Spielvogel Award for Outstanding Presentation by an Undergraduate 
Student 
229. Boateng, G.O.^, Onono, M., Baughan, E.*, Collins, S.M. **, Young, S.L. Food insecurity and HIV exposure are 
deleterious to infant cognitive development. Human Biology Association. New Orleans, LA. April 2017. (Oral 
presentation.)
230. Pebsworth, PA.**, Young, SL., Huffman, MA. Can geophagy alter the feeding ecology of non-human 
primates?: A systematic literature review. The International Primatological Society and the American Society of 
Primatologists. Chicago, IL. August 2016. (Oral presentation.) 
231. Familiar, I., Collins, S. **, Sikorskii, A., Ruisenor, H., Achidri, D., Achola, H., Onen, D., Boivin, M., Young, SL. 
Predictors of neurocognitive outcomes among a cohort of 12-month old infants from Uganda of mixed HIV 
exposure. The International AIDS Conference. Durban, South Africa. July 2016. (Poster presentation.)
232. Widen, E.**, Collins, S.**, Wekesa, P., Krumdieck, N.**, Onono, M., Young, SL. Newly Diagnosed HIV is 
Associated with Lower Rates of Gestational Weight Gain and Loss of Mid-Upper Arm Circumference among 
Pregnant Kenyan Women. Experimental Biology. San Diego, CA. April 2016. (Oral presentation.)
233. Tsai, I.*, Krumdieck, N.**, Collins, S.**, Widen, EM.**, Wekesa, P., Onono, M., Young, SL. Food Insecurity is 
Associated with Depression and Stress Among a Cohort of Pregnant Kenyan Women of Mixed HIV Status. 
Experimental Biology. San Diego, CA. April 2016. (Poster presentation.) **Received Second Place in the American 
Society for Nutrition’s Emerging Leaders in Nutrition Poster Competition
234. Miller, JD.*, Collins, S.**, Krumdieck, NR.**, Wekesa, P., Onono, M., Young, SL. Pica is Associated with Lower 
Hemoglobin Concentration in a Cohort of Pregnant Kenyan Women of Mixed HIV Status. Experimental Biology. 
San Diego, CA. April 2016. (Poster presentation.)
235. Hong, JJ.*, Martey, E.*, Dumas, SE.**, Young, SL., Travis, AJ. Physical, Economic, and Social Limitations to 
Egg Consumption in Luangwa Valley, Zambia. Experimental Biology. San Diego, CA. April 2016. (Poster 
presentation.)
236. Maranga, A.*, Dumas, SE.**, Mbullo, PE., Wekesa, P., Collins, S.**, Onono, M., Young, SL. Perceived Benefits 
of Livestock Ownership among Female Smallholder Farmers of Mixed HIV Status in Nyanza Province, Kenya. 
Experimental Biology. San Diego, CA. April 2016. (Oral and poster presentations.) **Received First Place in the 
American Society for Nutrition’s Emerging Leaders in Nutrition Poster Competition
237. Martin, S., Collins, S.**, Natamba, BK.**, Achidri, D., Widen, EM.**, Young, SL. Perceived breastmilk 
insufficiency and HIV are key predictors of exclusive breastfeeding at 1 and 3 months among mothers in northern 
Uganda. Experimental Biology. San Diego, CA. April 2016. (Oral and poster presentations.)
238. Krumdieck, N.**, Collins, S.**, Wekesa, P., Onono, M., Young, SL. Just how much household water insecurity 
do pregnant Kenyan women of mixed HIV status experience?: The need for a validated scale. Water and Health 
Conference: Where Science Meets Policy, UNC Chapel Hill.  October 2015. (Poster presentation.)
239. Williams, A.,** Chantry, C., Young, S.L., Null, C., Stewart, C. Breastmilk Vitamin B12 Concentration are 
inadequate, but are not associated with reported recent animal source food or vitamin B12 intake among lactating 
women in rural Kenya. Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine, Los Angeles CA. October 2015. (Oral presentation.)
 of 
21
39

240. Young, SL, Koss, C., Natureeba, P., Plenty, A., Charlebois, E., Nyafwono, D., Clark, T., Cohan, D., Kamya, M., 
Havlir, D. Food insecurity is associated with lack of sustained viral suppression among HIV-Infected pregnant 
and breastfeeding Ugandan women.” AIDS Impact. Amsterdam, the Netherlands. July 2015. (Oral presentation.)
241. Collins S,** Natamba BK,** Arbach A,** Widen EM,** Desai P,* Khan H,* Griffiths JK, Young SL. Alcohol Use 
Among Pregnant Ugandan Women of Mixed HIV Status is Associated with Social Environment and Food 
Insecurity. Experimental Biology. Boston, MA. March 2015. (Poster presentation.)
242. Dumas SE,** Oyier B, Otticha S, Arbach A,** Zheng A,* Desai P,* Khan H,* Onono M, Young SL. Perceived 
Causes and Consequences of Food Insecurity During Pregnancy and Lactation among Kenyan Women of Mixed 
HIV Status. Experimental Biology. Boston, MA. March 2015. (Poster presentation.)
243. Natamba BK,** Mehta S, Mou S,* Ghosh S, Stoltzfus RJ, Griffiths JK, Young SL. Social Support Modifies 
Bidirectional Linkages Between Food Insecurity and Prenatal Depressive Symptoms while Domestic Violence 
Alters the Unidirectional Impact of Food Insecurity on Prenatal Depressive Symptoms. Experimental Biology. 
Boston, MA. March 2015. (Oral presentation.)
244. Roy A,** Fuentes-Afflﬂick E, Fernald L, Young SL. Pica is prevalent and strongly associated with iron 
deficiency, but not anemia, among Mexican-born pregnant women living in the United States. Experimental 
Biology. Boston, MA. March 2015. (Poster presentation.)
245. Santoso MV,** Larkin H,* Chung YB, Ota V, Bezner Kerr RN, Young SL. Sub-Optimal Infant and Young Child 
Feeding (IYCF) Practices in Singida, Tanzania are Associated with Food Insecurity. Experimental Biology. Boston, 
MA. March 2015. (Poster presentation.)
246. Schuster RC,** de Sousa O, Reme A, Pinault D, Young SL. Evaluative ethnography is useful for 
understanding the impact pathways of performance- based incentives on health worker motivation. Experimental 
Biology. Boston, MA. March 2015. (Poster presentation.)
247. Widen EM,** Natamba BK,** Collins S,** Khan H,* Sirotin N, Ghosh S, Griffiths JK, Young SL. Maternal Food 
Insecurity is Associated with Loss of Fat, but not Lean Mass during Lactation among Ugandans of Mixed-HIV 
Status. Experimental Biology, Boston, MA. March 2015. (Oral presentation.)
248. Williams, A.,** Chantry, C., Young, S.L., Null, C., Stewart, C. Breastmilk Vitamin B12 Concentration is Low 
among Women in Western Kenya and is Not Associated with Animal Source Food Intake or Food Insecurity. 
Experimental Biology, Boston, MA. March 2015. (Poster presentation.)
249.Young, S.L., Dumas, S.,** Oyier, B., Otticha, S., Arbach, A.*, Zheng, A.,* Desai, P.,* Onono, M. Food insecurity 
during pregnancy and lactation: Kenyan women’s experiences of vulnerability and strategies for resilience. 
Society for Applied Anthropology, Pittsburgh, PA, March 2015. (Oral presentation.)
250. Schuster RC,** de Sousa O., Vopelak C.,** McMahon D,* Pinault D., Young SL. The women have trust in me, 
and I try to live up to this trust: Health worker motivation and workplace characteristics among facility- and 
community-based health workers in rural Mozambique. American Public Health Association Annual Meeting, 
New Orleans, LA, November 2014. (Oral presentation.)
251. Schuster R.C.,** de Sousa O., Vopelak C.,** McMahon D.,* Pinault D, Young SL. Motivation and workplace 
characteristics among facility- and community-based health workers in rural Mozambique to inform a 
performance-based incentive intervention. Global Symposium on Health Systems Research, Cape Town, South 
Africa, September 2014. (Poster presentation.)
252. McDermid, J., Spraggon, V., Oyier, B., Otticha, S., Onono, M., Young, S.L. Appetite sensation scores and 
dietary intake of pregnant and lactating women in western Kenya. Experimental Biology, San Diego, CA, April 
2014. (Poster presentation.)
253. Natamba, B.,** Oyok, T., Achan, J., Mou, S.,* Ghosh, S., Sirotin, N., Stoltzfus, R.J., Griffiths, J., Young, S.L. 
Maternal food insecurity, anemia, and social support are independently associated with prenatal depression 
among HIV-positive and –negative women attending antenatal services in northern Uganda. Experimental 
Biology, San Diego, CA, April 2014. (Poster presentation.)
 of 
22
39

254. Finkelstein, J., Plenty, A., Mehta, S., Natureeba, P., Clark, T., Kamya, M., Charlebois, E., Cohan, D., Havlir, D., 
Young, S.L. Anemia, vitamin B12, and folate statuses during pregnancy, and their association with obstetric 
outcomes among HIV-infected Ugandan women receiving ART. Experimental Biology, San Diego, CA, April 2014. 
(Poster presentation.)
255. Dickin, K., Seim, G.,* Young, S.L., Wawire, S., Martin, L. Challenges and Facilitators for Implementing 
Prenatal Calcium Supplementation to Prevent Preeclampsia: Formative Research with Health Care Providers and 
Women in Kenya. Experimental Biology, San Diego, CA, April 2014. (Oral presentation.)
256. Tuthill, E.,** Young, S.L. Appropriate Methodologies for Mapping the Biocultural Determinants of Infant 
Feeding Practices in the Context of HIV in Limited-Resource Settings. American Anthropological Association, 
Chicago, IL, Nov 2013. (Oral presentation.)
257.Tuthill, E.,** McGrath, J., Young, S.L. Commonalities and differences in infant feeding attitudes and practices 
in the context of HIV in Sub-Saharan Africa: a Metasynthesis. AIDS Impact, Barcelona, Spain, October 2013. (Oral 
presentation.)
258. Jones, A.D., Ngure, F.M., Pelto, G., Young, S.L. What are we assessing when we measure food security?: A 
compendium and review of current metrics. First International Conference on Global Food Security. 
Noordwijkerhout, the Netherlands, September 2013. (Oral presentation.)
259. Powell, B., Bezner-Kerr, R., Young, S., Johns, T. The importance of biodiversity for dietary diversity and 
nutrition: perspectives of small-scale farmers in rural Tanzania. Agriculture, Food, and Human Values Society. 
East Lansing, MI, June 2013. (Oral presentation.)
260. Lumish, R.,* Young, S.L., Lee, S., Cooper, E, Pressman, E, O’Brien, K.O. Pica behavior is prevalent and 
associated with low iron status in pregnant adolescents. Experimental Biology, Boston, MA, April 2013. (Poster 
presentation.)
261. Nagata, J.M., Fiorella, K.J., Young, S.L., Weiser, S.D., Bukusi, E.A., Cohen, C.R. Social determinants of BMI 
and food insecurity among adults living with HIV/AIDS in Nyanza Province, Kenya. University of California 
Global Health Day, University of California, Riverside, February 2013. (Poster presentation.)
262.Williams, A.,** Chantry, C., Geubbels, E., Ramaiya, A.,* Shemdoe, A., Young, S. Food insecurity is negatively 
associated with exclusive breastfeeding in Tanzania: a cross-sectional study among HIV-positive women. 
International AIDS Conference, Washington, D.C. July 2012. (Poster presentation.)
263. Young, S.L., Natamba, B.K.,** Luwedde, F.A., Plenty, A.H.J.,  Mwesigwa, J., Natureeba, P., Osterbauer, B., 
Achan, J., Clark, T.D., Ades, V. Nzarubara,B.K., Ruel, T.D. Kamya, M., Charlebois, E.D., Havlir, D.V., Cohan, D. 
Severe household food insecurity is highly prevalent and associated with suboptimal breastfeeding practices 
among HIV-infected women in rural Uganda. International AIDS Conference, Washington, D.C. July 2012. (Oral 
presentation.)
264. Seim, G., Ahn, C., Bodis, M., Tako, E., Miller, D., Glahn, R., Young, S. The concentration of iron in Zanzibari 
geophagic earth is high but its in vitro bioavailability is low and it inhibits the bioavailability of dietary iron in an 
in vitro digestion/Caco-2 Cell model. 16th International Symposium on Iron Nutrition and Interactions in Plants, 
Amherst, MA June, 2012. (Poster presentation.)
265. Natamba, B.,** Robine, M.,* Luwedde, F., Mwesigwa, J., Natureeba, P., Osterbauer, B., Ades, V., Clark, T. 
Charlebois, E., Plenty, A., Havlir, D., Cohan, D., Achan, J., Young, S. Breastfeeding practices and beliefs among 
HIV+ pregnant and lactating women on antiretroviral therapy in rural Uganda indicate obstacles to following 
national guidelines. Experimental Biology, San Diego, CA April 2012. (Poster presentation.)
266. Seim, G.,* Ahn, C.,* Bodis, M., Tako, E., Miller, D., Glahn, R., Young, S. The concentration of iron in Zanzibari 
geophagic earth is high but its in vitro bioavailability is low and it inhibits the bioavailability of dietary iron in an 
in vitro digestion/Caco-2 Cell model. Experimental Biology, San Diego, CA April 2012. (Poster presentation.)
267. Phillips, E.L., Pelletier, D., Gervais, S., Stoltzfus, R., Young, S., Michaud, L. Using Program Impact Pathways 
to Improve Anemia Reduction Programs. Experimental Biology, San Diego, CA April 2012. (Oral presentation.)
 of 
23
39

268. Phillips, E.L., Pelletier, D., Gervais, S., Stoltzfus, R., Young, S., Michaud, L. The Use of Mixed Methods 
Evaluation for Effective Program Scale up. Experimental Biology, San Diego, CA April 2012. (Poster presentation.)
269. Cohan, D.L., Young, S.L., Murray, K., Mwesigwa, J, Achan, J, Ades, V, Charlebois, ED, Ruel, T, Kamya, MR, 
Havlir, DV. Maternal Nutritional Status Predicts Adverse Birth Outcomes among HIV-infected Rural Ugandan 
Women Receiving Combination Antiretroviral Therapy.  Abstract presented at CROI March, 2012. (Evaluated on 
Faculty of 1000: http://f1000.com/14267262#eval15779446) (Poster presentation.)
270. Achan J., Ikezeki G., Kakuru A., Murray K., Young S., Havlir D., Kamya M., Charlebois E., Ruel T. HIV-
infected Ugandan children suffer high rates of malnutrition and minimal recovery following the initiation of 
antiretroviral therapy. International AIDS Society, Rome, Italy. July, 2011. (Oral presentation.)
271. Chantry C.J., Young S., Ngonyani M., Israel-Ballard K., Peerson, J., Nyambo, M., Rennie, W., Dewey, K.G.  
Feasibility of Flash-heating breastmilk to reduce maternal to child transmission of HIV. American Public Health 
Association. Denver, CO. November, 2010. (Poster presentation.)
272. Young, S.L., Chantry, C., Ngonyani, M., Israel-Ballard, K., Ash, D., Nyambo, M. Flash-heating breastmilk is 
feasible in Dar es Salaam Tanzania. International Congress of Nutrition. Bangkok, Thailand. October, 2009. (Poster 
presentation.) ** Selected as Distinguished Poster.
273. Nyambo, M., Ash, D., Ngonyani, M., Young, S.L., Israel-Ballard, K., Chantry, C. Feasibility of Reducing 
MTCT-HIV by Flash-heating breast milk. Medical Women’s International Association. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. 
August, 2009. (Poster presentation.)
274. Young, S., Israel-Ballard, K., Leshabari, S., Maternowska, C., Turuka, E., Mallya, D., Maisho, C., Ash, D., 
Nyambo, M., Chantry, C. Flash-heating Breastmilk To Reduce MTCT-HIV: Successes And Challenges. Global 
Health Council. Washington DC, May 2009. ** Selected as part of the New Investigator in Global Health Program 
(Poster presentation.)
275. Chantry C.J., Young S., Ngonyani M., Israel-Ballard K., Ash D., Nyambo M., 2009. Feasibility of Flash-heating 
breastmilk to reduce maternal to child transmission of HIV. Pediatric Academic Societies. Baltimore, MD May 
2009. (Poster presentation.)
276. Young, S., Steinmetz, A.,* Abrams, E.T.  Are food aversions protective adaptations to pregnancy? American 
Anthropological Association. Philadelphia, PA. December 2009. (Co-chair of panel “Cravings and Aversions” with 
Crystal Patil). (Oral presentation.)
277. Young, S.L., Chantry, C., Ngonyani, M., Israel-Ballard, K., Ash, D., Nyambo, M. Flash-heating breastmilk is 
feasible in Dar es Salaam Tanzania. Experimental Biology. New Orleans, Louisiana, April 2009. (Poster 
presentation.)
278. Young, S.L., Ali S. M., Wilson, M.J., Hillier, S., Rasmussen, K.M., Stoltzfus, R.J. Pica is associated with 
pregnancy, anemia and gastrointestinal distress among Zanzibari women. Bloemfontein, South Africa, October 
2008. (Oral presentation.)
279. Wilson, M. J., Hillier, S., Young, S.L. Clay Mineralogy of Geophagic Materials from Tanzania and Other 
Countries. 4th Mid-European Clay Conference, Zakopane, Poland, September 2008. (Oral presentation.)
280. Young, S.L., Hernandez Cordero, S., Branco Garcia, I., Bonvecchio Arenas, A., & Neufeld, L. M. Acceptability 
of three nutritional supplements among pregnany and lactating women in Mexico. Experimental Biology, San 
Diego, CA, April 2008. (Poster presentation.)
281. Young, S. L., Goodman, D., Farag, T. H., Ali, S. M., Khatib, M. R., Khalfan, S. S. Tielsch, J.M., Stoltzfus, R.J. 
Geophagia is not associated with Trichuris or hookworm transmission in Zanzibar, Tanzania. Experimental 
Biology, Washington DC, April 2007. (Poster presentation.)
282. Young, S.L., J.B. Lucks, G.H. Pelto. Managing 1,472 articles on pica. Strategies for hypothesis testing with a 
comprehensive literature review. Society for Anthropological Sciences. Savannah, Georgia. February 2006. (Oral 
presentation.)
 of 
24
39

283. Young, S.L. Safura [anemia], the disease of earth-eating? An investigation of the relationship of iron status to 
pica in Zanzibar. International Commission on the Anthropology of Food. Oxford, England. June 2005. (Oral 
presentation.)
284. Young, S. L. Mapping the Cultural and Physiological Components of Anemia on Pemba Island, Zanzibar.  
American Anthropological Association, Nutritional Anthropology section. Chicago, IL, November 2003. (Oral 
presentation.)
285. Young, S. L. Religious Conversion by Dogon Women: A Tactic of the Weak? Conference of the Netherlands 
African Studies Association. Leiden, the Netherlands, September 2003. (Oral presentation.)
286. Young, S. L. Straight Edge: Youth rebellion or voice of social conscience? American Midwest Sociological 
Society. Chicago, IL, April 2000. (Invited oral presentation.)
287. Young, S. L. Dogon Women’s Religious Conversion: A Strategy for improved reproductive success? 
American Anthropological Association, Anthropology of Religion. Philadelphia, PA, April 1999. (Oral 
presentation.)
T R A I N I N G
The OpEd Project :: Public Voices Fellowship — 2018-2019 
National Institute of Health’s Advanced Training Institute on Health Behavior Theory — Summer 2012
American Psychological Association’s Cyber Mentor Program for HIV research, Committee on Psychology and 
AIDS — Fall 2009-Fall 2011
Dannon Nutrition Leadership Institute — Spring 2009
New Investigator in Global Health Program, Global Health Council — Spring 2009
Cells to Society Biomarker Institute, Northwestern University — Spring 2008
T E A C H I N G
Turning your numbers into a story: A quantitative methods class, Northwestern University: Anthropology 
390-0-23/Global Health 390-0-22 — Fall 2017, Fall 2018, Fall 2019, Fall 2021
Biocultural perspectives on water insecurity, Northwestern University: Anthropology 390-0-22/Global Health 
390-0-253 — Spring 2018, Spring 2019, Spring 2020, Spring 2022 (Weinberg & NPEP), Fall 2022 (Weinberg & 
NPEP)
Ecology of Infant feeding, Northwestern University: Anthropology 390-0-32/Global Health 390-0-24 — Winter 
2017, Winter 2018, Winter 2019
Freshman Seminar, Northwestern University: Spring 2023
Undergraduate independent research, Northwestern University: Anthropology 399-0-32/Global Health 399-0-3 
— each quarter Fall 2016 to present
Undergraduate independent research, Cornell University: NS 4010 - Empirical Research; BIOG 2990; BIOG 4990 
— Fall 2012-2015
Community and International Nutrition Seminar Series, Cornell University: NS 6980 — Fall 2012, Spring 2013 
Nutrition in Developing Countries, UC Berkeley School of Public Health: Lecturer: PH 298.41 — Spring 2008 
Nutritional Problems of Developing Nations, Cornell University: Teaching Assistant: NS 306 — Spring 2004
English Literature, Special Ed, Port Huron School District, Michigan: Substitute Teacher: — Spring 2000
Secondary Level Teaching Certificate, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor: — 1999
Cultural Anthropology, Plymouth Canton High School, Michigan: Student Teacher : — Spring 1999 
 of 
25
39

AP English, Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan: Student Teacher: — Fall 1998
T E A C H I N G  AWA R D S  &  H O N O R S
Faculty Honor Roll :: Office of Undergraduate Research — 2022-2023. For mentoring 20 students to successfully 
obtain research funding.
Faculty and Administrator Honor Roll :: Associated Student Government — 2019-2020. For the course “Ecology 
of Infant and Young Child Feeding”. 
Searle Fellows Program :: Northwestern University. 2017-2018. Program for learning and implementing evidence-
based approaches to teaching. 
Sugar Award :: One Laptop Per Child — 2007. For the development of the best educational children’s software.
Student-Intern Teacher of the Year Honorable Mention :: State of Michigan — 1999. For the demonstration of 
outstanding potential as an educator.
G U E S T  L E C T U R E S
Northwestern Parents Weekend, 2022. "Making the invisible: Measuring water security”
Northwestern, 2017-2021. Guest lecture in Water in Israel and the Middle East: Resilience, Sustainability, 
and Security. “Water insecurity: Prevalence, security, and assessment.”
Cornell University, 2012, 2014. Guest lectures in graduate courses NS 6370 Topics in Nutritional Epidemiology 
and NS 6140 Maternal and Child Nutrition.
Cornell University, 2012, Cornell Health International Association. “"Craving Earth: A tale of three hypotheses"
University of California, Berkeley. Global Health. 2007, 2008, 2009*, 2010. *Voted by class as “favorite lecture of the 
semester”.
S T U D E N T S
Doctoral students, committee chair: Current: Elijah Watson (Northwestern), Margaret Butler (Northwestern), 
Patrick Mbullo (Northwestern), Past: Marianne Vicky Santoso (Cornell, graduated 2019) Roseanne Schuster 
(Cornell, graduated in 2016), Barnabas Natamba (Cornell, graduated in 2015)
Doctoral students, committee member: Current: Colleen O’Brien (Northwestern, Civil Engineering), Elizabeth 
Koselka (Northwestern, Anthropology); Past: Melissa Manus (Northwestern, graduate 2022), Betty Samburu 
(Kenyatta University, graduated 2020), Sarah Dumas (Cornell, graduated 2017), Elizabeth Fox (Cornell, 2017), 
Anne Williams (University of California, Davis, 2016), Sarah Pedersen (Cornell, 2015)
Medical students: Past: Maya Jackson-Gibson (Northwestern), Angela Arbach (Cornell Weill), Natalie Krumdieck 
(Cornell Weill), Jason Nagata (University of California, San Francisco), Alexis Steinmetz (Loyola)
Master’s students: Present: Lyra Johnson; Past: Mira Wang, Hollyn Cetrone, Allison Mark, Virginia Nowakowski, 
Shalean Collins (Tulane)
Post-doctoral fellows: Current: Hilary Bethancourt; Past: Vidya Venkataramanan, Marianne Vicky Santoso, 
Godfred Boateng, Yolanda Brooks, Katie Fiorella, Paula Pebsworth, Aditi Roy, Emily Tuthill, Elizabeth Widen 
Undergraduate students at Northwestern: Nihmotallahi Adebayo, Rahul Aggarwal, Kelly Alvarez, Samuel Balka, 
Amelia Beck, Casey Benzaken, Aidan Boleyn-Fitzgerald, Hollyn Cetrone, Cheryl Chen, Kathleen Clark, Jo Ann 
Efobi, Priyanka Garigipati, Talia Ginsberg, Maxime Godart, Ishani Gupta, Tracy Guo, Brooke Hassan, Jordan 
Harris, Luana Hillman, Lyra Johnson, Alina Junejo, Samanvi Kanugula, Aarthi Kottapalli, Amy Lin, Denise 
Lopez, Esra Maududi, Ashleigh Maclean, Erin McCotter, David McCuskey, Annika Mittu, Daniel Peters, Hayley 
Platt, Clara Oh, Sophia Olmos, Sarah Padon, Lahari Ramani, Francesca Rosen, Anna Scarbrough, Lily Settel, 
Revika Singh, Benjamin Thomae, Emilie Umuhire, Mira Wang, Julia Yeam
 of 
26
39

Undergraduate students at Cornell: Cedric Ahn, Chaele Arkfeld, Eleonore Baughan, Lauren Blacker, Corrine 
Casal, Pooja Desai, Melanie Graber, Damarys Hernandez, Josephine Hong, Jen Huang, Hijab Khan, Paige Killeala, 
Joanie Kim, Heather Larkin, Ann Lei, Janice Lin, Phoebe Lo, Rachel Lumish, Abena Maranga, Emily Martey, 
Devon McMahon, Chloe Michel, Joshua Miller, Lusine Mehrabyan, Sophie Mou, Jacqueline Rivera, Marion 
Robine, Keith Ryan, Evelyn Samuel, Gretchen Seim, Rie Seu, Santana Silver, Shanna Smith, Christina Son, Alexis 
Steinmetz, Luisa Temple, Irene Tsai, Kelechi Umoga, Shiliu Wang, Tingting Wu, Amy Zheng
F I E L D  R E S E A R C H ,  B Y  T O P I C
Food and water insecurity:
We Are Water Evanston :: Evanston, IL 2020-present
A community-based participatory research project led by Citizens’ Greener Evanston to understand water 
insecurity and how water is valued in and around Evanston (https://greenerevanston.org/we-are-water). This 
resulted in an 8-part series in the local paper about water in Evanston: https://evanstonroundtable.com/
2021/09/20/we-are-water-evanston-about-this-series/
Individual Water Insecurity Experiences (IWISE) Scale :: 31 countries :: Northwestern University, UNESCO, 
Gallup World Poll 2019-present
A collaboration to refine and validate a scale to measure water insecurity at the individual level.
Household Water Insecurity Experiences (HWISE) Scale :: 26 sites worldwide :: Northwestern University — 
2016-2019
A 28-site, multi-partner collaboration to design and refine a novel cross-culturally validated household water 
insecurity scale, as well as the development of a scale implementation manual (http://sites.northwestern.edu/
hwise/). 
Health Consequences of Water Insecurity for HIV+ Women & Their Infants :: Kisumu, Kenya :: Northwestern 
University, Kenyan Medical Research Institute, and Family AIDS Care and Education Services, — 2016-present
An observational study of the consequences of water insecurity for adverse maternal and infant health outcomes 
among a cohort of HIV-infected and uninfected pregnant and lactating women in western Kenya.
Singida Nutrition and Agroecology Project :: Singida, Tanzania :: Cornell University, Northwestern University, 
Action Aid Tanzania, Nelson Mandela Agricultural Institution of Science and Technology 2014— present
We are assessing if a participatory educational intervention about nutrition, climate change, agroecology, and 
gender equity that we co-created with rural farmers in E. Africa improves women’s empowerment, food 
insecurity, and infant feeding practices in Singida, Tanzania.
Health Consequences of Food & Nutrition Insecurity for HIV+ Women & Their Infants :: Kisumu, Kenya :: 
Northwestern University, Cornell University, Kenyan Medical Research Institute,  and Family AIDS Care and 
Education Services, — 2013-present
An observational study of the role of food insecurity in adverse maternal and infant health outcomes among a 
cohort of HIV-infected and uninfected pregnant and lactating women in western Kenya. 
Food insecurity and nutritional status of patients infected with tuberculosis and HIV in Gulu, Northern 
Uganda (The FINITH Study) :: Gulu, Uganda :: Cornell University and Gulu University — 2013-2014
A cross-sectional study of the effects of food insecurity on disease and nutritional status among adult Ugandans 
infected with TB and/or HIV.
Prenatal Nutrition And Psychosocial Health Outcomes (PreNAPs) study :: Gulu, Uganda :: Cornell University 
and Gulu University — 2012-2015
A longitudinal cohort study of the effects of food insecurity on depression, stress, and gestational weight gain 
among HIV-infected and -uninfected pregnant women.
Nutrition and HIV:
 of 
27
39

PROMOTE study (Prevention of Malaria and HIV disease in Tororo) :: Tororo, Uganda :: University of 
California, San Francisco and Makerere University — 2011-2013
Assessing and intervening to improve nutritional and obstetric outcomes among a cohort of HIV+ women 
receiving anti-retroviral therapy and their HIV-exposed infants.
Feasibility and pilot efficacy of Flash heated breastmilk to reduce pediatric HIV :: Dar es Salaam, Tanzania — 
2008-2011
Scientific coordinator of a multi-disciplinary study of the effects of home-based education on exclusive 
breastfeeding and the uptake and consequences of rapid heating of breastmilk among HIV+ women in urban 
Tanzania.
Program Development and Implementation Research:
Understanding the Barriers and Facilitators to Uptake, Provision, and Management of Prevention of Vertical 
Transmission of HIV Services in Inhassoro District, Mozambique :: Cornell University and CARE-Mozambique 
— 2012-2015.
A pilot intervention study to determine if performance based incentives can improve the quality of care provided 
to HIV-infected pregnant women.
Reaching the Hard to Reach: Documenting World Vision Haiti Mobile Clinic Best Practices :: Haiti :: Cornell 
University and World Vision — 2011
Determining best practices for reducing maternal anemia among rural women via mobile clinic services.
Maternal anemia care, program evaluation :: Pemba Island, Zanzibar, Tanzania : Cornell University/Zanzibar 
Ministry of Health— 2006
Conducted community surveys, focus group discussions and interviews with traditional and biomedical health 
care workers, private medicine retailers and pregnant women to understand how use of anemia medicine can be 
improved.
Adapting EFNEP to the changing needs of food-assistance eligible families in the era of welfare reform :: 
Qualitative Researcher : Cornell University — 2003-2004
Conducted interviews and focus group discussions with nutritional education program staff as part of a USDA-
funded multi-state research project to understand the effects of welfare reform on on nutritional status and well-
being. 
Pica
Antojitos study, the relationship between pregnancy, pica, iron status, and cognitive function :: Salinas, 
California  — 2008-2011
Primary investigator of a study of nutritional behaviors and beliefs, and their associations with iron status and 
cognitive function among pregnant Hispanic women.
Quantitative and qualitative study of non-food cravings, primary investigator :: Pemba Island, Zanzibar, 
Tanzania : Cornell University— 2004
Secured funding, hired, and trained Zanzibari fieldworkers to collect epidemiological data about consumption of 
non-food substances (pica) in 700 adults as part of a larger trial on the prevention of severe anemia (PI Rebecca 
Stoltzfus). Conducted in-depth interviews about pica (the cravings for and consumption of non-food substances) 
with community members and health care workers. Collected samples of pica substances for biochemical 
analysis.
Perceptions of anemia during pregnancy :: Pemba Island, Zanzibar, Tanzania : University of Amsterdam — 2002
Qualitative data was collected about the perceived causes, cures, and appropriateness of UNDP-supplied ferrous 
sulfate and traditional medicines for the treatment of anemia during pregnancy. Analyzed data to make 
suggestions about how traditional and biomedical treatments can be linked.
 of 
28
39

Other
Hospital Renovation, project manager :: Pemba Island, Zanzibar, Tanzania — 2001, 2003, 2005. 
Identified areas of need, raised all funds, and oversaw renovations of Mental Hospital, Maternity Ward and 
Children’s Ward.
“Down for the count in the Bijlmer” :: Interviewer : University of Amsterdam — 2002.
Censused and interviewed homeless people about drug use, health care, and general well-being in low-income 
neighborhoods in Amsterdam.
Polygyny and child mortality :: Mali, West Africa/University of Michigan —1998. 
Field manager of longitudinal biological anthropological study comparing infant mortality by family structure. 
Responsibilities included fieldworker hiring, anthropometry of 1000 0-5 year old children, household surveys, 
censusing villages, house construction,  and data organization.
R E S E A R C H  P O S I T I O N S  &  C O N S U LTA N C I E S
Asian Development Bank— 2023
Analysis on disparities in water insecurity by gender.
International Women’s Development Agency— 2022
Analysis of data on water insecurity in Tonga and the Soloman Islands.
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC)— 2009
Consulting on reports from Research and Evaluation Division of BRAC. 
Program for Appropriate Technology in Health (PATH), Washington DC — 2009
Advised on assessment of nutritional needs among HIV-positive pregnant and lactating Rwandan women. 
Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública (INSP), Cuernavaca, Mexico — 2007 
Evaluation of quantitative and qualitative data on the acceptability of micronutrient tablets, sprinkles and a fortified food to 
pregnant and lactating Oportunidades recipients.
University of Amsterdam — 2001-2006
Responsible for translation and text editing of dissertations, articles, and grant proposals. Converted four PhD manuscripts 
into books.
Kelsey Museum of Archaeology : University of Michigan— 1997-1998
Assisted with reconstruction of an ancient Greek mosaic mural, sorted and classified Etruscan coins.
Royal Museum of Central Africa : Tervuren, Belgium — 1997
Assisted with editing “Zimbabwe: Legacies of Stone Past and Present: Volume I and II”.
L A N G U A G E S
English : Dutch : French : Swahili 
I N V I T E D  TA L K S
2023 Invited lectures at the University of New South Wales, Australia; The George Institute, Sydney, Australia.
2022 Invited briefings on the Water Insecurity Experiences (WISE) Scales to: The Gap, Water.org, UNICEF’s 
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, Heineken, Xylem, Scottish Whisky Association, Asian Development Bank, 
Inter-American Development Bank, BRAC, Indigo, Stone Family Foundation, UN Economic Commission for 
Africa, US Agency for International Development, GIZ (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit), Indonesian Ministry, World Resources Institute, World Bank, One Drop Organization, 
 of 
29
39

Helvetas, Heaven Hill, Pernod Ricard, United States Department of Agriculture, Japan International Cooperation 
Agency, Stone Family Foundation, Chicago Metropolitan Water Reclamation District.
2022 Invited lectures to the Northwestern Alumni Association; University of California Davis, Department of 
Nutrition; Xylem Innovation Challenge; CDC’s NOPREN working group.
2021 “Conversations with the Dean” https://news.weinberg.northwestern.edu/2021/03/25/conversation-with-
dean-featuring-sera-young/
2021 German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety. Expert Roundtable 
“Turning the tide on data— How to collect, analyze and act on data through a multi-sector perspective?”
2020-2021 Invited briefings on the Household Water Insecurity Experiences Scale and the Individual Water 
Insecurity Experiences Scale to the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization, USAID, Oxfam, REACH, the 
International Food Policy Research Institute, Capitol Hill, World Bank, International Water Management Institute, 
Reckett Group, Danaher, Unilever, UNICEF, International Food Policy Research Institute, Global Water 
Partnership, UNESCO, FCDO, WaterAid, GAIN, 2030 Water Resources Group, Xylem, Millennium Water 
Alliance, WaterAid, Water.org, Water Keepers.
2019 Invited presentations to USAID, USDA, UK AID, Oxfam-GB, Millennium Challenge Corporation, 
International Food Policy Research Institute, Rotary International, and World Bank. “The Household Water 
Insecurity Experiences (HWISE) Scale: A cross-culturally valid tool for the measurement of water insecurity.”
University of Chicago Science Policy Group, Panel on Water Security in Chicago with MWRD Commissioner 
Debra Shore, 2019
Shirley Ryan “Learning for Life” Lecture, 2018. 
Royal Geographic Society, London, UK, 2018. “The Household Water Insecurity (HWISE) Scale: a ‘look under the 
bonnet’”. Related: https://www.rgs.org/geography/advocacy-and-impact/impact/hwise/
University of Cape Coast, Ghana, 2018. “The links between household water insecurity and food insecurity in 
sub-Saharan Africa (and the story behind how this work was funded)”
United States Agency for International Development, 2017. “The Household Water Insecurity Experiences 
(HWISE) Scale: A cross-culturally valid tool for the measurement of water insecurity.”
United Nations Commission on the Status of Women, 2017. “Food security in the first 1,000 days”.
Buffett Institute, NICO, and Institute for Policy Research, 2019. “The Household Water Insecurity Experiences 
(HWISE) Scale: A cross-culturally valid tool for the measurement of water insecurity.”
Northwestern University, 2019. “The power of breastfeeding.”
Workshop on Globalization, Northwestern University, 2018. “Health Effects of Globalization.” 
Third Annual Symposium on Water in Israel and the Middle East, Northwestern University, 2018. “The Economic, 
Health, and Psychosocial Consequences of Household Water Insecurity.”
Microgrids Symposium, Northwestern University, 2018. “Realizing the human benefits of improved energy 
access.” https://bit.ly/2rI2VC4 
Northwestern University Dumas Domain Dinner, 2017. “Water Insecurity: Understanding its Consequences and 
Identifying Solutions.”
Third Coast Center for AIDS Research. “‘If I Can’t Eat, How Can I Feed?’: Food Insecurity, HIV, and Maternal and 
Child Health.”
Program in African Studies & Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern University. October 2017. "Why is Food 
Insecurity So Harmful in the First 1,000 Days of Life? Findings from East Africa.”
Emory University, 2015. “If I can’t eat, how can I feed?’: Food and water insecurity, HIV, and maternal and child 
health.” 
 of 
30
39

University of California, San Francisco, 2012, Reproductive Infectious Diseases Seminar. “Current knowledge and 
future research areas on infant feeding in the context of HIV: Basic, clinical, behavioral, and programmatic 
perspectives.” http://bit.ly/LVfJcw and http://db.tt/Uww3XHRH
Cornell University, 2011. “Chats in the Stacks: Craving Earth.” http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-
KX2bwGAxuM
Touro University, Mare Island, California. 2010, 2011.
University of California, Davis Medical Center. Grand Rounds: Pediatrics. 2008.
University of California, San Francisco. "Local health meets global health group. 2008.
University of Illinois, at Chicago. Department of Anthropology. 2007.
W E B I N A R S
American Society for Nutrition, 2020. “Household Water Insecurity and its Importance for Ensuring Food, 
Nutrition and Well-being.” https://ondemand.nutrition.org/s/2020an/annual/ASN20-27
Engineering for Change, 2019. “A tool to measure household water insecurity globally.” https://
www.engineeringforchange.org/webinar/measuring-worlds-water-insecurity/
IMMANA, 2019. “A cross-culturally equivalent measure of household water security: experiences in scale 
development and implementation from 30 sites worldwide.” https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=juTDN7YGbCs&t=12s
International WaTERS Webinar, 2018. “‘You are alert all the time just in case you hear rumors that there is water 
somewhere’: Lived experiences of water insecurity during pregnancy and lactation in western Kenya.” https://
bit.ly/2wHr9S5
D E PA RT M E N T,  C O L L E G E ,  A N D  U N I V E R S I T Y  M E M B E R S H I P S  &  S E RV I C E
Northwestern service 
Ad hoc Tenure Committee Member for Weinberg College — 2022.
Lecture for Northwestern New York and the Northwestern University Leadership Circle at Neuberger Bergman, 
NYC “The Art and Science of Today's Social Challenges”— 2022
Institute for Policy Research, Executive Committee— 2021-present
Undergraduate Research Programs, Review Committee— 2021-present
Tenure & Promotion Committee for Global Health — 2017-present
Accelerated Master’s in Public Health Admissions Committee — 2017-present
One Book Northwestern Committee—2021-2022
Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences Committees on Academic Appeals — 2019-2022
Program in African Studies, Executive Committee — 2017-2022
Global Health Curriculum Committee — 2016-2021
Office of the Provost Research Networking Lunch, Co-leader — 2018-2020
Global Health Case Competition Judge — 2017 
Cornell service
Cornell University :: Search Committee, Master’s in Public Health Curriculum Development Committee 2016
 of 
31
39

Nutrition Graduate Student Organization :: Secretary, Social Director, Faculty Liaison, Founder and member of 
the Committee on Professional Development : Cornell University— 2003-2007
Academic Integrity Hearing Board :: Graduate Representative : Cornell University— 2004
C O M M U N I T Y  S E RV I C E
2021-present. Spearheaded the naming, renovation, and installation of a pollinator garden in Turnaround Park, 
Evanston. https://evanstonroundtable.com/2021/10/03/turnaround-park-marks-the-spot/
N AT I O N A L  &  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  P R O F E S S I O N A L  S E RV I C E
American Society for Nutrition ::  Chair, Global Nutrition Council 2020-2022; At Large Member of the Global 
Nutrition Executive Council 2014-2016; Graduate and Professional Education Executive Committee Member— 
2006-2008
Maternal and Child Nutrition :: Editorial Board 2017-present 
Advances in Global Health :: Associate Editor 2021-present 
WHO/UNICEF JMP :: Virtual Expert Group on Enhanced Monitoring of Gender in relation to SDG WASH targets 
2021
Society for Applied Anthropology :: Nominations Committee 2016-2020, Chair 2019-2020; Malinowski Award 
Selection Committee 2015-2020, Chair 2018-2019
NIH review panel :: PAR-DK-19-019: AIDS and AIDS-Related Research— 2020
Sir Henry Wellcome (UK):: Post-doctoral Fellowships Panel— 2020
Innovative Metrics in Agriculture and Nutrition (IMMANA) (UK):: Grant Review Panel — 2020, 2021
French National Institute for Agricultural Research ::  Post Agreen Skills Fund— 2020
Household Water Insecurity Experiences-Research Collaborative Network :: Executive Committee 2018-2020, 
Steering Committee 2020-2022 
Global Food Security Strategy Working Group :: 2019. Advised the USAID Bureau for Resilience and Food 
Security and the Feed the Future interagency group on the Global Food Security Strategy-Refresh.
Ad hoc reviewer :: Advances in Nutrition, African Health Sciences, African Journal of Biotechnology, African 
Journal of AIDS, AIDS and Behavior, American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, American Journal of Human Biology, 
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Appetite, 
Berghahn Books, BMC Breastfeeding Medicine,  BMC Medicine, BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, BMC Public 
Health, BMC Research Notes, BMJ Open, Clay Minerals, Climate and Development, Current Anthropology, 
Current Developments in Nutrition, Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, Global Public Health, Ecology 
of Food and Nutrition, Environmental Geochemistry and Health, Epidemiology and Infection, Evolution, 
Medicine, and Public Health, International Breastfeeding Journal, International Journal of Obesity, Journal of 
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, Journal of AIDS and Clinical Research, Journal of AIDS and HIV 
Research, Journal of Health, Population, and Nutrition, Journal of Nutrition, Journal of Tropical Ecology, Journal 
of Water & Health, Maternal and Child Health Journal, Lancet Global Health, Maternal and Child Nutrition, 
Medical Anthropology,  Medical Anthropology Quarterly, Medische Antropologie, National Research Foundation 
(South Africa), Nature Food, PLoS One, Population Health Metrics, Public Health Nutrition, Review of 
Development Economics, Rural and Remote Health, Science Translational Medicine, Scientific Research and 
Essays, Sigma Delta Epsilon/Graduate Women in Science Fellowship, Social Sciences and Humanities Research 
Council of Canada, Social Science and Medicine, Swiss National Science Foundation, Texas Biomedical Research 
Institute, Toxicology Reports, Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, UCSF’s Center 
of Excellence in Women’s Health, Water Policy, Water Research, Yearbook of Physical Anthropology
 of 
32
39

Dannon Nutrition Leadership Institute ::  President —- 2015-2017; President-elect —- 2012-2015; Treasurer — 
2010-2012 
World Food Program :: Inter-agency Task Team for Food, Nutrition, and HIV — Member 2014-2017
Food and Agriculture Organization :: High Level Panel of Experts Committee on Critical and Emerging Issues 
for Food Security and Nutrition — 2014
Society for the Anthropology of Food and Nutrition ::  Vice-President — 2012-2014; National Meeting Program 
Chair — 2010-2012
One Laptop Per Child :: Co-developer of children’s math game Kuku Anakula (http//wiki.laptop.org/go/Kuku)
— 2007 
Nutrition Graduate Student Organization :: Secretary, Social Director, Faculty Liaison, Founder and member of 
the Committee on Professional Development : Cornell University— 2003-2007
P R O F E S S I O N A L  M E M B E R S H I P S  &  A F F I L I AT I O N S
American Anthropological Association; American Society for Nutrition; Human Biology Association; Society for 
Applied Anthropology; International Society for Research in Human Milk and Lactation; Society for 
Implementation Science in Nutrition.
P R E S S  C O V E R A G E
News articles and blog coverage:
The Daily Northwestern, 2023. “Study led by Northwestern professor quantifies experiences with global water 
insecurity” https://dailynorthwestern.com/2023/01/03/campus/study-led-by-northwestern-professor-
quantifies-experiences-with-global-water-insecurity/
Erin Brokovich, 2022. https://www.thebrockovichreport.com/p/are-you-a-tap-water-avoider
Mother Jones, 2022. “America’s Food-Security Crisis Is a Water-Security Crisis, Too” https://
www.motherjones.com/food/2022/11/americas-food-security-crisis-is-a-water-security-crisis-too/ 
Axios, 2022. “Water insecurity is stressing mental health” https://www.axios.com/2022/11/17/water-insecurity-
climate-change-mental-health
El Universal (Mexico), 2022. “One in 3 households has insecurity in the access and use of water.” https://
www.eluniversal.com.mx/cartera/1-de-cada-3-hogares-mexicanos-presenta-inseguridad-en-uso-y-acceso-al-
agua-indica-estudio (This story was picked up by more than 25 news outlets in Mexico.)
Press conference with the President of Mexico’s National Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI) about 
nationally representative survey of Mexican’s experiences with water insecurity, 2022. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=uytJlVQAbh4
Helvetas, 2022. "The WISE Scales: A New Way to Measure Water Insecurity” https://www.helvetas.org/en/
switzerland/how-you-can-help/follow-us/blog/Other/The-WISE-Scales-A-New-Way-to-Measure-Water-
Insecurity
The Hill, 2022. “Solving water insecurity could be key to global hunger crisis: study” https://thehill.com/
policy/equilibrium-sustainability/3522821-solving-water-insecurity-could-be-key-to-global-hunger-crisis-study/
Planet’s Water, 2022. https://www.planetswater.com/food-insecurity-and-water-insecurity-go-hand-in-hand-
study-finds-study-suggests-water-may-be-key-to-addressing-hunger-in-low-and-middle-income-countries-
science-daily
Smart Water Magazine, 2022. https://smartwatermagazine.com/news/american-society-nutrition/food-
insecurity-and-water-insecurity-go-hand-hand-study-finds
 of 
33
39

Daily News Egypt, 2022. “Food security and water security go hand-in-hand: Study” https://
dailynewsegypt.com/2022/06/15/food-security-and-water-security-go-hand-in-hand-study/
Iagua, 2022. “La inseguridad alimentaria y la inseguridad hídrica van de la mano, según un estudio”  https://
www.iagua.es/noticias/redaccion-iagua/inseguridad-alimentaria-y-inseguridad-hidrica-van-mano-segun-
estudio
Brainfacts.org, 2022. “The Emotional weight of water stress” https://www.brainfacts.org/thinking-sensing-and-
behaving/emotions-stress-and-anxiety/2022/the-emotional-weight-of-water-stress-061322
Evanston RoundTable wrote a series of articles about our work “We are Water Evanston”, 2021. See https://
evanstonroundtable.com/2021/03/16/we-are-water-evanston-asks-residents-what-water-means-to-them/ ; 
https://evanstonroundtable.com/2021/07/04/we-are-water-evanston-creates-action-items-for-the-city-of-
evanston/
The Daily Northwestern, 2021: https://dailynorthwestern.com/2020/10/08/city/politics/we-are-water-project-
assesses-evanstonians-relationship-with-water/
National Institutes of Health, 2021. Fogarty International Center, “Water insecurity can disrupt exclusive 
breastfeeding”: https://www.fic.nih.gov/News/GlobalHealthMatters/may-june-2021/Pages/breastfeeding-
lmics-water-insecurity.aspx
Vice, 2020. Climate Change Is Making Women's Chores Deadlier. https://www.vice.com/en/article/93wq5y/
climate-change-drought-is-making-womens-chores-deadlier-in-kenya
BBC World Service, 2020. Health Check: Burden of personal injury from fetching water. https://www.bbc.co.uk/
sounds/play/w3cszcct
The Telegraph, 2020. Collecting drinking water can cause serious injury and disproportionately affects women, 
study finds. https://www.telegraph.co.uk/global-health/women-and-girls/collecting-drinking-water-can-cause-
serious-injury-disproportionately/
Gizmodo, 2020. The Coronavirus Has Exposed a Global Water Crisis. New Research Shows How to Fix It 
https://earther.gizmodo.com/the-coronavirus-has-exposed-a-global-water-crisis-new-1844827155 
Opinion by Nicholas Kristof in the New York Times, 2020. https://messaging-custom-
newsletters.nytimes.com/template/oakv2?uri=nyt://newsletter/edc50cfb-d102-4a45-8e4b-
d0d7188b4061&productCode=NK&CCPAOptOut=true&te=1&nl=nicholas-kristof&emc=edit_nk_20200404
How Stuff Works, 2019. Why Do People Eat Dirt? https://people.howstuffworks.com/culture-traditions/
cultural-traditions/why-do-people-eat-dirt.htm
BBC, 2019. Why do some people eat soil? https://www.bbc.co.uk/sounds/play/w3csz1t4
Hindu Business Online, 2019. Ask 12 questions to know the impact of water stress. https://
www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/ask-12-queries-to-assess-economic-impact-of-lack-of-water/
article28334641.ece
The Hindu, 2019. Now, water insecurity can be measured. https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/
telangana/now-water-insecurity-can-be-measured/article28138629.ece 
International Atomic Energy Agency, 2019. Infants Consume Less Breast Milk in Households with Insecure Food 
Access, IAEA Research Project Finds. https://bit.ly/314q8h0  (Also featured on the front page of UN.org)
Northwestern University, 2018. Securing Food and Water. https://news.northwestern.edu/stories/2018/
october/securing-food-and-water/ 
Northwestern University, 2018. Q&A: Sera Young. https://news.northwestern.edu/stories/2018/october/sera-
young 
MedPage Today, 2018. Pica Among Pregnant Women in the US. https://www.medpagetoday.com/resource-
centers/focus-on-iron-deficiency-anemia/pica-among-pregnant-women-us/2251 
 of 
34
39

Northwestern University, 2017. Food or Water? http://www.ipr.northwestern.edu/about/news/2018/young-
food-or-water.html
Northwestern University, 2017. Northwestern researchers take global lead on water insecurity. https://
news.northwestern.edu/stories/2017/september/northwestern-researchers-take-global-lead-on-water-
insecurity/
Northwestern University, 2017. Alumni work to strengthen ties with Mexico. https://news.northwestern.edu/
stories/2017/november/northwestern-university-remains-engaged-with-mexico/ 
Inside Science, 2017. Ancient Practice of Eating Soil Might Pose Risks to Unborn Babies https://
www.insidescience.org/news/ancient-practice-eating-soil-might-pose-risks-unborn-babies
Northwestern University, 2017. New Grants, Global Partnership Extend Water Center’s Reach. https://
research.northwestern.edu/news/new-grants-global-partnership-extend-water-center%E2%80%99s-reach 
Airone, Italy, 2017. Mal di pancia? Mangiamoci un po’ di terra. http://www.cairoeditore.it/index.php?
option=com_flﬂippingbook&book_id=4428&Itemid=83
NPR, 2017. Why Do Parrots (And People) Eat Clay? 
http://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2017/09/07/547981850/why-do-parrots-and-people-eat-clay
British Broadcasting Company (UK), 2016. The people who can’t stop eating dirt. http://www.bbc.com/future/
story/20160615-the-people-who-cant-stop-eating-dirt?ocid=fbfut
Continente (Portugal), July 2014. Geofagia. 
The Guardian (UK), 2014. Why do some people love 'earthy' flﬂavours in food? http://www.theguardian.com/
lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/jul/29/why-some-people-love-earthy-flﬂavours
Cornell Chronicle, 2014. Pica in pregnant teens linked to low iron. http://news.cornell.edu/stories/2014/08/
pica-pregnant-teens-linked-low-iron
Science Daily, 2014. Pica in pregnant teens linked to low iron. http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/
2014/08/140820164026.htm
New York Times, 2013. Digging Into the Dirt.  ‘Craving Earth’ Looks at Pica, the Urge to Eat Unusual Substances. 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/09/science/craving-earth-looks-at-pica-the-urge-to-eat-unusual-
substances.html?_r=0
Geo, 2013. (National Geographic of Germany.) “Dreckige Geluste.”
National Geographic, 2012. Guess Who's Eating Dirt: Surprising Number of Men Found Practicing Pica. http://
news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2012/10/121019-pica-food-health-science-madagascar-men-women-
pregnant-eat-dirt/
Cornell Chronicle, 2012. Study documents eating of soil, raw starch in Madagascar.  http://
www.news.cornell.edu/stories/Nov12/PICA.html
Science Daily, 2012. Eating of Soil and Raw Starch Documented in Madagascar. http://www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2012/11/121109162023.htm
Scenes of Eating, 2012. Review: Craving Earth, by Sera L. Young. http://scenesofeating.com/2012/01/24/
review-craving-earth-by-sera-l-young/
Huffington Post, 2011. Explained: Why People Sometimes Crave Dirt. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/
2011/06/07/dirt-cravings-explained_n_872532.html
Scientific American, 2011. Let them eat dirt. http://www.scientificamerican.com/podcast/episode.cfm?id=let-
them-eat-dirt-11-06-03
US News and World Report, 2011. Eating Dirt Has Long, Maybe Healthy, History. http://health.usnews.com/
health-news/family-health/brain-and-behavior/articles/2011/06/06/eating-dirt-has-long-maybe-healthy-
history
 of 
35
39

Discovery News, 2011. Why some people eat dirt. http://news.discovery.com/human/eating-dirt-more-
adaptive-than-thought-110607.html
Fox News, 2011. Dirty Truth: Humans Eat Dirt to Shield the Stomach. http://www.foxnews.com/health/
2011/06/07/dirty-truth-humans-eat-dirt-to-shield-stomach/
Medline Plus, 2011. Comer tierra tiene una historia larga, y quizás saludable. http://www.nlm.nih.gov/
medlineplus/spanish/news/fullstory_112886.html
The Awl, 2011. Why Do People Like To Eat And Buy And Sing About Dirt? http://www.theawl.com/2011/06/
why-do-people-like-to-eat-and-buy-and-sing-about-dirt#more
Pour Femme, Italy, 2011. Geofagia: e se mangiare la terra facesse bene? http://salute.pourfemme.it/articolo/
geofagia-e-se-mangiare-la-terra-facesse-bene/10739/
El Colombiano, Colombia, 2011. De aquellos que comen física tierra: la geofagia. http://www.ecbloguer.com/
cienciaaldia/?p=4014
El Comercio, Peru, 2011. ¿Por qué a algunas personas les gusta comer tierra? http://elcomercio.pe/gastronomia/
769462/noticia-que-algunas-personas-les-gusta-comer-tierra
Corrieo do Estado, Brasil, 2011. Hábito de comer terra ajuda a proteger de doenças. http://
www.correiodoestado.com.br/noticias/habito-de-comer-terra-ajuda-a-proteger-de-doencas_113652/
Jurnalul Naţional, Romania, 2011. Geofagia ar avea virtuţi nebănuite, susţine un antropolog american. http://
www.jurnalul.ro/viata-sanatoasa/terapii-complementare/geofagia-ar-avea-virtuti-nebanuite-sustine-un-
antropolog-american-585360.html
KSL news, Salt Lake City, UT 2011. Sore tummy? Skip the Tums and grab some dirt. http://www.ksl.com/
index.php?nid=1012&sid=15902164
Sacramento Bee, CA, 2011. “Between the lines: A trove from UC Davis faculty”
The Daily Mail, 2011. Why eating dirt can be good for you... and act as a shield for your stomach. http://
www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1394694/Why-eating-dirt-good-stomach--act-shield-stomach.html
China Daily, 2011. Eating earth may be good for stomach: study
The Independent, United Kingdom, 2011. Feeling nauseous? Eat dirt. http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/
health-and-families/feeling-nauseous-eat-dirt-2294603.html
The Times of India, 2011. Hitting pay dirt and eating it too.
The Times Higher Education, United Kingdom, 2011. Biting the dust proves popular. http://
www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?storyCode=416487&sectioncode=26
Cornell Chronicle. Eating dirt may protect against pathogens and toxins. http://news.cornell.edu/stories/
2011/06/study-animals-and-humans-eat-clay-rid-toxins
Cornell Sun. Cornell Researcher Explores Eating Dirt. http://www.cornellsun.com/section/science/content/
2011/11/09/cornell-researcher-explores-eating-dirt
Audubon Magazine. Clay Craving and Dirt Dining: Eating earth may be good for us. http://
magblog.audubon.org/clay-craving-and-dirt-dining-eating-earth-may-be-good-us
Delish.com, 2011. Get Dirty: Study Finds Eating Dirt Could Have Benefits. http://www.delish.com/food/recalls-
reviews/study-finds-eating-dirt-could-be-good-for-you
Free Republic, 2011. Is dirt safe to eat? http://www.freerepublic.com/focus/f-chat/2738674/posts
LA Weekly, California, 2011. Weird Science: Eating Dirt Can Be Good For. http://blogs.laweekly.com/squidink/
2011/06/eating_dirt_can_be_good_for_you_weird_science.php
Toronto Sun, 2011. Dining on Dirt. http://www.torontosun.com/2011/06/03/dining-on-dirt
 of 
36
39

The Davis Enterprise, 2011. From UCD authors, a nonrequired summer list. http://www.davisenterprise.com/
local-news/ucd/from-ucd-authors-a-nonrequired-summer-list/
ABC News, 2011. Eating dirt has long, maybe healthy, history. 
Science News, 2011. Craving Earth. http://www.sciencenews.org/view/generic/id/71641/title/
Book_Review__Craving_Earth_by_Sera_L._Young
Foodista, 2011. Eat the Earth. http://www.foodista.com/blog/2011/04/22/eat-the-earth
Salon.com, 2011: "Craving Earth": Why do some people love eating dirt? http://www.salon.com/books/feature/
2011/04/12/craving_earth_sera_l_young
Ethiopian Review, 2011. Eating earth: Exploring the mysterious world of geophagy.
The Week, 2011. Why pregnant women eat dirt. http://theweek.com/article/index/213694/why-pregnant-
women-eat-dirt
The Atlantic, 2011. Eating Dirt. http://www.theatlantic.com/daily-dish/archive/2011/03/eating-dirt/173583/
BoingBoing, 2011: Book about people who eat dirt. http://boingboing.net/2011/03/29/book-about-people-
wh.html
Voice of America, 2009. HIV-Positive Women Will Follow Protocols to Make Breast Milk Safe. http://
www.voanews.com/content/a-13-2009-05-07-voa29-68815217/413128.html
Focus, 2009. A clay multivitamin? http://www.focus.pl/cywilizacja/zobacz/publikacje/gliniana-
multiwitamina/
der Spiegel, 2008. Why Do People Eat Dirt? http://www.spiegel.de/international/zeitgeist/
0,1518,525726,00.html
Nature, 2007. The earth-eaters. 10.1007/s10886-013-0258-3peaters. http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/
v444/n7119/full/444543a.html
Television, radio, and podcasts:
Talking Under Water, 2022. Episode 54: Measuring Water Insecurity. @TUWpodcast https://soundcloud.com/
talkingunderwater/episode-54-measuring-water-insecurity 
Heritage Radio Network, 2022. “Down in the Dirt: Geophagy, Carbon Capture, and Conservation”. https://
heritageradionetwork.org/episode/down-dirt-geophagy-carbon-capture-and-conservation
WNYC, The Takeaway, 2021. “Deep Dive with Dorian Warren: Water.” https://www.wnycstudios.org/podcasts/
takeaway/segments/deep-dive-dorian-warren-water 
The Stream with Will and Tom, 2021. “Filling the Data Gaps on Water Poverty with Sera Young” https://
lnns.co/jygRdsNDEaB
WGN, 2020. "What is ‘food insecurity’ and why did the Nobel Peace Prize go to the World Food Programme for 
their work combatting it?”  https://wgnradio.com/chicagos-afternoon-news/what-is-food-insecurity-and-why-
did-the-nobel-peace-prize-go-to-the-world-food-programme-for-their-work-on-it/
Gallup, 2020. “A Crisis Within a Crisis: Water Scarcity Amid COVID-19” https://news.gallup.com/podcast/
315953/crisis-within-crisis-water-scarcity-amid-covid.aspx
BBC News, 2020. “Why do people eat chalk, earth and clay?” https://youtube.com/watch?v=o5ELJx1h3Sk 
Oxfam, 2020. “The journey and challenges in measuring sustainable water in Oxfam’s impact evaluations with 
the HWISE Network" https://views-voices.oxfam.org.uk/2020/03/the-journey-and-challenges-in-measuring-
sustainable-water-in-oxfams-impact-evaluations-with-the-hwise-network/
Circle of Blue, 2020. “Speaking of Water” https://www.circleofblue.org/2020/wef/speaking-of-water-sera-
young-on-identifying-who-is-water-insecure/
 of 
37
39

AnthroDish, 2020. “Why do some humans eat earth? With Dr. Sera Young” https://www.anthrodish.com/
episodes/serayoung
Human Biology Association, 2019. “Chatting with Dr. Sera Young about White Dirt, Women’s Health, and Water 
Security” https://www.humbio.org/sos-33-chatting-with-dr-sera-young-about-white-dirt-womens-health-and-
water-security/ 
Radio Health Journal, 2017. “Pica" https://radiohealthjournal.wordpress.com/tag/dr-sera-young/ 
Public Broadcasting Service (PBS), 2016. “Eat White Dirt” http://www.pbs.org/video/2365925943/ 
NPR, The Salt. “The Old And Mysterious Practice Of Eating Dirt, Revealed” https://www.npr.org/sections/
thesalt/2014/04/02/297881388/the-old-and-mysterious-practice-of-eating-dirt-revealed
Big Picture Science, 2013. “Digging our Past” http://radio.seti.org/episodes/Digging_Our_Past
Institutet, 2013 (Swedish national public radio program). “Tänk vad härligt att ta en näve grus och skölja runt i 
munnen” http://sverigesradio.se/sida/artikel.aspx?
programid=4131&artikel=5478881&play=4486865&playtype=Ljudklipp
The Academic Minute, WAMC, Albany, NY. 2012. “The urge to eat dirt”. http://wamc.org/post/dr-sera-young-
cornell-university-urge-eat-dirt
Capitol Public Radio, Sacramento, CA, 2011. “Craving Earth”. http://www.capradio.org/163198
Living on Earth, 2011. “Eating Dirt” http://www.loe.org/shows/segments.html?programID=11-
P13-00023&segmentID=8 
Talk Radio Europe, 2011. 
The Lanigan and Malone Morning Show, 2011. Cleveland, OH.
NewsTalk with Moncrieff (Ireland), 2011. http://www.newstalk.ie/programmes/all/moncrieff/
CBS-Miami, 2011: “Irresistible Craving To Eat Dirt May Cause Health Problems” http://miami.cbslocal.com/
2011/01/10/irresistible-craving-to-eat-dirt-may-cause-health-problems/
CBS-Chicago, 2010: “Coping with the dangers of pica” http://chicago.cbslocal.com/2010/12/31/coping-with-
the-dangers-of-pica/
CBS-San Francisco, 2010: “Health Watch—Craving Earth”
Good Food with Evan Kleinman, on Los Angeles’s KCRW, 2011; radio interview: http://www.kcrw.com/etc/
programs/gf/gf110416matzo_balls_eating_d; “Evan eats clay” http://blogs.kcrw.com/goodfood/2011/04/
video-evan-eats-clay/
Zanzibar Public Television, 2006. An interview with Said M. Ali, Sarah Beckham, and me about our research on 
the relationship between anemia and pica. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kfGQ6Je8_vo
Quotes:
Chicago Tribune, 2021. “The efficiency behind Amazon and the idea behind HelloFresh: How one Chicago 
neighborhood charity is rethinking food insecurity” https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/breaking/ct-food-
insecurity-englewood-dion-chicago-dream-20210728-vnz2kqeuoncyfmogr2pulyqi6a-story.html
Circle of Blue, 2020. "Who in the U.S. Is in ‘Plumbing Poverty’? Mostly Urban Residents, Study Says” https://
www.circleofblue.org/2020/world/who-in-the-u-s-is-in-plumbing-poverty-mostly-urban-residents-study-says/
Chicago Sun Times, 2018. “Forget what Republicans say; some are OK with certain babies dying” https://
chicago.suntimes.com/news/republicans-babies-dying-abortion-united-nations-breastfeeding-formula-trump/
Reuters, 2018. “Breastfeeding linked to lower stroke risk” https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-women-
breastfeeding/breastfeeding-linked-to-lower-stroke-risk-idUSKCN1L71QX 
 of 
38
39

A RT I S T I C  E N G A G E M E N T
Science Gallery Lab. Detroit, MI, 2019. “Precarity: water and power.”
Eating Earth Workshop. Amsterdam, 2018. “Craving Earth.” (https://nias.knaw.nl/events/eating-earth/)
 of 
39
39

ROBERT A. WEINSTOCK 
(312) 503-1457  
robert.weinstock@law.northwestern.edu 
 
1 of 3 
 
EDUCATION  
 
Columbia University School of Law, New York, NY 
J.D., May 2009 
Honors: 
Alfred S. Forsyth Prize:  for leadership and achievement in environmental law, 2009 
Earthwatch Institute Grant:  in recognition of environmental law work, 2009 
James Kent Scholar, 2007-2009 
Harlan Fiske Stone Scholar, 2006-2007 
Activities: 
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW: Articles Editor, 2008-2009; Staff Editor, 2007-2008 
Environmental Law Society: President, 2007-2008; Board Member, 2006-2009 
American Constitution Society:  Media Chair, 2007-2008 
Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT  
B.A., with Honors, May 2006 
Major: 
The College of Social Studies; Honors Thesis:  Environmentalism and Its Discontents, 2006 
Honors: 
Cardinal Club Scholar-Athlete Award, 2006 
Davenport Grant for summer thesis research, 2005 
Activities: 
Varsity Football, 2002-2006; NESCAC All-Academic Selection, 2003-2006; 
Student Endowment Advisory Committee, Founder, 2005-2006 
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE  
 
Environmental Advocacy Center at the Northwestern Pritzker School of Law 
     September 2022 – Present 
Director & Clinical Associate Professor of Law 
Abrams Environmental Law Clinic at the University of Chicago Law School                             September 2016 – August 2022 
Associate Clinical Professor of Law, Assistant Clinical Professor of Law, Clinical Instructor and Lecturer in Law; Clinical Fellow 
    Chicago, IL 
• Led the clinic’s Clean Water Act portfolio, which involved litigating citizen suits, including against U. S. Steel 
Corporation and Trump Tower, Chicago, conducting state regulatory proceedings and related judicial appeals, drafting 
public comments, and participating in stakeholder processes. 
• Litigated energy and species protection issues on behalf of (i) grassroots energy justice organizations in Michigan Public Service 
Commission proceedings, (ii) Prof. Michael Greenstone as amicus curiae in litigation of climate change rulemakings and National 
Environmental Policy Act reviews of coal mining on federal land, and (iii) NGO clients in Endangered Species Act litigation. 
• Collaboratively pursued policy projects including developing state legislative proposals on energy efficiency and utility rate 
protections for low-income customers, advocating at the intersection of legacy contamination and public housing, exploring 
nutrient water quality trading policy proposals, and commenting on federal rulemakings and environmental reviews. 
• Co-instructed clinical seminar, which included both substantive environmental law and lawyering skills lessons.   
• Advised and actively supported students in securing employment (summer, post-graduation, and clerkship). 
• Assisted in administration of clinical program, including interaction with registrar, faculty, clients, and institutional partners. 
 
Barnes & Thornburg LLP 
   October 2012 – August 2016 
Associate, Environmental Department 
 Chicago, IL 
• Represented municipalities and sewer districts in federal enforcement actions under the Clean Water Act, with particular 
emphasis on the negotiation of complex consent decrees under the U.S. EPA Combined Sewer Overflow Control Policy and 
permitting, planning, and policy negotiations with state agencies and U.S. EPA headquarters and regional staff. 
• Drafted pleadings, motions to dismiss and for summary judgment, and mediation briefs in CERCLA litigation; argued 
summary judgment motion. Conducted document and deposition discovery.  
• Led and assisted in negotiation of settlements at Superfund Sites; managed complex remediation sites, including 
coordinating with agencies, supervising consultants, and drafting collateral cleanup and redevelopment agreements. 
• Developed strategies and negotiated complex agreements to address environmental issues in real estate transactions. 
• Advised on compliance issues under the CWA, RCRA, CERCLA, TSCA, and FIFRA and local zoning and land use laws. 
• Litigated permit appeals and petitions for adjusted standards before the Illinois Pollution Control Board. 
• Pro bono representation of The Nature Conservancy to assist with environmental aspects of property acquisitions. 
• Pro bono representation of community groups in agency challenge to mining permit for silica sand mine. 

ROBERT A. WEINSTOCK 
(312) 503-1457  
robert.weinstock@law.northwestern.edu 
 
2 of 3 
 
Chambers of the Honorable Victor Marrero, 
September 2011 – September 2012 
United States District Court, Southern District of New York 
 
New York, NY 
Law Clerk and Deputy 
 
 
Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP 
September 2009 – August 2011; Summer 2008 
Associate; Summer Associate, Litigation Practice 
New York, NY; Washington, D.C. 
• Member of team that won $74m jury verdict in patent litigation, Edwards v. CoreValve, C.A. No. 08-91 (D. Del.). 
• Principal associate on successful cross-appeal in the Federal Circuit (Case Nos. 2011-1215, -1257). 
• Authored administrative law sections of brief to Second Circuit in Lopez v. Terrell, No. 10-2079 (2d Cir.). 
• Pro bono representation of a class of mobility-impaired residents in settlement negotiations with NYC Housing Authority. 
• Researched and drafted sections of amicus curiae brief submitted to U.S. Supreme Court in Voting Rights Act case. 
 
Environmental Law Clinic, Columbia Law School 
2007 – 2009 
Clinical Staffer 
New York, NY 
• Drafted sections of briefs to Fifth Circuit, Southern District of New York, and in opposition to a writ of certiorari to the 
United States Supreme Court relating to administrative and environmental law issues. 
• Extensive land use policy research and committee work for the Pinelands Commission in southern New Jersey. 
Sive, Paget & Riesel, PC 
Summer 2007 
Summer Associate 
New York, NY 
• Researched and drafted for various publications and environmental litigation, administrative, and land use matters. 
PROFESSIONAL HONORS AND ACTIVITIES  
 
Environment, Climate & Energy Research Team 
We Will Chicago, City of Chicago 
           2021 – 2022 
Environmental Law Committee (Chair, Vice-Chair) 
Chicago Bar Association  
           2021 – 2023 
Wavemaker Award for Distinguished Legal Services 
Surfrider Foundation 
       March 27, 2018 
Juvenile Justice Mentoring Initiative 
Chicago Bar Association 
 Fall 2013 – Fall 2015 
New York City Environmental Law Leadership Institute 
 
Spring 2011 
• 
Selected for USEPA Region Two-sponsored program regarding environmental and public health issues in New York. 
Legal Aid Society 
Winter 2010 
• 
Member of pro bono team recognized by New York Legal Aid Society for work on wage and hour litigation. 
American Constitution Society 
Member 
2009 – Present 
 
BAR ADMISSIONS  
 
 
• New York (inactive) 
• Illinois 
• Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit 
• Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit 
• Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit 
• Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 
• Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit 
• Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit 
 
 
• District Court for the Northern District of Indiana 
• District Court for the Eastern District of New York 
• District Court for the Southern District of Illinois 
• District Court for the Central District of Illinois 
• District Court for the Southern District of New York 
• District Court for the Northern District of Illinois 
• District Court for the Northern District of Illinois 
 
 
 
 

ROBERT A. WEINSTOCK 
(312) 503-1457  
robert.weinstock@law.northwestern.edu 
 
3 of 3 
 
 
COURSES TAUGHT                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
• Abrams Environmental Law Clinic Seminar (annually) 
• How Law and Legal Institutions Address (or Fail to Address) the Impacts of Racial Segregation in Chicago (Spring 2019; Winter 
2020; Winter 2021) 
• Greenberg Seminar:  (Re)Building Bridges:  Can Reviving & Reimagining Public Infrastructure Save America? (2020-2021) 
PUBLICATIONS  
              
• 
Advancing Climate Resilience through Green Infrastructure in U.S. Cities by Leveraging their Dual Role as Regulated and Regulator under the U.S. 
Clean Water Act, in ENHANCING URBAN CLIMATE RESILIENCE: THE ROLE OF LAW, (Jonathan Verschuuren & Angela van der 
Berg, eds.) (Edward Elgar Sept. 2022) 
• 
Poisonous Homes:  The Fight for Environmental Justice in Federally Assisted Housing, June 2020 (with Emily Coffee and Kate Walz of the 
Shriver Center on Poverty Law, Debbie Chizewer of Earthjustice, Prof. Emily Benfer of Columbia Law School, and Prof. Mark 
Templeton) available at https://www.povertylaw.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/environmental_justice_report_final-
rev2.pdf.   
• 
Protecting the Illinois EPA’s Health, so that It Can Protect Ours, November 2019 (with Prof. Mark Templeton, Elizabeth Lindberg and 
former IEPA Directors Mary Gade and Doug Scott, and former USEPA Deputy Regional Administrator Bharat Mathur), 
available at https://www.law.uchicago.edu/files/IEPA%20Report%20FINAL%2011.21.19.pdf.   
• 
Driving Distributed Generation in Different Directions from the Shores of Lake Michigan: A Look Back at Pivotal 2016 Energy Legislation in 
Michigan and Illinois, American Bar Association, Section of Energy, Environment, and Resources, Renewable, Alternative, and 
Distributed Energy Resources Committee Newsletter, Vol. 6, No. 1 (July 2018) 
• 
Transforming EPA Support for Green Infrastructure from a Policy Pronouncement into a CSO Consent Decree Priority, NACWA Clean 
Water Current, January 22, 2016. 
• 
D&O Treatment of Climate Change Liabilities, Insurance Law360, January 11, 2010 (with H. Christopher Boehning). 
• 
The Lorax State:  Parens Patriae and the Provision of Public Goods, 109 COLUM. L. REV. 798 (2009). 
 
SELECTED PUBLIC PRESENTATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
• “Environmental Cases Pending at the Supreme Court,” Winston & Strawn LLP, Mar. 4, 2021. 
• “Maui 6-3: The Supreme Court’s ‘Functional Equivalent’ Test Preserves a Functional Clean Water Act,” Chicago Bar Association, 
May 4, 2020. 
• “Clean Water Act Enforcement:  Core Tenets & Current Trends,” Chicago Bar Association, Feb. 19, 2020. 
• “Enforcing The Clean Water Act To Protect Against Industrial Water Pollution,” A Thirst for Clean Water:  Protecting Our Bodies and 
Bodies of Water Through Knowledge and Engagement, Valparaiso University, Apr. 6, 2019. 
• “Responding to the Oil Spill on Bubbly Creek,” Southbranch Parks Advisory Committee, Nov. 8, 2017. 
 
SELECTED MEDIA APPEARANCES/QUOATATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
• “Hazardous Homes: Thousands of U.S. Public Housing Residents Live in the Country’s Most Polluted Places,” The Intercept, Jan. 
13, 2021.   
• “Feds, US Steel Reject Concerns Over Toxic Spill Settlement,” Law360, May 22, 2020. 
• “Groundwater Ruling Dooms US Steel Settlement, Court Told,” Law360, May 12, 2020. 
•  “Indiana Cyanide Leak Kills 3,000 Fish and Shut Down Beaches at America’s Newest National Park,” TIME, Aug. 20, 2019. 
• “Toxic spill from northwest Indiana steel mill kills fish, forces closure of Lake Michigan beaches,” Chicago Tribune, Aug. 16, 2019. 
• “IDEM orders U. S. Steel to begin quarterly groundwater testing in Portage,” Northwest Indiana Times, Jan. 21, 2019. 
• “Surfers given OK to intervene in U. S. Steel settlement as IDEM again cites Portage facility,” Northwest Indiana Times, Dec. 14, 
2018. 
• “U. S. Steel report says foam didn’t contain regulated pollutants; IDEM to issue report next week,” Northwest Indiana Times, Dec. 4, 
2018. 
• “Portage Lakefront and Riverwalk closed after foamy, scummy discharge reported at troubled U. S. Steel plant,” Northwest Indiana 
Times, Nov. 11, 2018. 

Biographical Sketch: Michael C. Jewett 
 
(a) Relevant Experience and Employment History 
Education and Professional Training 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA  
Chemical Engineering  
B.S., 1999 
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 
 
 
Chemical Engineering  
M.S., 2001 
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 
 
 
Chemical Engineering  
Ph.D., 2005 
Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, DK 
Systems Biology 
 
2005-2007 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
 
Genetics/Synthetic Biology 2007-2009 
 
Academic and Professional Appointments 
2023-present Professor, Bioengineering, Stanford University 
2023-present Adjunct Professor, Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern 
 
 
 
University 
2020-2022 
Walter P. Murphy Professor, Northwestern University 
2019-2022 
Director, Center for Synthetic Biology, Northwestern University 
2018-2022 
Professor in Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University 
2017-2022 
Institute Fellow, Northwestern Argonne Institute for Science & Engineering  
2017-2021 
Charles Deering McCormick Professor of Teaching Excellence, Northwestern 
University 
2015-2019 
Co-director, Center for Synthetic Biology, Northwestern University 
2015-2018  
Associate Professor in Chemical and Biological Engineering 
2009-2015 
Assistant Professor in Chemical and Biological Engineering 
 
(b) Selected Honors and Awards 
2009 NIH Pathway to Independence Award 
2011 DARPA Young Faculty Award 
2011 Agilent Early Career Professor Award  
2011 David and Lucile Packard Fellowship for Science and Engineering 
2012 3M Non-tenured Faculty Grant 
2015 Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar Award 
2017  ACS Biochemical Technologies Young Investigator Award 
2019 Blavatnik National Awards for Young Scientists, Life Sciences Category, Finalist 
2020    Fellow, American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering (AIMBE) 
2020    Fellow, National Academy of Inventors (NAI) 
2020    Fellow, American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) 
 
(c) Publications  
1. Thavarajah, W., Silverman, A.D., Verosloff, M.S., Kelley-Loughnane, N., Jewett, M.C.,
 
and Lucks, J.B. 2020. Point-of-use detection of environmental fluoride via an engineered
 
cell-free riboswitch-based biosensor. ACS Synthetic Biology. 9(1):10-18. 
2. Silverman, A.D., Akova, U., Alam, K.K., Jewett, M.C., and Lucks, J.B. 2020. Design and
 
optimization of a cell-free atrazine biosensor. ACS Synthetic Biology. 9: 671–677. 
3. Hunt, A.C.,  Case, J.B., Park, Y.J., Cao, L., Wu, K., Walls, A.C., Liu, Z., Bowen, J., Yeh,
 
H.W., Saini, S., Helms, L., Zhao, Y.T., Starr, T.N., Goreshnik, I., Kozodoy, L., Carter, L.,
 
Ravichandran, R., Green, L.B., Matochko, W.L., Thomson, C.A., Vögeli, B., Krüger-Gericke,

 
A., VanBlargan, L.A., Chen, R.E., Ying, B., Bailey, A.L., Kafai, N.M., Boyken, S., Ljubetič,
 
A., Edman, 
N., Ueda, G., Chow, C., Addetia, A., Panpradist, N., Gale, M., Freedman,
 
B., Lutz, B., Bloom, J.D., Ruohola-Baker, H., Whelan, S., Stewart, L., Diamond, M.S.,
 
Veesler, D., Jewett, M.C., and Baker, D. 2022. Multivalent designed proteins protect against
 
SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern. Science Translational Medicine. 14, eabn1252. 
4. Lin, L.,  Kightlinger, W.,  Parhu, S.K., Hockenberry, A.J., Li, C., Wang, L.-X., Jewett, M.C. 
and Mrksich, M. 2020. Sequential glycosylation of protein via substrate specific N-
glycosyltransferases. ACS Central Science. 6: 144-154. 
5. Meyer, A., Saaem, I., Silverman, A.D., Varaljay, V., Mikol, R., Blum, S., Onderko, E., Bristol, 
C., Liu, S., Pratt, K., Casini, A., Eluere, R., Moser, F., Servinksy, M., Lucks, J.B., Lux, M., 
Glaven, S., Crookes-Goodson, W., Jewett, M.C., Gordon, D.B., and Voigt, C.A. 2019. 
Organism engineering for the bioproduction of the triaminotrinitrobenzene (TATB) precursor 
phloroglucinol (PG). ACS Synthetic Biology. 8(12): 2746-2755. 
6. Silverman, A.D., Karim, A.S., and Jewett, M.C. 2020. Cell-free gene expression systems: An 
expanded repertoire of applications. Nature Reviews Genetics. 21: 151-170.  
7. Kightlinger, W., Duncker, K., Ramesh, A., Thames, A., Natarajan, A., Stark, J.C., Yang, A., 
Lin, L., Mrksich, M., DeLisa, M. P., and Jewett, M.C. 2019. A. cell-free biosynthesis platform 
for modular construction of protein glycosylation pathways. Nature Communications. 
10:5404. 
8. Kightlinger, W.,  Lin, L.,  Rosztoczy, M., DeLisa, M.P., Mrksich, M., and Jewett, M.C.  2018. 
Design of glycosylation sites by rapid synthesis and analysis of glycosyltransferase. Nature 
Chemical Biology. 14: 627-635. 
9. Jaroentomeechai, T., Stark, J.C., Natarajan, A., Glasscock, C., Yates, L., Hsu, K.J., Mrksich, 
M., Jewett, M.C., and DeLisa, M.P.  2018. Single-pot glycoprotein biosynthesis using a cell-
free transcription-translation system enriched with glycosylation machinery. Nature 
Communications. 9, 2686.  
10. Jewett, M.C., Calhoun, K.A., Voloshin, A., Wuu, J.J., and Swartz, J.R. 2008. An integrated 
cell-free metabolic platform for protein production and synthetic biology. Molecular Systems 
Biology. 4: 220. 
 
(d) Additional and Synergistic Activities 
• Co-founding director of the Center for Synthetic Biology at Northwestern University 
• Technical Advisory Council, Synthetic Biology Advanced Research for the Advancement of 
S&T Priorities within the Department of Defense 
• Invited Participant, Army Collaborative Hub for Biological Engineering Workshop 
• Technical Advisory Board and Review Board, AFRL Biotechnology Portfolio 
• Co-Chair, Future Directions Workshop on Synthetic Biology for Energy/Power, Office of 
Secretary of Defense's Basic Research Office in partnership with the UK Ministry of Defense 
 
 
 
 
Michael C. Jewett - 9/19/2023

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 
 
Comments on behalf of Northwestern University WISE-Dx Faculty Team Regarding 
EPA’s Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
 

URoL:ASC: The design, development, and distribution of rapid, in-home, water quality biosensors. 
I. Broader Impacts
The global water crisis is among 
the most urgent issues of our 
time.1,2 This proposal seeks to 
address the need for action on 
water quality and water insecurity 
with three central goals, encap-
sulated in a novel methodology 
for the collaborative design (Stage 1), development (Stage 2), and distribution (Stage 3) of rapid in-home, 
water quality monitoring tests (Fig. 1): 
•
Goal 1: To design cell-free synthetic biological systems that can detect key water contami-
nants by harnessing the ‘rule of life’ of natural biological systems to sense their environment.
•
Goal 2: To develop these biological sensors into accessible diagnostic tests that permit an-
yone to rapidly assess their water quality in a simple and affordable way.
•
Goal 3: To distribute and understand the societal implications of these diagnostic tests,
including how people’s knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors related to water are impacted by the
information these biosensor tests generate.
Together, these goals help realize a new distributable biotechnology platform by harnessing the ‘rule of life’ 
of biosensing; this platform has the potential to democratize access to water quality information across 
society. In collaboration with the greater Chicagoland community, we will demonstrate the utility of this new 
approach with the detection of lead, copper, and per/polyfluoroalkyl substances, three water contaminants 
that are the subject of major public regulation and concern. Our vision is that this biotechnology platform 
will help mitigate the economic, political, and health impacts of the global water crisis by providing actiona-
ble information to individuals and communities that positively impact their daily lives and informs mitigation 
strategies. Below we describe the importance of water quality, the premise for harnessing the natural bio-
sensing abilities of cells (a ‘rule of life’) into technologies that can rapidly detect water quality, and how such 
a technology stands to make significant broader impacts for this paramount societal challenge.  
I.A. Water security is a global societal challenge. Water security exists when water is available, acces-
sible, safe, and reliable for a healthy life (Fig. 2).3-6 The billions of people globally who face problems with
one or more of these four domains experience far-reaching adverse economic, political, nutritional, and
mental and physical consequences, ranging from work absenteeism to waterborne infections, interpersonal
violence, and depressive disorders.4,7-9
Water quality (safety) is core to water in-
security and is threatened by both chemical and 
biological contaminants. The World Health Or-
ganization estimates that 2.2 billion people glob-
ally do not have access to “safely managed water” 
(i.e., water is likely to be contaminated). Water 
contamination can have both acute and lifelong 
consequences on human health and develop-
ment, economic output, and agricultural produc-
tion.2 Globally, the leading chemical contaminants 
of concern are fluoride and arsenic, but domesti-
cally there are a range of important contaminants 
including 
lead 
and 
copper10 
as 
well 
as 
per/polyfluoroalkyl substances.11 Water insecurity 
in the US is far more common than one might ex-
pect;12 nationally representative data reveal that 
~20% of adults do not drink their tap water13 and 
39.6% of Americans anticipate being harmed by 
their water in the next 2 years.14  
Figure 1. A collaborative methodology to address water quality and
insecurity with rapid, in-home water quality biosensors.
Figure 2. Measuring global water insecurity. (A) 
The global prevalence of experiences with water in-
security.7 (B) The four domains of water security.3,4  
1
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
1

 
The ability to detect water contaminants should increase water security for the most vulnerable 
populations.15 However, limited accessibility to testing methods is a critical barrier to understanding water 
safety. Accurate and timely information about the presence of most contaminants is currently very difficult 
for most people to obtain due to both bureaucratic and technical reasons.16 Detecting most contaminants 
in drinking water requires analytical chemistry techniques that necessitate skilled operation in a centralized 
laboratory facility.17 This restriction results in tests that are costly (>$50/test) and slow (>2 weeks),18 creating 
barriers for private citizens to access this testing information. 
As an indicative example, establishing the presence of lead (Pb), a neurotoxin that causes severe, 
long-lasting harm by interrupting neurotransmission,19,20 is challenging in part because gold-standard Pb 
testing requires individuals to mail a sample to a laboratory, results take several weeks, and tests are ex-
pensive. Less-expensive ‘at-home’ Pb test kits consist of sample collection tubes and mailing envelopes, 
requiring sample mailing, processing and waiting that create the same barriers to testing.18 Other types of 
at-home tests are sold but are not validated and have documented issues with accuracy.21 A second diffi-
culty in establishing the presence of Pb in drinking water is the need to test multiple samples because many 
contaminants are released erratically in pipes.22 The EPA’s Lead and Copper rule, a regulation for a testing 
and remedial action regime related to lead and copper in municipal water, mandates representative sample 
testing by cities, but the number of sample sites is often small and there are unfortunate loopholes that 
enable municipalities and utilities to avoid remediation activities.23 With approximately 6-10 million house-
holds and 400,000 schools in the US having Pb water lines that contribute to this problem,24 easily acces-
sible and accurate testing by individuals is essential to prompt remediation action ensuring a safe and 
secure water supply. Our three-stage methodology will address this problem by creating a workflow to 
design, develop and assess the accessibility and accuracy of new water contaminant biosensors that are 
rapid, cheap, and easily used, which should increase water security for the most vulnerable populations. 
 
I.B. Understanding the rules of biological sensing has created new synthetic biology technologies 
that address the water insecurity crisis. A cell’s ability to sense and respond to changes in the environ-
ment is one of its defining attributes of life (“rule of life”). Many of these sense-and-response mechanisms 
arise from non-coding riboswitch RNAs25 or allosteric transcription factor (aTF) proteins that each bind to 
target small molecules to activate expression of a downstream gene.26,27 These regulators often control 
transport of the bound molecules out of the cell (e.g., heavy metals or antibiotics) or catabolism of the bound 
molecule into a more useful form (e.g., substrates for central carbon metabolism). Naturally derived ri-
boswitches and aTFs thus provide key components that can be repurposed for synthetic sensing systems. 
 
Decades of fundamental investigations into the mechanisms of riboswitches and aTFs have fueled 
recent innovations in synthetic biology that harness the biosensing ‘rule of life’ for the point-of-need detec-
tion of chemical species.18,21,28-40 These systems typically consist of three components: (i) a molecular bio-
sensor (riboswitch or aTF) that activates the production of a reporter system once a target compound is 
bound; (ii) a reporter system that generates a fluorescent or colorimetric output; and (iii) an in vitro reaction 
platform that contains reagents and other biological machinery needed to support the biosensing reactions 
(Fig. 3). Our team and others have shown that this approach can be used to create water diagnostics for a 
range of different compounds such as metals (e.g., lead, copper, cadmium, mercury),18,37 antibiotics and 
other drugs,18,37 personal care products,18 cleaning products,18 toxic geogenic ions,21 endocrine disrup-
tors,31,38-40 micronutrients,18,30 and other toxins (e.g. cyanuric acid).29 Lessons learned from these tests will 
have broad impacts for the design, develop-
ment, and distribution of other diagnostics like 
those we propose here.  
Cell-free synthetic biology biosensors 
have several advantages over conventional la-
boratory-based strategies. For one, they can be 
freeze-dried for cold chain-free storage, rapid 
distribution, and activation simply by rehydrating 
with the sample of interest. They can be manu-
factured cheaply, with cost-estimates <$2/test 
for many analytes when produced at scale,18 
and they do not have the biocontainment 
 
Figure 3. Translating the sense-and-respond “rule of 
life” into real-world water monitoring technology.   
2
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
2

 
concerns of engineered whole cell biosensing approaches.15,41 For these and other reasons, developing at-
home water quality tests are an opportunity to increase the reach of synthetic biology by delivering public 
health benefits in the field of water insecurity. In this project, we propose to improve the sensitivity, accu-
racy, accessibility, and impact of water quality biosensors by merging synthetic biology and chemistry with 
the social sciences in community-driven, user-focused research. 
 
I.C. Distributing rapid biosensor tests could confer beneficial societal impacts. The proposed work 
represents a major step towards democratizing knowledge about water safety for all. Our three-stage meth-
odology merges social science and synthetic biology to overcome many of the financial and technical bar-
riers currently preventing individuals, especially those from marginalized communities, from ascertaining 
their exposure to unsafe water. Further, this work 
will study how access to biosensing technologies 
will affect the knowledge, attitudes, and behav-
iors of individuals about water quality—infor-
mation used to further refine the technologies 
and maximize their impact. While our project will 
directly interact with greater Chicago, there are 
clear benefits applicable well beyond Chicago-
land and even outside of the US (Fig. 4). 
The first is the translational nature of the proposed work, which sets it apart from other diagnostic 
development because of our inclusion of underserved groups from the outset. Of the thousands of point-
of-care diagnostics developed each year, only a tiny fraction is field-tested under “real world” conditions 
(i.e., by non-scientists).42 Even fewer studies examine how the technology shapes consumer risk and harm 
reduction. Our proposed work on technology usability (see Stage 2) and impacts on contaminant-related 
knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors (see Stage 3) will help illuminate how such tests can increase envi-
ronmental health and safety literacy across socio-economic groups.43,44 
The second is a much clearer picture of the prevalence of water quality issues that will arise from 
this work; the ease of obtaining quick and accurate results will likely greatly expand the current pool of 
individuals who test their water. Indeed, it is feasible that regular water testing can become standard prac-
tice in daycares and schools. There is wide agreement that information about the extent of water contami-
nation, of lead for example, are poorly understood. 
Third, this information would be incredibly powerful to advocate for environmental justice. Test re-
sults would be actionable evidence for garnering additional attention and resources to reduce the scourge 
of heavy metal poisoning and other contaminants of concern that are disproportionately borne by margin-
alized groups in the US. By analogy, data on blood lead levels of Flint children were instrumental for drawing 
media attention and the eventual government action. Data on drinking water could capture risks before the 
contaminant is ingested, and embodied. 
Fourth, these tests will empower people to make safer choices about the water they use. For ex-
ample, parents and childcare providers can use these tests as they decide which water to use for preparing 
food (including infant formula) and beverages for their children. If water is contaminated, they can take 
measures to reduce exposure to toxins. Alternatively, if these tests demonstrate that water quality is high, 
they can decide to spend money otherwise spent on bottled water for other household needs. 
Further, this body of work will generate critical, policy-relevant information to plan and evaluate 
interventions. For example, high levels of lead in drinking water can indicate where buried lead lines or 
fixtures are located that cannot otherwise be observed. Such information is critical for prioritizing areas to 
implement the lead line replacements laid out in the 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. In terms of moni-
toring the impact of interventions, detection of contaminants after remediation actions indicates that removal 
was incomplete and more or different remediation action is needed.  
 
I.D. At-home water quality biosensor tests offer new ways to engage and educate diverse commu-
nities through citizen science. A unique feature of cell-free biosensing technology is that it is accessible 
to diverse stakeholders—people from a range of ages, abilities, and backgrounds can see, touch, and 
operate these devices, creating powerful entry points for engagement and education. For instance, our 
team recently developed an easily configurable education platform, called BioBits, using cell-free synthetic 
 
Figure 4. Layers of beneficial societal impacts.   
3
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
3

 
biology to demonstrate and observe underlying biolog-
ical processes with visual outputs (BioBits; Fig. 5).45,46 
For example, high school students have learned about 
topics such as gene expression,46 enzymatic function,45 
antibiotic resistance,47 and biochemical sensing48 
through BioBits kits that produce color, fluorescence, 
and scents. In each case, we have assessed learning 
activities to improve understanding of the biological 
concepts. In this proposal, we will leverage these fea-
tures through citizen science activities focused on the 
diverse communities impacted by water quality issues. 
In this project, we plan to develop new ways of 
connecting the public with water quality biosensing. 
Specifically, we will partner with the Northwestern Of-
fice of Community Education Partnerships (OCEP) to develop a Research Experience for Teachers (RET) 
program, modeled off NSF RET programs but not an official NSF RET site, to give teachers hands-on water 
quality research experience and enable the co-production of learning projects for their classrooms in Ev-
anston and Chicago, IL. This two-week program will pair teachers and graduate students in labs at North-
western University to focus on translating laboratory experience and BioBits kits into new curriculum. OCEP 
has successfully led RETs with over 300 area schools, about half being Chicago Public Schools which is 
the third largest school district in the country and serves predominantly minority and low-income student 
populations. The developed curriculum and activities can also be implemented throughout each year in 
events in Chicago Public Schools by the graduate and undergraduate researchers of this project, allowing 
integration of research and education at multiple levels (see Section II.E and Student Training Plan). 
Assessment of both the RET and learning activities will follow our previously published approaches of uti-
lizing pre- and post-activity surveys developed in partnership with OCEP (see Letter of Support). We note 
that these activities are synergistic to our research goal of understanding the impacts of water quality tests 
on the knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors of households for water contaminants (see Section II). 
 
I.E. Assessing societal impacts of rapid, in-home, water quality biosensors. We have strategically 
identified lead,19 copper, and per/polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS)11 as widely recognized contaminants 
of major concern, where federal regulations are being reevaluated or just beginning to be written and where 
existing biosensing technologies are at distinct stages in our methodology (see Section II). As such, in 
parallel we will (i) use commercially available lead tests from Stemloop, Inc. (see Section II.C.3; Letter of 
Support) to probe the impact of distribution on knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors, (ii) develop an existing 
transcription factor-based biosensor for copper and optimize and distribute tests based on the biosensor to 
evaluate impact, and (iii) design a novel PFAS detection scheme combining both biological and chemical 
mechanisms, develop an at-home test, and distribute them to measure societal impact. We will test and 
refine the methodology in greater Chicago, the city with the most lead pipes in the US,23 with key community 
stakeholders, including Chicago civil society (e.g., Blacks in Green, Citizens for a Greener Evanston, Rotary 
International), Chicagoland water utilities (e.g., City of Chicago, Evanston Water District), and policymakers 
at the local, state, and federal level (see Letters of Support). These interactions will be facilitated through 
the development of a Community Advisory Board at the outset (see Project Management Plan) who will 
guide our activities throughout the project. This feedback will be augmented through presentations at town 
hall meetings, focus group discussions, ethnographic interviews, and field trials. As such, this proposal 
could contribute valuably to regulatory design and compliance assessment and advances the goals of 
NSF’s URoL big idea and NSF’s strategic plan by mobilizing knowledge most effectively to impact society. 
 
II. Intellectual Merit: Convergent Research Plan 
In this work, we propose developing a three-stage methodology for the collaborative design (Stage 1), 
development (Stage 2), and distribution (Stage 3) of rapid in-home, water quality monitoring tests for 
three contaminants of major concern—lead (Pb), copper (Cu), and per/polyfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFAS)—in the Chicagoland area (Fig. 6). This proposed research is oriented around the biosensing ‘rule 
of life’, the natural ability of cells to sense and respond to molecules in their environment (Section I.B). 
 
Figure 5. Cell-free biosensing is accessible to 
diverse stakeholders.   
4
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
4

 
Importantly, developing simple, af-
fordable, and rapid water quality di-
agnostics is a process that occurs 
across scales, from research on mo-
lecular-level engineering required to 
detect and report on contaminants21 
to the user-focused research on un-
derstanding how to format tests for 
usability and accessibility18 to the so-
cial science research needed to un-
derstand how the newly gathered wa-
ter quality information impacts indi-
viduals and communities through 
changes in their knowledge, atti-
tudes, and behaviors.49 Our method-
ology incorporates both technical de-
velopments in STEM (biology, chem-
istry, engineering, synthetic biology) 
and qualitative and quantitative meth-
ods from the social sciences (anthro-
pology, epidemiology) at all stages 
(Fig. 6). Importantly, each stage will incorporate the perspectives of diverse community stakeholders in an 
open and inclusive manner. One important mechanism for this community engagement will be through the 
establishment of an 8-person Community Advisory Board. Members of the Community Advisory Board will 
represent diverse stakeholder groups in the Chicago area, with an emphasis on amplifying the voices of 
groups that have experienced the most environmental injustices in Chicago, (i.e., those living along the 
industrial corridor, non-white individuals, and those living in poorer wards).50,51 
Stage 1: Technology discovery and design. Each water contaminant requires the discovery of a 
natural biosensing mechanism (a biosensing ‘rule of life’) that can be leveraged in a portable cell-free tech-
nology. From a technology perspective, we will address this need through molecular engineering to genet-
ically rewire sensors (riboswitches or aTFs) to produce easily visible outputs in response to detecting the 
specified contaminant and coupling chemistry techniques that may be needed to convert a desired con-
taminant target into a molecule that can be sensed by a biosensor. From a social science perspective, it is 
critical to understand at this early stage the perceptions about the contaminant within a target community: 
are they aware this contaminant is a priority? Do they have adequate mitigation strategies (e.g., access to 
filtration or alternative water supplies) if the contaminant is identified? Do they have community advocacy 
to enact long term change (e.g., replace aged pipe infrastructure) if contamination is found to be highly 
prevalent in their community? In this stage, we will address this need through town hall meetings in collab-
oration with the Community Advisory Board as well as through focus group discussions. 
Stage 2: Community-driven usability development. Once the technology is designed, it is para-
mount that it is usable and accessible by communities impacted by these contaminants. From a technology 
perspective, there are multiple ways that the presence of a water contaminant can be communicated to a 
user, for example through the generation of fluorescence, the creation of a visible color, or the development 
of a line on a lateral flow strip like an at-home COVID test. Developing the test can require high-throughput 
optimization to ensure the biosensors are sensitive and function robustly in the given test format, and in-
corporating sample processing steps (e.g., concentrating contaminants to amplify detection signals), and 
molecular and device engineering to achieve the indicated performance. From a social science perspective, 
we will conduct iterations of usability studies to inform the molecular and device engineering of the biosen-
sors. Participants in these studies will be asked to use different types of test formats (e.g., lateral flow, 
fluorescence) to test water samples either pre-seeded with known levels of contaminants, or control tests 
designed to produce specific output signals, to determine if participants interpreted test results accurately. 
They will then answer open-ended questions about knowledge, attitudes, and behavior (KAB) to inform 
optimization of technology features most important to users (e.g., speed of the test, simplicity of the test, 
cost of the test, etc.) and the survey design in Stage 3. 
 
Figure 6. A three-stage methodology for the collaborative de-
sign, development, and distribution of rapid, in-home, water 
quality monitoring tests for lead, copper, and PFAS.  
5
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
5

 
Stage 3: Community impact research through test distribution. The goal of biosensor technology 
development is to empower individuals with information about their water quality so that they can make 
decisions to improve their lives. However, this goal is not always realized with technology development.42 
From a technology perspective, ensuring the accuracy and reliability of biosensor tests is essential for use 
and impact. Technology outputs will be compared with gold-standard contaminant measurements to track 
accuracy as tests are distributed.  From a social science perspective, we will work to understand how water 
quality monitoring technologies influence KAB of users about the contaminant of interest, and the diagnostic 
developed to detect it. Key activities for Stage 3 are two surveys conducted before and after participants 
use the biosensor tests to understand key demographics, and changes in water insecurity and KAB related 
to the contaminant of interest. Findings will be communicated to participants and their communities through-
out the project in consultation with the Community Advisory Board. 
 
II.A. Background on targets for biosensing. We selected Pb, Cu, and PFAS as priority contaminants for 
several reasons: (i) severity—exposure to these molecules is linked to hundreds of thousands of deaths 
and billions of dollars per year;19,52,53 (ii) prevalence—these are some of the most widely distributed con-
taminants in the United States;7,54,55 (iii) technology suitability (see Section II.C.1).  
Lead (Pb) exposure is widely recognized as a top environmental health threat in the US, with a 
large proportion of exposure occurring through water.56 Pb toxicity disproportionately affects vulnerable and 
marginalized populations57,58 and is therefore a major environmental justice concern.59,60 Pb continues to 
be a pressing environmental health challenge in part because of the difficulty in identifying exposure (see 
Section I.A). Our inability to rapidly detect Pb has caused public health crises and perpetuated public health 
inequities, as seen in Flint,61,62 Newark,63,64 Washington DC,22,65 and Chicago.23 There is thus a great need 
for low-cost Pb tests that enable the public to test for exposure where and when there is cause to do so. 
While less recognized as an issue than Pb, Cu is also a serious contaminant of health concern in 
drinking water. In fact, allowable copper ion (Cu(II)) concentration in drinking water is addressed alongside 
lead through the EPA’s lead and copper rule (LCR). The LCR currently defines an action level of 1.3 ppm 
(0.02 µM) for copper concentration, meaning that a drinking water system must undertake mitigation strat-
egies if it finds a significant number of sources (10%) having at or above this concentration. High levels of 
copper are harmful to human health and can lead to severe illness including kidney and liver damage.66 
Test sensitivity is vitally important for proper detection of Cu exposure. 
PFAS are surfactants that contain many carbon–fluorine bonds, are environmentally persistent, 
and bioaccumulate.67 This pervasive and persistent contamination is alarming because chronic exposure 
to even low levels of these compounds is associated with thyroid disease, liver damage, high cholesterol, 
reduced immune responses, low birth weights, and several cancers. PFAS are used as water-, oil-, and 
stain-resistant barriers in thousands of consumer products (e.g., Teflon®) and are found in the blood of 
nearly all Americans,68 drinking water, surface waters, aquaculture, and agricultural products around the 
world. Heavily contaminated water would present ~1 ppb (1 μg/L) PFAS, but many communities face con-
tamination at far lower levels of 1-10 ppt (1-10 ng/L). PFAS detection now requires mass spectrometry-
based methods, which are expensive and largely unavailable to affected populations. Therefore, non-MS-
based PFAS detection at the ppt sensitivity level represents an important challenge and opportunity.  
 
II.B. Innovation. Our proposed three-stage methodology towards developing biosensor technologies is 
only possible today because of both recent technical developments in STEM (cell-free synthetic biology, 
aTF and riboswitch biosensing, chemical amplification and destruction methods) and qualitative and quan-
titative social science methodologies (ethnographic observations, interviews, surveys, participatory dissem-
ination). Integrating expertise across disciplines allows us to evaluate true societal impact of technologies 
that have emerged from URoL. Our expertise spans anthropology, biochemical engineering, chemistry, 
molecular biology, and synthetic biology. Specifically, our senior personnel span 4 NSF Directorates includ-
ing Behavioral and Economic Sciences (Young, Weinstock), Biological Sciences (Lucks, Jewett, and Ka-
rim), Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Dichtel), and Engineering (Gaillard, Lucks, Jewett, Karim), Fur-
thermore, as we develop the methodology, community stakeholders are at the core of new developments. 
Importantly, each of our contaminant targets are at different stages of our development pipeline: 
lead detection is prepared to enter Stage 3, with a commercial product that has been designed and devel-
oped; copper test development is at Stage 2, with biosensors identified and engineered into tests that 
6
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
6

 
function in the laboratory and have been field-tested with expert users; and PFAS detection is ready for 
Stage 1 design, with concepts for detection that combine chemistry and biosensing waiting to be tested 
(see Section II.C). As such, we can begin working on all three stages of our proposed methodology in 
parallel. Overall, the integration of multiple disciplines in this community-driven approach to develop these 
water quality tests will allow us to train students on these convergent approaches (see Section II.E). 
 
II.C. Preliminary Work. Several lines of research make our proposed work possible: 
II.C.1 Analysis of drinking water data shows major concerns about water quality both domestically 
and abroad. The co-PIs have analyzed nationally representative data about perceived drinking water safety 
from 140 countries and found that there is global concern about the safety of drinking water; 40% of Amer-
icans believe their drinking water will cause them serious harm in the next two years.69 Using data from the 
US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), Young has also demonstrated the de-
cline in Americans’ trust in drinking water following the Flint Pb crisis70 and been involved in a 2020-2021 
community-based participatory research project on water priorities in Evanston, IL.71-73 Preliminary data 
suggest that while there is substantial concern about drinking water safety, particularly from Pb pipes, res-
idents have limited knowledge on Pb testing, on Pb pipe replacements, and avoiding exposure to Pb. Eval-
uating in-home Pb biosensor tests could improve trust and safety in drinking water. 
 
II.C.2. The ROSALIND platform allows for 
design of cell-free biosensors for heavy 
metals. We have made significant progress in 
developing biosensors for Pb and Cu. Lead 
and copper are both sensed by microbes in 
nature using metal-sensing aTFs. Specifically, 
lead is detected by the ArsR/SmtB family aTF 
CadC, which is naturally found in the pI258 
plasmid within Staphylococcus aureus74 while 
copper is sensed by the aTF CsoR found in 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.75 In prior pub-
lished work, we utilized each of these biosen-
sors in our ROSALIND platform (Section I.B) 
to create customized ROSALIND reactions 
that could detect lead or copper in water sam-
ples.18 By titrating different amounts of lead or copper into these ROSALIND reactions and measuring flu-
orescent output signals, we were able to characterize the limit of detection (LoD) of the reactions to be ~260 
ppb for lead and ~320 ppb for copper (Fig. 7). Interestingly the observed LoD for copper was less than the 
threshold set by the US EPA’s LCR, which is 1.3 ppm (1,300 ppb). By including a higher concentration of 
the CsoR protein in the reaction, we found that we could desensitize the system to achieve a tunable limit 
of detection of 1.3 ppm.18 The ROSALIND platform provides flexibility to design and develop cell-free bio-
sensors with specific attributes.  
 
II.C.3. Lead detection sensitivity has been improved 
through the commercialization of the ROSALIND 
platform by Stemloop, Inc. Lucks and Jewett co-
founded Stemloop, Inc. in 2019 to develop convenient 
user interfaces and reliable manufacturing methods to 
scale up distribution of biosensing tests. In 2022, Stem-
loop launched the  µSense product which uses 
ROSALIND reactions to detect lead at levels of 5 ppb 
or higher using a lateral flow device as a read out (Fig. 
8). In this format, users rehydrate ROSALIND reactions using a sample of their tap water, wait 15 minutes, 
then insert a lateral flow strip. Development of the lateral flow strip happens similar to an at-home COVID 
test: the presence of both the control and test band indicate that the water has > 5 ppb lead. We note that 
ROSALIND reactions are safe since they utilize DNA templates and purified proteins and do not contain 
 
Figure 7. ROSALIND platform can optimize biosen-
sors for heavy metals including (A) copper and (B) 
lead.   
 
Figure 8. Preliminary testing shows that 
manufactured Pb tests function as designed. 
7
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
7

 
any other components of the organisms from which the aTFs are derived. Developing biosensing systems 
with user testing in mind is important for end use. 
 
II.C.4. PFAS can be removed from water and mineralized to fluoride ions under mild conditions. The 
relevant levels for detecting PFAS in contaminated water resources are quite low, as a heavily contami-
nated water sample would contain 100-1,000 ppt PFAS. However, consumer tests will ultimately need to 
detect PFAS at levels as low as 1 ppt to be informative, which is around the current state-of-the-art for 
validated mass spectrometry-based PFAS measurements. This detection threshold remains 50 times 
higher than the 2022 EPA advisory levels for perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) of 0.04 ppt, which is beyond 
the detection limits of all available detection technologies. Two recent advances by Dichtel could enable 
low ppt level quantification of PFAS without the need for expensive mass spectrometry. First, novel adsor-
bents based on functionalized cyclodextrins remove PFAS from water and can be regenerated, resulting in 
an at-least 106-fold amplification of their concentration relative to the original water sample.76 This feature 
has led Dichtel’s cyclodextrin-based adsorbents to be used as analytical pre-concentrators commercially in 
passive water samplers77 and consumer-facing PFAS test kits that still require mass spectrometry.78 Sec-
ond, Dichtel recently discovered how to mineralize the PFAS to produce fluoride ions.79 This approach 
separates the PFAS selectively over other fluorine sources (e.g., fluoride ions) that might be present in 
water samples and is non-targeted (i.e., not just a single pollutant such as PFOA of the ~10,000 known 
PFAS compounds). Coupling this approach with RNA riboswitches could achieve sensitive PFAS detection 
without relying on expensive instruments. 
  
II.C.5. Fluoride can be sensed using RNA riboswitches. We have made 
significant progress in utilizing the natural fluoride-sensing RNA riboswitch bi-
osensor from Bacillus cereus in cell-free systems to detect fluoride.80 In prior 
published work, we discovered the RNA folding mechanism underlying fluo-
ride riboswitch function81 and used that knowledge to develop a version of the 
ROSALIND reaction platform that utilizes the riboswitch to detect fluoride in 
water samples.21 To enhance the analytical sensitivity of the platform, we uti-
lized a cell-free gene expression system that supports protein translation so 
that we could utilize an enzymatic reporter catecholase synthesized in situ 
when the riboswitch detects fluoride. Specifically, the catecholase enzyme 
cleaves a colorless compound included in the reaction into a yellow compound 
that is visible by eye and offers signal amplification because each enzyme 
synthesized can generate multiple, colored compounds. We demonstrated 
that this platform detects fluoride at 1.5 ppm, corresponding to the WHO’s 
secondary containment limit for fluoride in water49 (Fig. 9). Setting the stage 
for Aim 3, we have recently demonstrated improved sensitivity of the fluoride 
riboswitch (200 ppb) and compatibility with samples generated from PFAS destruction. 
 
II.C.6. Cell-free biosensors have been tested in 
field settings, including with non-expert users. In 
addition to developing biosensing mechanisms, we 
have performed field testing with expert users, and 
in the case of fluoride detection, non-expert users. 
The ROSALIND platform was first field tested in 
2019 in the context of heavy metal detection follow-
ing the California Camp Fire in Paradise, CA in 2018 
(Fig. 10A). With support from an NSF RAPID grant 
(NSF2028651), the PIs developed a strategy for 
manufacture of tests in Evanston, IL, transport to 
Paradise, CA, and field testing by expert users. This 
initial round of testing identified deficiencies in pack-
aging that were resolved followed by a second round of testing, demonstrating that all tests of Paradise 
 
Figure 9. Preliminary 
fluoride detection.  
 
Figure 10. Field test results in (A) California and 
(B) Kenya. Participants and experts participate 
in data evaluation.  
8
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
8

 
municipal water supplies functioned as intended.18 The µSense product has been additionally validated 
using field samples as part of its product development.  
In 2022, Young and Lucks led a field trial of the fluoride biosensor in Kisumu, Kenya among non-
experts (Fig. 10B).49 In this study, fluoride sensing tests were manufactured in Evanston then shipped and 
transported to households in rural Kenya (Nakuru, along the Rift Valley, where geogenic fluoride is com-
mon). Community members tested up to three household water samples (n=57) compared to “gold stand-
ard” fluoride testing. All but one study participant was able to operate and interpret the tests without issue. 
This fluoride biosensor study demonstrated the suitability of biosensors for accurate contaminant detection 
outside of the laboratory, the utility of understanding knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors related to fluoride 
for fluoride testing, and how user feedback can inform subsequent iterations of the biosensor test. These 
studies serve as a foundation for assessing societal impact of the proposed work in Chicago. 
 
II.D. Technical Plan. 
II.D.1. Aim 1: Lead (Stage 3 Focus) 
Overview. Lead (Pb) biosensors have been developed and field-tested (Stages 1 and 2)18 and are ready 
for a broader distribution into communities. However, further evaluation in a “real world” setting is needed 
to ensure it can be used by non-scientists. In this aim, we will focus on assessing the societal impact (Stage 
3) of Pb tests, provided by Stemloop, Inc. (see Project Management Plan and Letter of Support). Our 
objective is to test the accuracy and interpretability of the in-home Pb test and its impacts on knowledge, 
attitudes, and preventative behaviors (KAB) about Pb in families with young children in Chicago (Fig. 11). 
Key activities for Stage 3 include two surveys, conducted before and two weeks after participants use the 
lead biosensor tests. These surveys will test Hypothesis 1, that users can correctly interpret the diagnostic 
output, and Hypothesis 2, that users will have greater knowledge about Pb and water testing, attitudes 
towards water testing will be more positive, and they will engage in more behaviors to reduce Pb exposure 
once they are aware of lead testing capabilities and contamination. 
 
Approach. We will start by re-
cruiting through community or-
ganizations and our Community 
Advisory Board with whom we 
have already been in contact 
(see 
Project 
Management 
Plan and Letters of Support). 
Cook County residents with 
young children (6 years or less, 
the window when children are 
most vulnerable to Pb tox-
icity19,82) who have an internet-
enabled laptop or cell phones 
with video conferencing capabilities, or who are willing to meet in person for testing their tap water, are 
eligible. To increase the likelihood of finding Pb exposure, we will also include housing type as an eligibility 
requirement (i.e., participants should live in a 1- or 2-unit residence built before 1984). We will sample to 
recruit across socio-economic status, gender, race, ethnicity, age, and technological literacy, with an em-
phasis on those more likely to be experiencing environmental injustice. We will again draw on community 
connections (see Letters of Support) as well as the relationships we established during the now completed 
$1.2 million NSF-funded study with community organizations and schools in 3 Chicagoland communities.  
 
 
Once participants have consented via telephone, we will conduct surveys and testing. Sample size 
calculations83 using 95% sensitivity and specificity estimates for the test, a 95% confidence interval, 5% 
precision, and 40% estimated prevalence of samples containing lead above 5 ppm based on published 
lead prevalence results58 and our target demographic area which enriches for lead pipe exposure, we cal-
culate that we need 182 samples to measure diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of the tests. Adding an 
additional 10% of tests above this estimate to account for possible imperfections of tests, loss/damage 
during shipment, or unreadable outputs, results in 200 tests, which we will conduct with 100 individuals (2 
tests/individual). Our community partners have assured us that this recruitment is feasible. 
 
Figure 11. Aim 1.  
9
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
9

 
 
 
In Survey 1, we will establish key demographics, water insecurity, and knowledge, attitudes, and 
behaviors related to the contaminant of interest (Table 1).84-86 Participants will then have testing boxes 
mailed to their homes containing two µSense at-home Pb tests, two empty metal-free, acid-cleaned poly-
propylene sampling tubes for water collection, instructions, and information about Pb mitigation resources. 
Enclosed instructions will guide participants through 4 tasks (Fig. 11): Step 1) Collecting tap water samples. 
Two samples from the hot tap will be collected in polypropylene tubes in the morning, (i.e., after water has 
stood for 8-10 hours) and a second sample after water has run for 1 minute/5 liters, to maximize the chances 
of observing Pb that has leached into water sitting in pipes overnight and to approximately account for 
length of pipes in the household.87 Step 2) Using the at-home Pb test. Participants will apply the water they 
collected in Step 1 to the at-home Pb tests according to provided test kit instructions. Step 3) Reporting test 
results. Participants will take a photograph of both tests and text or email them to the study team. If the at-
home test indicates the presence of Pb, filters will be immediately provided and participants will receive 
additional information about mitigation resources and strategies. Step 4) Returning the kit and water sam-
ples. Participants will place the two samples of their tap water and all testing materials into the box and 
send it to Northwestern for gold-standard Pb testing using the pre-addressed, postage paid label.  
 
 
Once the drinking water samples are re-
ceived at Northwestern, they will be immediately fil-
tered, using acid cleaned syringe filters and stored 
acidified using trace metal grade nitric acid (HNO3). 
In most instances, we expect that Pb will be in the 0-
10 ppb range and therefore the first set of analyses 
performed will performed by transversely heated 
graphite furnace (GFAAS) atomic absorption spec-
troscopy88 using a high-resolution continuum source 
graphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscope 
(HR-CS-GFAAS)89-91 equipped with an echelle mon-
ochromator and a CCD detector (ContrAA 800 G, An-
alytik Jena). This instrument has a spectral resolution 
of 2 pm at 200 nm and is therefore able to resolve 
spectral interferences from other elements/species. 
The characteristic masses corresponding to an ab-
sorbance A = 0.0044 (or 1% absorption) for Pb is 6 
pg for both elements using wavelengths at 324.754 
nm and 283.306 nm respectively. This corresponds 
to Pb concentrations of 300 ppt, well below the US-EPA standards. Results of the gold standard analyses 
will be communicated by telephone and in writing to participants as soon as they are available, in approxi-
mately 1-2 weeks. Participants whose water was determined to contain elevated levels of Pb (> 1 ppm) by 
laboratory analysis will be provided filters and liaised with Cook County lead mitigation resources. 
 
 
Survey 2 (S2 on Table 1) will be scheduled approximately two weeks after Survey 1.  This survey 
will cover experiences of water insecurity, the impacts of the test results on KAB, and experiences with the 
test. Study staff will also answer any questions that the participant may have about water contamination, 
including information shared as part of the results of the gold standard analyses.  
To test Hypothesis 1, that users can correctly interpret diagnostic output (i.e., the photographs of 
tests in Step 3 will match user’s interpretation of water lead content in >95% of samples), we will compare 
participants’ interpretations of the at-home Pb test to that of a trained technician. We hypothesize that the 
technician’s interpretation of the photographs will match the user’s interpretation of Pb content in >95% of 
the 200 samples; with this sample size we will be powered at a 95% confidence level.  
 
To test Hypothesis 2 about changes in Pb KAB, we will investigate differences in responses from 
Survey 1 to Survey 2 (Table 1). Knowledge will be scored based on the Chicago Lead Knowledge Test.87 
Although we could find no other studies about changes to Pb KAB, we expect to observe a 20% increase 
in knowledge based on changes in knowledge and attitudes on other topics (e.g., AIDS prevention, educa-
tion).86,92 Changes in attitudes will be determined by assessing differences in Likert responses to survey 
items about valuation of drinking water and perceived risks of Pb. We similarly expect to see a 20% increase 
in positive attitudes towards drinking water safety and Pb detection. The frequency of Pb mitigation-related 
Table 1. Key topics & items, by survey (S). 
 
Survey Topics 
S1 
S2 
Socio-demographics: age, housing type, 
race, ethnicity, income, education, zip code 
  
  
Water insecurity: Household Water Insecu-
rity Experiences Scale80 
  
  
Knowledge: About pathways and conse-
quences of exposure81 
  
  
Attitude: Trust in water, perceived severity 
of harm from contaminant82 
  
  
Behavior: Contaminant avoidance (water 
avoidance, filtration) and risk identification 
strategies (blood tests) 
  
  
Experiences with at-home biosensor test 
  
  
10
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
10

 
behaviors will be summed at each time point. We expect that there will be an increase in behaviors to 
reduce Pb exposure in 90% of homes in which Pb has been detected. We will also explore if differences in 
knowledge, attitude, or behaviors vary by socio-demographic characteristics, including education, race, and 
income level. All statistical analyses will be performed using Stata.93 
 
Anticipated results and alternative approaches. The primary expected outcome is an at-home test that can 
easily be used by non-scientists to determine if there is Pb in their water. Findings about its accuracy and 
impact on KAB will be communicated to participants through follow up email/mail communications, and in 
aggregate to the broader communities in consultation with the Community Advisory Board including at city 
council meetings, community meetings, and in two OpEds in Chicago newspapers, similar to those we have 
published elsewhere.94,95 Several potential limitations and problems are possible including: (i) Participant 
expectations, communication, and health: Because there is no safe limit of Pb in drinking water,9 it is critical 
that participants correctly understand the purpose and structure of this study and the results of the at-home 
Pb tests. (ii) Recruitment and follow-up challenges. To mitigate these, we are partnering with community-
based organizations to ensure the study meets community needs and is broadly advertised (see Project 
Management Plan and Letters of Support). To manage follow-up, we have designed the study to require 
no physical travel, only video and telephone calls, which will reduce some of the recognized barriers to 
continued study participation and inflated the sample size by 10% to account for missing data. (iii) Statistical 
power: Because prevalence estimates of Pb in drinking water are imprecise, prevalence estimates used in 
sample size calculations may be incorrect. If this is the case, we can consider revising the sample size 
based on the prevalence observed in this study, performing additional tests as the budget allows. (iv) Legal 
challenges: In Illinois, the Residential Real Property Act requires homeowners to disclose known issues to 
potential buyers, including the safety of the drinking water. During the process of written consent, we will 
provide information to homeowners about this requirement so that they can decide for themselves if the 
knowledge gained about potential lead exposure is worth the risk to potential real estate value. 
 
II.D.2. Aim 2: Copper (Stage 2 Focus) 
Overview. The mechanism for copper (Cu) detection using biosensors has already been identified through 
the development of the ROSALIND platform using the CsoR aTF to sense copper (Stage 1; Section II.C.3) 
and preliminary field testing has been conducted (Section II.C.3). In this aim, we will develop tests and 
perform user studies to detect copper in drinking water supplies (Stage 2). Stage 2 development will use 
ethnographic observations and interviews as well as expert-guided field testing to assess usability of copper 
biosensors. Iterations of testing with the community will lead to optimizing the usability and assessing the 
accuracy and interpretability of at-home copper sensing tests (Fig. 12). Below we describe our approach 
to Stage 2 that will be used in Aim 3 as well for PFAS. After development and user testing of the at-home 
copper tests we will assess the impact of these tests on KAB as described in Aim 1.  
 
Approach. First, we will observe users per-
forming ROSALIND reactions to understand 
how test formats can be adjusted to improve 
the user experience. Cu sensing reactions 
are developed at Northwestern and the oper-
ation format is different from the LFA format 
of Stemloop’s µSense tests used in Aim 1. 
As published, these ROSALIND reactions 
can detect Cu at a threshold of 1.3 ppm and 
use fluorescence as an output, requiring a 
3D printed hand-held illuminator that we 
have developed to visualize if a specific con-
taminant is present above the threshold, indicated by high fluorescence. Though, like µSense, copper tests 
are prepared as lyophilized reactions that users rehydrate as an initial part of the test.  
 
 
Participant recruitment will occur through community organizations and our Community Advisory 
Board with whom we have already been in contact (see Letters of Support) as in Aim 1. In this usability 
 
Figure 12. Aim 2.  
11
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
11

 
testing, we expect a sample size of 50 to be adequate because of the iterative design and the sample size 
slightly above that which has been suggested for usability studies.96-98  
 
 
After obtaining informed consent, we will perform user testing interviews with participants using 
copper-sensing ROSALIND kits comprised of two tests, two water samples pre-seeded with Cu levels (0 
ppm, 2 ppm) and necessary personal protective equipment (gloves, protective eye wear) and tube stands 
to minimize exposure and spills. At a mutually agreed upon time, we will meet with participants in person 
for approximately 1.5 hours. First, participants will open the box and examine the materials while an inter-
viewer from the study team observes and answers questions. Participants will then be asked to test the 
water from the 2 vials pre-seeded with copper using 2 at-home copper tests. While the test runs (roughly 
30 minutes), the interviewer will ask about the different aspects of the testing experience, including the test 
format, application of water, clarity of the instructions, ideas for improvements, etc. They will also ask open-
ended questions about knowledge, attitudes, and behavior (KAB) as a pre-survey to Stage 3. Once the test 
has finished running, the interviewer will ask the participant to read and photograph the output from the 2 
tests; the interviewer will also read the output. At the end of the interview, the interviewer will collect all 
materials and explain the observed test results to the participant.  
 
 
Interviews will be conducted in 5 rounds of approximately 10 individuals and will be recorded, and 
extensive notes will be taken by the trained interviewer. The number of samples for which participants 
correctly read test output will be tracked by the interviewer in a spreadsheet. Notes, and if appropriate, 
audio or video clips, will be coded using Atlas.ti qualitative software99 to identify issues and themes germane 
to test development. After every round, all Investigators will meet to discuss findings from that round of data 
collection, including the accuracy with which participants read the output of the tests. The number of cor-
rectly read test results will be divided by the total number of test results read to test our hypothesis that 
participants can correctly follow instructions and interpret results generated by the final iteration of the test 
with >90% accuracy. Improvements in testing materials and instructions will then be implemented for the 
next round of interviews until no further improvements are needed. 
 
 
Next, we will test the diagnostic accuracy (sensitivity and specificity) of at-home copper sensing 
tests on real-world water samples (Stage 3), as well as the ability of non-expert users to interpret test 
results. Diagnostic accuracy and KAB will be assessed by following the approach of Aim 1 (see Table 1). 
Sample size calculations using the methods and parameters of Aim 1, adjusting for the estimated preva-
lence of Cu at detectable levels to be 20% based on historical data54,66 and accounting for our target de-
mographic, and padding with an additional 10%, results in a sample size of 400 tests that we will conduct 
with 200 participants. Notably, when use gold-standard measurements, it may be necessary to use flame 
atomic absorption spectroscopy88 (FAAS) when Cu concentrations are close to the US-EPA standard for 
drinking water. FAAS (PinAAcle 500, Perkin Elmer) has a characteristic concentration of about 50 ppb with 
a linear response up to 2.5 ppm88.  
 
Anticipated results and alternative approaches. In this aim, we anticipate collecting data on usability and 
accuracy of our copper sensing test that will inform test format and distribution. If fluorescent read outs are 
not amenable to easy interpretation, we will evaluate colorimetric detection approaches by reconfiguring 
the biosensor reactions to work in cell-free systems that use colorimetric enzymes.21,49  
 
II.D.3. Aim 3: PFAS (Stage 1 Focus) 
Overview. In this aim, we will focus on Stage 1 of our methodology by designing and testing a novel strategy 
to detect PFAS using a hybrid chemical and biological approach that: (1) captures PFAS from water sup-
plies, (2) destroys the PFAS into breakdown products including fluoride anions that can (3) be detected by 
fluoride biosensors. This “Capture-Destroy-Detect" approach is appealing for several reasons: first, the 
capture strategy allows at least a 1,000,000-fold concentration of PFAS from typical contaminated water 
samples and separates the PFAS selectively over other fluorine sources that might be present in the original 
water sample (e.g., fluoride ions in municipal drinking water). Secondly, the PFAS degradation to fluoride 
will result in multiple PFAS contaminants (of the ~10,000 known PFAS compounds) to contribute to the 
detection event, instead of just a small number of PFAS targets (e.g., only PFOA, PFOS, etc.) which further 
boosts sensitivity and will alert communities to PFAS contamination of even as-yet unidentified contami-
nants. Water samples that detect PFAS via fluoride ion detection may then be analyzed by more expensive 
methods that speciate individual PFAS as needed. After testing the design of this technology, we propose 
12
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
12

 
to perform user testing following the approach of Aim 2 and assess the impact of these tests on KAB 
following the approach of Aim 1. Because the increased complexity of the amplification strategy and safety 
of likely reagents (e.g., DMSO, NaOH) required to detect PFAS without relying on mass spectrometry, we 
anticipate that user testing will focus on trained volunteers from project partners (e.g., Current, Water Keep-
ers) instead of all community members. 
 
Approach. We will begin by developing the 
capture-destroy-detect approach to be 
able to measure PFAS in water at the level 
of 1ppt (Fig. 13). The capture strategy is 
based on the development of newly cre-
ated sorbents by Dichtel.76 These sorbents 
consist of cyclodextrins (e.g., the active in-
gredient in Febreeze) that have been pol-
ymerized into insoluble networks that can 
be embedded in filter papers or isolated as 
powders or granular media. Previous char-
acterization of these adsorbents has 
shown that contaminants such as PFAS have rapid binding kinetics,100 permitting their use as flow through 
filtration systems. The use of these materials to collect PFAS, followed by PFAS elution from the membrane, 
has been demonstrated to enable adsorbent reuse and results in an approximately million-fold concentra-
tion amplification in preliminary experiments directed to this effort. The destroy strategy is based on mild 
reaction conditions recently discovered by the Dichtel lab to break down PFAS into secondary compounds 
(Section II.C.4).79 Importantly after breakdown, each PFAS molecule results in multiple fluoride anions 
released (e.g., 15 fluoride ions per PFOA molecule), offering further signal amplification. These released 
fluoride anions can then be used in a fluoride biosensing ROSALIND reaction to detect the resulting fluoride 
ions generated by PFAS degradation (Section II.C.5). We will focus on fluoride biosensing reactions that 
utilize bacterial cell-free transcription-translation extract systems33 to support the use of enzymatic protein 
reporter systems.21 These enzyme reporter systems have multiple turnover events creating multiple color-
imetric compounds per enzyme synthesized, thus offering additional signal amplification.21 
 
We will first develop a workflow that combines the capture-destroy-detect techniques in a serial 
procedure, using PFOA as a model PFAS compound. Based on a first target concentration of 50 ppt (50 
ng/L) PFOA water contamination, we will filter 5 L of water through 100 mg of cyclodextrin media, followed 
by elution of PFAS with 500 µL of DMSO. This solution will be input into a small volume (~100 µL of satu-
rated NaOH in H2O), and heated to 90 °C for 12 hours, to perform the deconstruction reaction. A titration 
of destruction reaction contents will be input into 25 µL fluoride-sensing ROSALIND reactions21 to detect 
fluoride. We note that our preliminary data has demonstrated that fluoride-sensing ROSALIND reactions 
can tolerate up to 2.5 % v/v of destruction reaction volume without any effect on performance.  
We will establish the viability of this procedure and then optimize each step to target detection of 1 
ppt PFOA concentrations in water samples. Areas of optimization include increasing input water flow 
through amount and decreasing elution volume in the capture step. It may also be possible to streamline 
the capture and destroy steps, such as by subjecting the PFAS-loaded adsorbent to the degradation con-
ditions without eluting the PFAS. Given that the target adsorbents do not themselves contain fluoride, their 
concomitant degradation will not produce false positives, and success in these types of strategies would 
streamline the design of an integrated PFAS test. For the detection step we will utilize RNA engineering 
strategies to increase signal amplification and thus overall sensitivity of detection to meet our target metric 
of 1.65 ppb detection (Fig. 13). We already have evidence that changing the sequence of the fluoride 
riboswitch terminator can significantly reduce OFF state (i.e., no fluoride) expression levels, allowing us to 
use an increase in fluoride biosensor DNA template which we have shown decreases the limit of detection 
from 2 ppm to 200 ppb (a factor of 100). Additional factors of increased sensitivity will come from further 
RNA engineering as well as introducing catalytic signal amplification circuits in the reactions.28 
As we optimize, we will assess detection capabilities through comparison with gold-standard test-
ing. Total fluorine and extractable organic fluorine (EOF) measurements will be made by HR-CS-GF MAS 
(molecular absorption spectroscopy) by adding a Ga(III) salt to form in the furnace the species GaF that 
 
Figure 13. Aim 3.  
13
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
13

 
absorbs at 211.248 nm.101 Solid phase extraction (SPE) will be performed to concentrate the dissolved 
organic fluorine compounds (i.e., PFAS as well as herbicides and antimicrobials) using Oasis® HLB (Wa-
ters) cartridges102 and detected by mass spectrometry, which 2 ppt detection limits already established at 
Northwestern facilities. Inorganic fluorine (i.e., fluoride (F-)) will be measured by ion chromatography 
(Metrohm 930 Compact IC Flex) on filtered non acidified water samples (detection limit 10 ppb) for drinking 
waters that are expected to have optimal fluoride concentrations of ~0.7 ppm.103  
We will next develop a test kit format for the capture-destroy-detect approach to be used by non-
expert users. For capture, the test kit will contain a flow through filter, which will be integrated with a destroy 
module based on the most efficient method identified to integrate these processes. For example, a fluidic 
channel that routes DMSO through the separation media and into a vessel containing NaOH might prove 
feasible, or, if it proves feasible, performing destruction in the presence of the separation media would 
simplify this design. Either way, a portion of the fluoride-containing DMSO solution will be introduced into 
existing biosensor formats as developed in Aim 2 for copper detection. Once developed, we will conduct 
user testing of the test kit as in Aim 2, using iterations of testing, observation, and refinement until we 
develop a test that can be conducted by a similar sample size (n=50) of non-expert users. We will then 
distribute test kits and surveys as in Aim 1 to study the impact of these test kits on the KAB of users. 
Sample size calculations using the methods and parameters of Aim 1 and adjusting the estimated preva-
lence of PFAS at the levels the test is designed to detect to 80% for our target demographic104 and padding 
with an additional 10% results in a sample size of 100 tests that we will conduct with 50 participants. 
 
Anticipated results and alternative approaches. We anticipate that our capture-destroy-detect approach will 
measure PFAS in water at the level of 1 ppt because the approach presents opportunities to amplify signal 
at multiple steps. If we are unable to detect PFAS at the 1 ppt level using the strategies described above, 
we will implement additional RNA engineering strategies to boost the sensitivity of the fluoride riboswitch 
detection approach. These include screening additional naturally occurring fluoride riboswitch variants 
available from the RNA families database (RFAM).105 In addition, we can utilize a new catalytic signal am-
plification circuit being developed in the Lucks Lab called polymerase strand recycling (PSR). PSR utilizes 
toehold-mediated DNA strand displacement (TMSD) signal generation, whereby a biosensor-generated 
RNA output is used to strand displace a quenched fluorophore double stranded DNA gate, releasing the 
quencher and generating a fluorescence output. RNA polymerase then transcribes the resulting fluores-
cently labeled DNA, releasing the original RNA output for further signal generation and providing additional 
signal amplification to improve the biosensor’s sensitivity. If user testing in Stages 2 and 3 is too complicated 
for non-expert participants, we will work with our community partners to identify an alternative approach. 
For instance, we envision partnering with Chicagoland Water Utilities to conduct testing. Although we aim 
to distribute testing to community members to the greatest possible extent, the development of sensitive 
PFAS detection approaches without relying on mass spectrometry would be a major development in this 
emerging crisis 
 
II.E. Education and Outreach. Our plan for education and outreach consists of three main components: 
(i) development of curricular resources for classroom settings, (ii) undergraduate research, and (iii) a re-
search experience for teachers (see Student Training Plan). For graduate student training, we will develop 
and embed new curricular modules for existing courses at Northwestern. These modules will cover topics 
focused on teaching STEM students how to integrate social sciences perspectives and techniques in syn-
thetic biology technology development, and introducing anthropology students to synthetic biology technol-
ogies that can enable their work. Each of these modules will be set in the context of water quality. Under-
graduate research will give opportunities for early research experiences in water quality. We note that our 
proposed RET program is modeled off the NSF RET program but is not an official NSF RET site. 
 
II.F. Data Management. The proposed work will produce four fundamental types of data to be shared: (i) 
laboratory data describing biosensor development; (ii) gold standard characterization of water quality data; 
(iii) human subjects data about experiences with biosensor test use, , and knowledge, attitudes, and be-
haviors about water contamination; and (iv) outreach data including publications, handouts, lecture materi-
als, potential problem sets, team project descriptions, and learning assessment materials. (see Data Man-
agement Plan). In general, research data will be shared with participants and communities (in consultation 
14
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
14

 
with our Community Advisory Board), upon publication of results, and educational outreach data will be 
shared as it is developed. Maintaining the confidentiality of human subjects is of the utmost importance. 
 
II.G. Timetable of Activities. Our performance plan consists of 3 aims phased across 5 years. We envision 
pursuing other paths of research as new technologies emerge and alternative directions that better facilitate 
the proposed work as they become necessary. Aim 1: IRB Approval (Y1), KAB study on 100 participants 
for Pb tests (Y1-Y2), disseminate Pb findings to local and scientific communities (Y1-Y3). Aim 2: Cu usa-
bility format tests on 50 participants (Y1-Y2), Cu sensitivity and specificity performance tests on 200 partic-
ipants (Y2-Y3), Cu KAB study on 200 participants (Y3-Y4), disseminate Cu findings to local and scientific 
communities (Y2-Y5). Aim 3: Develop PFAS capture-destroy-detect procedure that can detect 1 ppt PFAS 
in water (Y1-Y2), develop PFAS test kit for non-expert users (Y1-Y3), PFAS usability format tests on 50 
participants (Y2-Y3), PFAS sensitivity and specificity performance tests on 50 participants (Y3-Y4), PFAS 
KAB study on 50 participants (Y4-Y5), disseminate PFAS findings (Y4-Y5). 
 
II.H. Team Members, Organization, and Capabilities. The central goal of our proposal—to design, de-
velop, and distribute cell-free synthetic biology biosensors that enable individuals to assess the quality of 
their water—requires the integration of expertise across disciplines including anthropology, biology, chem-
istry, environmental sciences, and epidemiology. Our team is composed of researchers that are expert in 
these disciplines that cover multiple NSF directorates including biological sciences, engineering, mathe-
matical and physical sciences, and social, behavioral, and economic sciences; all have a track record of 
both leadership and collaboration (see Project Management Plan). A key component of our project is the 
integration of a Community Advisory Board that ensures that the local communities impacted by water 
contaminants and can benefit from this research help to co-produce the design, implementation, interpre-
tation, evaluation, and dissemination of the research. Members of the Community Advisory Board will come 
from Chicago civil society organizations, Chicagoland water utilities, and policymakers at the local, state, 
and national level (see Letters of Support and Project Management Plan). 
 
II.I. Results from Prior NSF Support (PI/co-PIs). 
 
 
Prof. Julius Lucks – Northwestern University. CAREER: Uncovering Quantitative Design Principles 
of RNA Regulators for Synthetic Biology (MCB 1650040; PI: Lucks; Period: 8/1/2016-1/31/2020; Amount: 
$750,000). Results. Intellectual Merit: Quantitative design principles of RNA structure/function for new types 
of RNA-mediated genetic control. Broader Impacts: New training approaches for synthetic biology including 
the Cold Spring Harbor Synthetic Biology Summer Course. Publications. 12.21,33,106-115  
Prof. Sera Young – Northwestern University. RCN: Building a Community of Practice for Household 
Water Insecurity (HWISE) Research (BCS: 1759972; PI: Jepson; Period: July 1, 2018-June 30,02024; 
Amount: $499,707). Results. Intellectual Merit: Integrating geospatial methods into and adapting existing 
household water insecurity concepts and methods; developing analytic concepts to integrate household 
water insecurity into key NSF research priorities such as the water-energy-food nexus. Broader Impacts: 
Advanced the development of both data infrastructure and human capital, including analytical and method-
ological advances to improve the abilities of academics, practitioners, and policy makers to understand the 
prevalence, causes, and far-ranging consequences of water insecurity. Publications: 50.4,8,84,116-162 
Prof. William Dichtel – Northwestern University. Prof. William Dichtel – Northwestern University. 
CCI Phase II: Center for Sustainable Polymers (CHE 1413862 and 1901635; PI: Marc Hillmyer, University 
of Minnesota; Period: 8/1/2014-7/31/2024; Amount: $40,000,000; ~$2M to Dichtel). Results. Intellectual 
Merit: Discovery and development of (A) cyclodextrin polymers for PFAS removal and (B) novel methods 
to recycle polyurethanes. Broader Impacts: Educational programs on sustainable polymers to 4-H clubs 
and at the Minnesota State Fair; established startup company related to cyclodextrin polymers for PFAS 
removal (Cyclopure, Inc.). Publications (by Dichtel): 28.163-190 
Prof. Jean-François Gaillard – Northwestern University. RAPID: Collaborative Research: A cell-
free synthetic biology platform for water quality monitoring—field testing and validation at the Camp Fire 
site in Paradise, California (MCB 1929912; PI: Lucks and Gaillard; Period: 05/01/2019- 04/30/2021; 
Amount: $180,000). Results. Intellectual Merit: Field testing of the ROSALIND platform within Paradise 
(CA) for detecting the presence of lead, copper, zinc, cadmium, and mercury. Broader Impacts: First field 
testing and validation for a new synthetic biology environmental monitoring technology. Publications: 1.18 
15
WISE-Dx LCRI Comments 
Attachment 2
15

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1138 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1072 W. Lynch Street 
Suite. 10 
Jackson, MS 39203
February 5, 2024
BY EMAIL: 
RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI)
Dear EPA:
The potential high level of lead and copper in Mississippi’s waters parallels with the high level 
of PFAS in several Mississippi counties, according to a Consumer Reports article and study 
released in August 2023.
In Jackson, a federal judge has allowed a lawsuit to move forward with about 1,000 children 
diagnosed with lead poisoning suing the city and Mississippi State Department of Health. As the 
water system there has been the subject of national headlines, some residents, and at least one 
college and a hospital, have decided to turn to private wells.
Jackson residents remain warned of lead levels over the EPA action level, but the city’s third-
party water administrator, Ted Henifin, has said his team had not found any lead pipes since it 
took over the system last fall, at least as of last month.
An investigation by Consumer Reports and Mississippi Spotlight, a collaboration of the Clarion 
Ledger and other news organizations, found detectable levels of lead in all 149 municipal and 
well water samples from all corners of Mississippi, covering all counties in the state.   
Essentially, more water testing must be conducted in all Mississippi municipalities and counties, 
not curtailed. And the water systems must pay for these tests, not the residents and/or taxpayers.
The EPA should not only incentivize the installation of filters in schools, they should also foot 
the bill – for the children.  

The MS State Conference NAACP and its leadership are willing to discuss further to resolve this 
matter. If you have any questions or concerns, Charles Taylor, Executive Director, can be 
reached at ctaylor@naacpms.org or 601-720-3517. 
Sincerely,
Charles Taylor
Executive Director 
MS State Conference NAACP

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1377 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
January 31, 2024 
 
President Joseph R. Biden, Jr. 
The White House 
1600 Pennsylvania Ave, NW 
Washington, DC 20500 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460  
 
Dear President Biden and Administrator Regan, 
 
As representatives for communities across Wisconsin, we are very worried about lead’s 
impact on the health of our constituents. We know that no level of lead in drinking water is 
safe, and elevated blood lead levels in children are associated with hearing loss, lower IQs, 
developmental delays, behavioral changes, anxiety, and depression. This is particularly 
concerning because in some of our communities, as many as 1 in 4 children under 6 are 
considered lead poisoned. 
 
Thanks to your Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, Wisconsin is already benefiting from a more 
than $400 million investment to remove our lead pipes. That said, we need more tools to 
move faster. Based on 2022 data from our Public Service Commission, Wisconsin still has at 
least 174,637 utility-side service lines that contain lead or galvanized material, and 
181,918 customer-side service lines that contain lead or galvanized material. Even with the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, Wisconsin will be approximately $600 million short to 
remove both utility-side and customer-side service lines. Additionally, we still have a lot to 
learn about the best ways to ensure we are quickly remediating lead paint and fixtures in 
our homes, schools, and childcare facilities.  
 
That’s why we appreciate the EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, which 
would put Wisconsin on a faster course toward lead remediation. These proposed 
improvements are an important opportunity to make good on your commitment to 
protecting children and families through strong investments in public health and 
environmental justice. 
 
We particularly appreciate that the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements include 100 
percent replacement requirements for water utilities within 10 years of finalization. To 
further improve the rule, we urge you to require water utilities to cover the costs of fully 
removing both utility side, and customer-side lead service lines. This will ensure that 
individuals who are already confronting the public health costs associated with lead 
poisoning do not need to cover replacement costs on their own. Additionally, unless all 
individuals are able to replace their customer-side lines, we will not be able to protect the 
entire community from lead contamination. 
 

We also appreciate that the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements include improved 
sampling, inventory, education, and notification requirements. We urge you to further build 
on these improvements by requiring public water systems to implement stronger testing 
and remediation plans for our schools and childcare facilities. This is the only way we can 
ensure Wisconsin children are fully protected. 
 
Thank you for your attention to this pressing matter. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Wisconsin State Senator Melissa Agard, Madison 
Wisconsin State Senator Dianne Hesselbein, Middleton 
Wisconsin State Senator LaTonya Johnson, Milwaukee 
Wisconsin State Senator Chris Larson, Milwaukee 
Wisconsin State Senator Kelda Roys, Madison 
Wisconsin State Senator Jeff Smith, Brunswick 
Wisconsin State Senator Mark Spreitzer, Beloit 
Wisconsin State Senator Robert Wirch, Kenosha 
 
Wisconsin State Representative Clinton Anderson, Beloit 
Wisconsin State Representative Jimmy Anderson, Fitchburg, WI 
Wisconsin State Representative Deb Andraca, Whitefish Bay 
Wisconsin State Representative Samba Baldeh, Madison 
Wisconsin State Representative Mike Bare, Verona 
Wisconsin State Representative Ryan Clancy, Milwaukee 
Wisconsin State Representative Sue Conley, Janesville 
Wisconsin State Representative Dave Considine, Baraboo 
Wisconsin State Representative Steve Doyle, Onalaska 
Wisconsin State Representative Jodi Emerson, Eau Claire  
Wisconsin State Representative Evan Goyke, Milwaukee 
Wisconsin State Representative Kalan Haywood, Milwaukee, WI 
Wisconsin State Representative Francesca Hong, Madison 
Wisconsin State Representative Jenna Jacobson, Oregon, WI 
Wisconsin State Representative Alex Joers, Middleton 
Wisconsin State Representative Darrin Madison, Milwaukee 
Wisconsin State Representative Supreme Moore Omokunde, Milwaukee 
Wisconsin State Representative Greta Neubauer, Racine, Wisconsin 
Wisconsin State Representative Tod Ohnstad, Kenosha 
Wisconsin State Representative Lori Palmeri, Oshkosh  
Wisconsin State Representative Melissa Ratcliff, Cottage Grove 
Wisconsin State Representative Katrina Shankland, Stevens Point 
Wisconsin State Representative Kristina Shelton, Green Bay 
Wisconsin State Representative Christine Sinicki, Milwaukee 
Wisconsin State Representative Lee Snodgrass, Appleton 
Wisconsin State Representative Shelia Stubbs, Camden, Arkansas 
Wisconsin State Representative Lisa Subeck, Madison 
Wisconsin State Representative Robyn Vining, Wauwatosa

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0931 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5th, 2024 
 
Re: Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for  
Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI), 88 Fed. Reg. 84878 (December 6, 
2023), Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements (“LCRI” or “the Rule”). These comments are submitted by: Clean 
Wisconsin, on behalf of its members and supporters statewide; Midwest 
Environmental Advocates (MEA); and the Coalition on Lead Emergency (COLE). 
Clean Wisconsin, MEA, and COLE previously filed comments on February 12, 2020, 
in response to the Lead and Copper Rule revisions proposed by the EPA on 
November 13, 2019 (“the LCRR”), Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300. Clean 
Wisconsin and MEA further commented on July 28, 2021, in response to EPA’s 
request for comment on whether and how to revisit the LCRR, Docket ID No. 
EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0255. In those comments, we explained that the LCRR was 
woefully insufficient to address longstanding inadequacies in the Lead and Copper 
Rule. We specifically emphasized that EPA must lower the action level, require 
mandatory lead service line replacement (LSLR), and that utilities must be 
responsible for LSLR, not individual customers. The proposed LCRI mark major 
improvements on each of these issues. But there remain areas for improvement in 
EPA’s proposal. 
 
Lead Exposure in Wisconsin 
Childhood lead poisoning is a persistent public health issue that disproportionately 
harms lower-income children of color across the country.1 A recent study of blood lead 
levels in Milwaukee County children demonstrated similar findings in Wisconsin.2 
 
1 President’s Task Force on Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks to Children, 
Federal Action Plan to Reduce Childhood Lead Exposures and Associated Health Impacts, 
December 2018.  https://ptfcehs.niehs.nih.gov/sites/niehsptfceh/files/resources/lead_action 
_plan_508.pdf (see also, https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/populations.htm)  
2 Emily E. Lynch & Helen C. S. Meier, The Intersectional Effect of Poverty, Home 
Ownership, And Racial/Ethnic Composition on Mean Childhood Blood Lead Levels in 
Milwaukee County Neighborhoods, 15 PLOS ONE 6 (2020). 

2 
 
Lead is a neurotoxin, and the health impacts of lead poisoning include damage to the 
brain and nervous systems, impaired growth, and development and behavioral 
problems.3 The effects can be long-lasting, including underperformance in school and 
increased likelihood of becoming incarcerated.4 There is also evidence that childhood 
lead exposure can cause long-term harm,5 and a recent study concluded that 
childhood lead exposure can reduce an American man’s lifespan by an average of 
almost three months.6 
While no safe blood lead level in children has been identified, the State of Wisconsin 
and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) use blood lead reference values to identify 
children with elevated blood lead levels.7 Lead poisoning is currently defined in the 
Wisconsin Statutes as a blood lead level of 5 µg/dL or more.8 The CDC also used that 
level until late 2021, when the agency lowered its blood reference level to 3.5 µg/dL.9 
When compared to the rest of the nation, Wisconsin’s children have one of the highest 
rates of elevated blood lead levels. In 2018, the last year for which the CDC has 
published data on its website, 6.6% of the children under 6 years of age who were 
tested in Wisconsin had blood lead levels above 5 µg/dL, while nationally, only 2.6% 
of children tested exceeded that that threshold.10 Only Pennsylvania had a similar 
rate of elevated blood lead levels among its children.11 
While the percentage of tested children with elevated blood levels has fallen 
somewhat over the past several years, 2.7% of children tested in Wisconsin in 2022 
have blood lead levels above the 5 µg/dL threshold, and 5.3% of children tested have 
blood lead levels above the 3.5 µg/dL threshold.12 Moreover, some areas of the state 
have much higher instances of lead poisoning than do others. For example, in 
 
3 Ctrs. for Disease Control & Prevention, Health Effects of Lead Exposure, 
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/health-effects.htm (last reviewed Jan. 28, 2024). 
4 Anna Aizer & Janet Currie, Lead and Juvenile Delinquency: New Evidence from Linked 
Birth, School, and Juvenile Detention Records, 101 Rev. Econ. & Stat. 575–587 (2019). 
5 https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/health-effects.htm  
 
6 National Bureau of Economic Research, Toxified to the Bone: Early-Life and Childhood 
Exposure to Lead and Men’s Old-Age Mortality, NBER Working Paper 31957 (December 
2023). https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w31957/w31957.pdf  
7 Wisconsin Department of Health Services (WDHS), Lead-Safe Wisconsin: Childhood Lead 
Poisoning Data and Data Analysis. https://www.dhs.wisconsin.gov/lead/data.htm (last 
reviewed Jan. 28, 2024). 
8 Wis. Stat. § 254.11(9). 
9 WDHS, Lead-Safe Wisconsin: Childhood Lead Poisoning Data and Data Analysis.  
10 Centers for Disease Control, Blood Lead Levels (µg/dL) among U.S. Children < 72 Months 
of Age, by State, Year, and Blood Lead Level (BLL) Group. 
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/docs/cbls-national-data-table-508.pdf  
11 Id. 
12 WDHS, Lead-Safe Wisconsin: Childhood Lead Poisoning Data and Data Analysis. 

3 
 
Milwaukee County, from 2018-2021, 6.25% of the children tested had blood lead levels 
above the 5 µg/dL threshold, and in historically-redlined areas in Milwaukee’s central 
city, many census tracts have dramatically higher incidences of lead poisoning, in 
some cases affecting nearly 25% of the children tested.13 Sadly, it is likely that even 
these numbers may underestimate the scope of the problem, because many children 
vulnerable to lead exposure are not tested. 
Although drinking water is only one means of lead exposure for children, it remains 
a significant exposure pathway. The primary source of lead in drinking water is lead 
service lines (LSLs), which release lead into water on the way to the tap. A recent 
EPA Fact Sheet estimated that there are as many as 340,000 LSLs remaining in 
Wisconsin communities.14 Based on data used in a 2021 analysis by the NRDC, 
Wisconsin had more LSLs per capita than any other state in the nation—nearly 5,600 
LSLs per 1000 residents.15 Using data compiled by the Public Service Commission of 
Wisconsin, we estimate that there are approximately 244,000 service lines requiring 
removal16 statewide, including nearly 70,000 in the City of Milwaukee alone.17 
Until these LSLs are taken out of the ground and replaced with safe plumbing 
materials, Wisconsin residents remain at risk of lead poisoning. The current 
situation is especially tragic and unacceptable because the harms imposed by 
LSLs have fallen, and will continue to fall, disproportionately on some of the most 
vulnerable and disadvantaged members of our society.  
Accordingly, we applaud the EPA for the change in course proposed in the LCRI. 
Requiring the replacement of all, or nearly all, LSLs over a period of ten years is 
an important, if overdue, change in the EPA’s lead policy. While we offer a 
number of comments below that we believe would strengthen the LCRI, we must 
acknowledge this important change. 
Some Wisconsin municipalities have actively been working to remove LSLs, including 
the 10 communities chosen to participate in EPA’s Lead Service Line Replacement 
 
13 WDHS, Childhood Lead Poisoning Data Explorer. https://dhsgis.wi.gov/dhs/clpde/.  
14 EPA Fact Sheet: 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment, April 
2023. https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-
04/Final_DWINSA%20Public%20Factsheet%204.4.23.pdf  
15 NRDC, Lead Pipes Are Widespread and Used in Every State (July 18, 2021). 
https://www.nrdc.org/resources/lead-pipes-are-widespread-and-used-every-state  
16 This number is the sum of the larger numbers for each type of line, i.e. the utility-side 
LSLs, and customer-side unknown and galvanized lines (which were likely to have been 
downstream of lead distribution lines).  
17 Public Service Commission of Wisconsin, Number of Service Lines by Material Type for 
Wisconsin Water Utilities, 2023. 
https://psc.wi.gov/Documents/water/W22_W29_Service_Lines_Material_Type.pdf  

4 
 
Accelerator initiative, announced in January of 2023.18 While we are pleased to see 
some communities moving forward with LSL replacements (“LSLRs”), and believe 
that those efforts demonstrate the feasibility of accelerating removal, we know there 
are many more communities at risk of being left behind. The LCRI’s ambitious goal 
of removing 100% of LSLs in no more than 10 years should become a reality, but will 
be dependent on adequate funding and resources to get the job done, including 
additional funds to pay for the private-side LSL removal. 
 
Comments 
 
I. 
The LCRI’s Lead Service Line Replacement Requirements are a major 
improvement, but steps must be taken to ensure these requirements are 
expeditiously and equitably implemented.  
The LCRI’s baseline requirement that PWS’s replace all LSLs and galvanized requiring 
replacement (collectively “LSLs”) within 10 years is a generational investment in public 
health. Compared with either the longstanding approach to LSLR or the LCRR, the LCRI’s 
LSLR requirements are a vast improvement. The previous approaches would allow LSLs to 
stay in use so long as to be indefinite, a result inconsistent with the only durable, long-term 
solution to the problem of lead in drinking water: removing all LSLs. That the LCR has not 
required mandatory LSLR earlier is a fundamental failure on the part of the government to 
safeguard the people of this country. This failure has caused untold harm to some of our 
nation’s most vulnerable populations. Given this, EPA has a duty to ensure the LCRI’s LSLR 
requirements are implemented and enforced as early and quickly as possible, and in a 
manner that guarantees that those who have carried and continue to carry an unjust lead 
burden are given the full benefit of these proposed improvements. Anything less would 
perpetuate historical wrongs permitted by EPA’s past implementation of the SDWA and 
LCR.   
Accordingly, we start by recognizing why mandatory LSLR is so needful, and how the LCRI 
delivers on that need. We then comment on some areas for improvement, to address concerns 
that the LCR, once again, will benefit some communities more than others, creating 
predictable, yet entirely avoidable, environmental justice problems. 
a. Mandatory lead service line replacement is necessary and long 
overdue. 
The basis for mandatory, full LSLR is straightforward. The predominant source of lead in 
drinking water in most homes is a lead service line. Efforts short of LSLR require permanent, 
ongoing expenditures of money and staff time, and do not entirely remove lead from the 
 
18 See, https://www.epa.gov/water-infrastructure/lead-service-line-replacement-accelerators, 
and https://www.epa.gov/water-infrastructure/lead-service-line-replacement-accelerator-
communities.  

5 
 
water. Treating water with orthophosphate or other chemicals to reduce corrosion—where 
this technique is even available—is expensive and does not remove all the lead from drinking 
water supplied by those LSLs, in any event. An approach where “optimizing” corrosion 
control technology means accepting some amount of lead in the water, when we know there 
is no safe level of lead to consume, is an oxymoron. Similarly, tap water filtration can reduce 
lead exposure significantly in the short-term, but it is another fix that requires ongoing, cost, 
maintenance, and time. Both approaches also leave open the possibility of technological or 
human error, exposing individuals, households, or even entire communities to lead in their 
tap water. The fundamental fact, now finally recognized in the LCRI, is that so long as LSLs 
remain in use anyone drinking water out of taps serviced by those lines is being exposed to 
lead or is at risk of being exposed to lead at any time. 
b. The LCRI must require as many LSLs be replaced as quickly as 
possible, while avoiding obstacles to LSLR in the most lead-burdened 
communities. 
  
i. The LCRI must set an early completion deadline with limited 
opportunities for deferred deadlines. 
The LCRI proposes a ten-year deadline for PWSs to replace their LSLs, finding this is feasible 
for the vast majority of PWSs based on observed LSLR rates in cities across America, 
including in Wisconsin, as well as the growing number of states with laws requiring LSLR. 
88 Fed. Reg. 84912. EPA also proposes two ways PWSs could be eligible for deferred deadlines 
and thus take longer than ten years to replace their LSLs, while also requiring states to set 
LSLR deadlines sooner than ten years from the rule implementation date when the state 
determines it is feasible for the PWS to do so. In sum, then, EPA is proposing a general ten-
year deadline with mechanisms for PWSs to go faster or slower, depending on PWS-specific 
characteristics. 
We concur with EPA that past and ongoing LSLR efforts are persuasive evidence that a ten-
year deadline for LSLR is feasible for almost all PWSs. However, there are many PWSs for 
which an earlier deadline, maybe much earlier, would plainly be feasible. See, e.g., 88 Fed. 
Reg. 84912 (citing Stoughton and Mayville, Wisconsin, as examples of systems that replaced 
their LSLs in a single year). EPA considers this approach in requesting comment on “whether 
it is feasible [f]or systems across the nation to complete service line replacement in a shorter 
timeframe than ten years, such as in six, seven, or eight years.” 88 Fed Reg. 84916 (emphasis 
added). 
We should all agree that the ultimate objective of the LCRI should be for LSLR to occur as 
soon as feasible, meaning that faster timelines must be required where feasible. There are at 
least two ways EPA could try to achieve this. 
First, what is currently proposed in the LCRI, EPA can set a baseline ten-year replacement 
deadline, with a requirement that states set an earlier deadline be set for PWSs that can 
feasibly replace all their LSLs in fewer than ten years. 88 Fed. Reg. 85065, proposed 40 CFR 
141.84(d)(5)(iv). 

6 
 
Second, EPA could set an earlier deadline than ten years for all PWSs, recognizing that more 
PWSs would therefore meet the eligibility criteria for deferred deadlines. 
On paper, it may look like a distinction without a difference. The only difference is that one 
approach bumps deadlines up where feasible, and the other approach pushes deadlines back 
where a ten-year deadline is not feasible. But the distinction matters. 
Consider a PWS with 90,000 LSLs. With a 10-year deadline to replace all LSLs, this PWS 
needs to replace 9,000 LSLs/year, and thus does not meet the eligibility requirement under 
for a deferred completion date for a PWS that would be required to replace more than 10,000 
LSLs per year. All things being equal, we would anticipate this PWS would be required to 
replace 900 LSLs/year for ten years.  
On an 8-year deadline for replacing LSLs, however, this same PWS would qualify for a 
deferred deadline because it would be required to replace 11,250 LSLs per year, more than 
the 10,000 LSLs per year EPA has identified as one of the deferred deadline eligibility 
criteria. Under EPA’s proposal, that deferred deadline should be set at 9 years—the amount 
of time the PWS needs at a 10,000 LSLs/year rate. 88 Fed. Reg. 85065, proposed 40 CFR 
141.84(d)(5)(v)(A).19  
Under EPA’s proposal states are required to set an earlier deadline than 10 years where 
feasible for a given PWS. 88 Fed. Reg. 85065, proposed 40 CFR 141.84(d)(5)(iv). Thus, it could 
be argued that under a ten-year default deadline the state could still direct this PWS to 
complete its LSLR within 9 years, because replacing 10,000 LSLs/year has been deemed 
feasible, and the LSLR would get done at the exact same time under both approaches.  
But EPA’s proposed LCRI does not explicitly state how a state sets that new, earlier deadline. 
Instead, it merely says:  
Where the State determines that a shortened replacement deadline is feasible for a 
water system (e.g., by considering the number of lead and galvanized requiring 
replacement service lines in a system’s inventory), the State must require the system 
to replace service lines by an earlier deadline than [otherwise] required . . . and 
establish a different minimum replacement rate[.] 
88 Fed. Reg. 85065, proposed 40 CFR 141.84(d)(5)(iv). 
This appears to give the state discretion to set an earlier deadline—or not—based on 
feasibility, with the number of LSLs to be replaced just an example of a factor to be considered 
in assessing what “feasibility” means in that context. It is not clear how quickly, if ever, a 
state agency with primacy even could accurately assess the feasibility of LSLR for each of the 
many PWSs with LSLs that need replacing. Indeed, there are entirely conceivable ways that 
PWSs could end up taking ten years to complete LSLR when, in retrospect, it could have been 
 
19 The same logic would apply to the other eligibility criteria for a deferred deadline for 
PWS with a high per capita LSLR rate proposed by EPA. As the number of years to 
complete LSLR shrinks, the number of LSLs that must be replaced per year grows, and 
thus the numerator grows while the denominator stays the same in the formula for the per 
capita criteria. (LSLs Replaced per year/Number of Households ≥ .039.)  

7 
 
completed faster, i.e. it was not required to do so by a state with primacy, either due to a 
failure to fully implement the provision due to resource constraints or political constraints, 
differing views of “feasibility, or there simply was not enough information to know at the time 
that an earlier deadline was indeed feasible. 
This is why the two approaches would likely yield different deadlines in application. One 
approach puts the burden on state agencies to make tough, discretionary calls to move 
deadlines up from a ten-year default, whereas under an earlier deadline that same agency 
simply processes requests to move deadlines back based on objective, mathematical eligibility 
criteria tethered to EPA’s feasibility findings in support of the LCRI. Wisconsin DNR would 
struggle to quickly assess the specific circumstances of each PWSs. The potential result of 
EPA’s proposed approach would thus be numerous PWSs being given 10 years to complete 
LSLR when they could feasibly have done so sooner yet were not required to do so for 
arbitrary reasons. 
This observation leads us to recommend EPA strongly consider a deadline earlier than 10 
years. Lowering the default deadline from ten-years to six, seven, or eight years, with 
deferred deadlines only for strictly eligible PWSs, would ensure that no PWS that could meet 
an earlier deadline fails to do so. Each year of earlier compliance would be extraordinarily 
helpful to the residents in that community, so avoiding unnecessary delay is imperative. 
We recognize that by setting an earlier deadline more—perhaps many more—PWSs will meet 
the eligibility criteria for deferred deadlines. It might be thought that this will increase the 
burden on states of administering the LCRI, because more deferred deadlines will need to be 
set. However, those deferred deadlines are set by objective criteria laid out in the proposed 
LCRI and should thus not be burdensome to set.  
This approach is particularly reasonable given that EPA is not proposing for the mandatory 
LSLR requirements to go into effect until early 2028. 
Alternatively, if EPA keeps the ten-year deadline, changes to the requirement for states to 
set earlier deadlines must be made to clarify what “feasible” means in that context, and to 
ensure states have the capacity to make these important determinations. 
EPA requests comment on whether “States should be required as a condition of primacy to 
set initial shortened deadlines by a certain timeframe, such as no later than 60 days after 
the compliance date ... .” 88 Fed. Reg. 84915. We agree that States should be affirmatively 
and explicitly required to set earlier deadlines for each PWS for which an earlier deadline is 
feasible, and that this could extend to being a condition for retaining primacy. 
However, as currently proposed, the LCRI does not set state agencies up to successfully set 
earlier deadlines for all PWS for which an earlier deadline is feasible, especially within as 
little as 60 days. There are at least two problems with the currently proposed LCRI in this 
regard. First, as stated above, states do not have the resources to set appropriate deadlines 
quickly and accurately for each PWS in the state. Wisconsin has over 550 municipal water 

8 
 
utilities.20 Second, because the LCRI does not create detailed criteria for setting an earlier 
deadline, it is left to a state agency’s discretion to determine what is “feasible.” That puts an 
agency in the difficult position of having to create fresh criteria and then apply them in an 
even-handed and transparent manner to hundreds of PWSs across the state.  
Given this, the LCRI should also be revised to explain with greater specificity not just when, 
but how states should determine which PWSs must meet earlier deadlines. As noted above, 
the LCRI simply lists the number of LSLs to be replaced as an example of a relevant 
consideration. That is not enough to guide state agencies in this difficult, important task. It 
will also generate transparency issues when some PWSs receive shorter timelines to complete 
LSLR than other, neighboring PWSs. If EPA instead creates clear, simple criteria that 
require an earlier deadline—just as it does for deferred deadlines—this would greatly 
alleviate the burden on state agencies like the Wisconsin DNR. Indeed, EPA could set 
numeric thresholds based on LSLs required to be replaced per year, that automatically 
trigger an expedited LSLR deadline, without entirely eliminating discretion at the state level. 
It is an option EPA should strongly consider, rather than simply leaving it to the states to 
figure out on an ad hoc basis.  
ii. The LCRI must be strengthened to ensure that mandatory 
LSLR replaces all LSLs. 
There are multiple areas where the LSLR requirement must be strengthened to decrease the 
opportunity for LSLs to stay in use and thus for lead-burdened communities to be exposed to 
lead in drinking water for a minute longer than necessary.  
The first point concerns which LSLs the water system must replace. 
The proposed LCRI would require water systems to replace all lead and GRR service 
lines, and any lead connectors encountered, that are “under control of” the water 
system. EPA is proposing to treat a service line as under the system’s control wherever 
a water system has adequate access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full 
service line replacement. 
88 Fed. Reg. 84920.  
EPA acknowledges the position of many advocates that this “under control of” qualifier 
creates a large potential loophole for PWSs to leave LSLs in the ground and, moreover, all 
LSLs are truly “under the control of” the water systems given the history of installation and 
the practical reality that the water system controls it even under private property. 88 Fed. 
Reg. 84923. While we tend to agree with those advocates that EPA could and should require 
PWSs to replace all LSLs without exceeding the bounds of SDWA, we recognize that EPA 
has considered this position and reached a different conclusion, and that recapitulating 
arguments may not be helpful at this juncture. To the extent EPA is not going to close this 
loophole and require utilities to replace the entire LSL, this requires EPA to do more to erode 
 
20 A list of estimated LSLs for each of these municipal water utilities is provided by the 
Wisconsin Public Service Commission. Available online at 
https://psc.wi.gov/Pages/ServiceType/Water/LeadServiceLine.aspx.  

9 
 
and avoid the barriers to full LSLR that this “under control of” qualifier will create. And the 
biggest barriers will be cost and property owner consent. 
On cost, Wisconsin DNR recently estimated the cost of replacing Wisconsin’s LSLs to be 
between $620-966 million.21 That same estimate projected that Wisconsin is in line to receive 
$400 million in total BIL funding to conduct LSLR. Id. This $220-566 million gap must be 
closed somehow. 
In Wisconsin, state law allows public water utilities to use ratepayer funds to provide 
financial assistance to the “owner” of a property to help pay for the cost of replacing the 
portion of the LSL on their property, so long as certain conditions are met. Wis. Stat. S. 
196.372. One of those conditions is that the municipality must have an ordinance requiring 
all owners of property with an LSL to replace it and authorizing the utility to provide 
financial assistance for this purpose. The utility cannot provide more than 50% of the cost of 
private side LSLR, and even that portion may be in the form of a (non-forgivable) loan. Any 
plan to provide financial assistance must be approved by the state Public Service 
Commission. Id.  
Thus, even in a state that has recently acted to increase the ability of utilities to socialize the 
costs of LSLR, significant barriers remain. If you are a Wisconsin resident drinking water 
provided by a PWS, the LCRI may not expedite removal of your LSL, unless you happen to 
live in a municipality that has enacted the required ordinances and gotten approval from a 
state commission. And even then, the assistance you receive may be only partial, leaving you 
with a significant bill, perhaps in the thousands of dollars, to replace an LSL that you played 
no part in putting in the ground in the first place. 
If the LCRI were to require PWSs to pay the full cost, however, communities would not be 
left behind in this way. The requirement to catalog local laws that create barriers to access, 
with the intent of putting pressure on those laws, is admirable. But we should not deceive 
ourselves that these efforts are a substitute for a requirement that PWSs pay for full LSLR.  
On consent, the LCRI acknowledges that in certain cases a property owner might be 
unavailable or unwilling to provide consent to replace the LSL on their side of the property 
line. 88 Fed. Reg. 84920. The LCRI requires PWSs to make a “reasonable effort” to secure 
this consent. 88 Fed. Reg. 84923. We understand that the LCRI proposes a series of 
reasonable steps to increase the likelihood that these barriers are weakened or removed, i.e. 
cataloging state laws that create barriers to access public education, etc. Those elements of 
the LCRI will help. In places in Wisconsin without local ordinances mandating private-side 
LSLR, the need to secure consent is an obstacle to full LSLR, particularly for those who rent 
or otherwise live in non-owner-occupied home.  
Where consent is required for LSLR, property owners, including landlords, can be an obstacle 
to complete LSLR, especially if they are absentee landlords or out of state investors, a 
 
21 Wisconsin Natural Resources Board Meeting, December 13, 2023 at 2:47:00, available 
online at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lsjpmqHO32o&list=PLz1F3wus1j4waMx2rbPQUEReD
mDcngkdT&index=1&pp=iAQB. 

10 
 
situation increasingly common in Wisconsin.22 Under the proposed LCRI, Water systems 
must have a “strategy” for LSLR for apartments and non-owner-occupied homes (e.g. 
investment properties). However, if a property is owned by an individual or company that 
simply is not physically present in the state, then any strategy or reasonable effort to secure 
consent might fail. This is why the LCRI’s failure to require the PWS to replace the entire 
LSL is so problematic. We hope that the educational and informational requirements in the 
LCRI minimize the occurrence of this problem, because if it persists, the effects will, once 
again, be felt by vulnerable, already lead-burdened communities. 
Like many things in Wisconsin, the likelihood that a child lives in a home in which their 
family owns the property, versus rents the property, varies by race. For example, in 
Milwaukee, “fifty-seven percent of Black children live in a rented house compared with 26 
percent of white children, and 46% of Latino kids. Nineteen percent of Black children live in 
an owner-occupied house, compared to 60% of white kids, and 33% of Latinos.”23 Because 
status as a renter will likely make it harder to secure LSLR, then the disproportionate impact 
on Black and Latino children will raise significant environmental justice concerns. 
Importantly, these barriers to LSLR might persist even where funding is made available to 
the property owner, because their status as an out-of-state owner, more than reticence to pay, 
might create the practical barrier to securing consent, and thus initiating LSLR. If we look 
up ten years after the LSLR requirements go into effect and LSLs remain in use in a 
disproportionate fashion, then we will know EPA has again failed to protect the most lead-
burdened communities from harm.  
 
II. 
The LCRI Can and Should Set Earlier Compliance Dates for Some of the 
Rule’s Requirements. 
EPA is proposing that water systems covered by this rule come into compliance within three 
years of promulgation of the final rule, with some exceptions. 88 Fed. Reg. 84967. Given the 
likely promulgation date of a final rule, for many rule elements this means an initial 
compliance date no earlier than January 2028. 
This three-year post-promulgation compliance date would apply to the new mandatory LSLR 
requirements in the LCRI. EPA’s explanation for this delay is that “systems would better use 
the three-year period after promulgation of a final LCRI for program planning, including 
hiring additional staff, soliciting bids for contractors, securing grants or other types of 
funding, and continuing to improve inventories to ensure that they are better positioned to 
conduct mandatory service line replacement.” 88 Fed. Reg. 84968. This is a reasonable 
position; however, as mentioned above, this does buttress our position that a deadline to 
complete LSLR of fewer than 10-years is warranted. See supra at 7. Water systems are being 
 
22 See, e.g., John D. Johnson, Out of State Investment in Milwaukee’s Home Rental Market, 
Lubar Center for Public Policy and Civic Education, Marquette Law School (April 18, 2021), 
available online at https://law.marquette.edu/facultyblog/2021/04/out-of-state-investment-
in-milwaukees-home-rental-market/ 
23 Johnson (2021), at 5. 

11 
 
given four years of advance notice of this requirement. That long runway to get started 
justifies a default deadline to complete LSLR in less than 10 years. 
EPA then proposes several alternative compliance deadlines for specific parts of the LCRI. 
88 Fed. Reg. 848969. EPA specifically requests comment on “whether it is practicable for 
water systems to implement notification and risk mitigation provisions after full and partial 
service line replacement (§ 141.84(h)), notification of a service line disturbance (§ 141.85(g)), 
and associated reporting requirements (§ 141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) upon the effective date of 
the LCRI.” 88 Fed. Reg. 84968. These requirements should be implemented upon the effective 
date of the LCRI. Since these are notification and reporting requirements, they should not 
require large expenditures of money or lengthy training periods to accomplish. 
EPA also raises an alternative compliance date of 1-2 years after promulgation—as opposed 
to the default 3 years—for other areas of the LCRI beyond those just mentioned and the 
mandatory LSLR requirements. 88 Fed. Reg. 84969. It is difficult to make a blanket comment 
on some many disparate elements of the LCRI. Thus, here we merely suggest EPA should 
strongly consider moving many LCRI compliance dates up and provide a couple criteria EPA 
should use in guiding its analysis.  
First, as noted above, some requirements simply do not require significant expense to 
accomplish, either in terms of capital outlays or additional staff time or training. There is 
thus a reduced need to raise funds, finance expenditures, or otherwise budget for the 
requirement. There is also less need to schedule lengthy activities to prepare the water 
system for compliance. Where this is the case, further delay is unwarranted. 
Second, some requirements can better protect human health as soon as they go into effect, 
like the notice requirements around service line disturbance mentioned above. Delaying 
implementation of these notice requirements thus knowingly authorizes the continued use of 
inadequate notice procedures, needlessly placing people at risk. Whenever this element is 
present—immediate opportunity to avoid or reduce lead exposure—it should weigh heavily 
in favor of the earliest possible compliance deadline.  
 
III. 
Sampling Protocols  
We strongly support EPA’s proposal to require collection of first- and fifth-liter paired 
samples for lead at LSL sites and to use the higher of the two values to calculate the 90th 
percentile lead level to improve identification of higher risk sites for lead. The proposal is 
based in part on implementation data from Michigan’s revised LCR, and studies evaluating 
lead sampling data from various liters in different cities. The data suggest that using the 
higher of the first- and fifth-liter values from LSL sites will be more effective than using 
either value alone. 88 Fed. Reg. 84929-30.  
Historically, the 90th percentile lead level has been measured against regulatory action levels 
and trigger levels, to determine what treatment technologies the water system needed to 
adopt to reduce the levels of lead in the system. For example, under the current LCRR regime, 
the existing lead and copper action levels continue to determine whether a water system must 

12 
 
monitor source water, install corrosion control treatment (CCT), optimize or re-optimize 
existing CCT, replace lead service lines, or undertake a public education program. 88 Fed. 
Reg. 84939. 
 
IV. 
Lowered Action Level (AL) and Required Responses to AL Exceedances   
In the LCRI, EPA proposes to eliminate the lead trigger level of 0.010 mg/L, which was 
established by the LCRR, and to lower the lead action level (previously set at 0.015 mg/L) to 
0.010 mg/L (10 ppb). 88 Fed. Reg. 84939. Under the revised rules, EPA expects that 
eliminating the trigger level and establishing a single, lowered action level will simplify the 
rule and improve its implementation.  
While we applaud the reduction in the action level, and the commensurate reduction in public 
health risk that it should engender, we suggest that the action level could be set even lower, 
for example, at the at 0.005 mg/L24 alternative that EPA considered, and would confer even 
greater public health benefits. 
The EPA’s primary defense of its proposal to set the lead action level at 10 ppb, rather than 
at the lower alternative level, is that setting a lower action level would impose an undue 
administrative burden on States and water systems, because a lower action limit would 
require more small and medium systems (which make up the vast majority of all CWSs) to 
install optimized corrosion control treatment (OCCT), and conduct detailed OCCT 
demonstrations, which must be overseen and evaluated by state employees. 
We urge EPA to consider less than 10ppb, i.e., 5ppb, because there is no safe blood lead level, 
and the lower the action limit, the more protective the rule will be of public health. But if 
EPA determines that it is not feasible to do so, then it must impose stricter additional 
regulatory requirements for multiple lead AL exceedances. 
 
V. 
Additional Requirements for Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances 
 
The proposed rule would also impose additional regulatory requirements on systems with 
“multiple lead action level exceedances,” which is defined in the rule as a system that incurs 
three action level exceedances in a rolling five-year period. More specifically, EPA is 
proposing that systems with multiple lead action level exceedances conduct at least one 
additional systemwide public education outreach activity to raise additional awareness of the 
health effects of lead in drinking water, identify steps consumers can take to reduce their 
exposure, and provide information about how the water system is addressing the issue. The 
water system would be required to repeat the selected activity every six months until the 
system no longer meets the proposed criteria for multiple lead action level exceedances. 88 
Fed. Reg. 84954. 
 
While we agree that additional regulatory burdens should be imposed on such “repeat 
offenders,” we believe the criteria proposed to define these systems is insufficiently 
 
24 The 0.005 mg/L alternative is the practical quantification limit for lead. 

13 
 
protective. In Section IX of the proposed rule, EPA requests comments on “whether EPA 
should use three action level exceedances in a five-year period for identifying systems with 
multiple action level exceedances where additional action is warranted and, whether 
additional actions should be required sooner, or later, than the five-year period, or whether 
EPA should use a modified metric.” 
 
Requiring “three strikes” in five years before imposing additional public education 
requirements is overly lenient, particularly when each violation puts children at greater risk 
of lead poisoning.  We recommend that EPA instead define “multiple lead action level 
exceedances” as any two exceedances of the action level within a ten-year period.  
 
VI. 
Public Education and Outreach  
We strongly support the LCRI’s proposed improvements to the public education requirements 
in the Lead and Copper Rule, which will increase transparency and better inform the public 
of lead exposure and health risks. The changes notably include: 
 
proposed revisions to the mandatory lead health effects language that must be 
included in public education, public notification, and Consumer Confidence Reports 
(“CCRs”), to clarify the negative health effects of lead, including a statement that: 
“There is no safe level of lead in drinking water.” 88 Fed. Reg. 84963. 
 
a proposed requirement that water systems issue consumer notices of tap sampling 
results within three days of the system learning of the results, regardless of whether 
the results exceed the lead or copper AL. 88 Fed. Reg. 84947. (Under the LCRR, 
consumer notices only had to be delivered in three days if the tap sample exceeded the 
AL; non-exceedances could take up to 30 days. Id.  
 
a requirement that public education following a lead action level exceedance be sent 
within 60 days of the end of the tap sampling period for every lead action level 
exceedance. 88 Fed. Reg. 84950. 
 
Under the LCRI, the public education materials must be delivered “to every service 
connection address served.” Previously, the education materials only needed to be 
delivered to bill-paying customers. 88 Fed. Reg. 84951.  
 
a. EPA should require water systems to provide consumer notices 
regarding the results of testing within three days of receiving results.  
EPA proposes that PWSs must provide consumer notice of tap sampling results within three 
days of the system learning of the results, but is requesting comments on whether this 
requirement feasible. Clearly, it is feasible. First, water systems were required to deliver 
such notices within 3 days even before the LCRI, if the samples collected exceeded the AL.  
Second, under the proposed rule, water systems may deliver the notices either electronically 
(e.g., email or text message), by phone, hand delivery, by mail (postmarked within three days 
of the system learning of the results), or by another method approved by the State. 88 Fed. 
Reg. 84949.  There can be no question that this proposed requirement is feasible, and the 
final rule should impose the three day turnaround, as proposed. 
 

14 
 
b. Primacy states should be required to provide translation services to 
water systems in their jurisdictions, as a condition of retaining their 
primacy status. 
For water systems that serve a large proportion of consumers with limited English 
proficiency, the LCRI requires that public education materials include information about 
where consumers can obtain a translated copy of the materials, or translation assistance.  88 
Fed. Reg. 84949. In Section IX of the rule package, EPA requests comments on whether to 
require, as a condition of primacy for the LCRI, that states are required to provide translation 
support to water systems that are unable to comply on their own.   
Clearly, the answer is yes. To understand the health risks related to LSLs, and mitigate the 
risks facing their families, end-users of water systems need access to these public information 
materials. If they are not proficient in English, they need access to translated public 
education materials. In order to ensure that public education is provided in multiple 
languages, in order to mitigate environmental justice concerns, primacy states should be 
required to assist the water systems under their jurisdiction, by translating the public 
information materials, as needed. It would be incredibly inefficient for each individual water 
system to prepare translated materials on their own. The States, or perhaps more 
appropriately, the EPA, should provide consistent translations, and disseminate them to the 
PWSs for distribution to consumers who need them. 
 
 
VII. 
Reporting and Recordkeeping Requirements  
The LCRI also makes a number of improvements to the LCR’s reporting and recordkeeping 
requirements that we support, including reporting requirements regarding service line 
inventories, and replacement plans. In the LCRI, EPA has proposed that all systems 
conducting service line replacement must report information on their compliance with the 
proposed service line inventory and replacement requirements to the State. Each year, 
systems would be required to submit inventory summary information, including the current 
number of LSLs, GRR service lines, unknown service lines, non-lead service lines, and lead 
connectors. They would also be required to report information regarding their replacement 
programs, including the total number and street addresses of full service line replacements, 
partial service line replacements, replaced GRR service lines, and replaced lead connectors. 
Systems would also be required to certify to the State the number of service lines not replaced 
due to customer refusals for access to conduct service line replacement. EPA is also proposing 
that summary information about the inventory and service line replacement program be 
made available to the public to facilitate community tracking of system progress. 88 Fed. Reg. 
84959. 
 
a. All systems should be required to post service line inventories, and 
replacement plans, including information about the progress of 
replacement programs, online. 

15 
 
Large systems, serving greater than 50,000 persons, also have an obligation under the LCRI, 
to host their service line inventories and removal plans online, fostering even greater 
transparency and accountability, by making the inventory and plan easily accessible to the 
public. 88 Fed. Reg 85036.   In response to the EPA’s request for comment on this issue, we 
urge the agency to require online reporting of this information by ALL systems, not just the 
largest ones. Ready access to this information by the public should not be determined by the 
size of the system serving consumers. If the EPA is concerned about the administrative 
burden of imposing such a requirement on small and medium water systems, it should 
develop a publicly-available website that summarizes the information collected from all 
systems under the state reporting requirement, and make that information available to the 
public online. 
 
VIII. 
Schools and Childcare Facilities 
The underlying problem with the LCRI on this issue is that it simply does not change enough 
to improve on the LCRR, and thus is another missed opportunity to reduce lead exposure in 
places where our youngest children spend so much of their time. In this regard we reiterate 
some of the same comments we had in 2021 and again urge EPA to do better. 
The LCRI fails to require sufficient monitoring in schools and daycares. As we expressed in 
our 2021 comments, five samples per school and two per childcare facility is not enough to 
provide an accurate assessment of the lead in water risk at that school. EPA asks whether 
more samples should be required to be collected. 88 Fed. Reg. 84957. The answer is plainly 
yes. We understand that most schools and childcare facilities will not be served by a LSL and 
instead are at risk of lead from older, lead-bearing premises plumbing. Thus, checking each 
source of drinking water becomes imperative, when the risk may vary from source to source 
based on that premises plumbing.  
Similarly, the retained requirement from the LCRR for a PWS to test 20% of schools once in 
each of the first five years following rule implementation remains problematic. A single test 
allows for lead issues to be missed, providing false confidence in the school’s water safety. 
Further, the LCRI still allows schools to opt out and high schools to only be tested upon 
request, which renders these sampling requirements particularly incomplete. Schools and 
childcare centers should be tested more frequently and more than once, i.e., once every six 
months, or twice per school year.  
EPA should strongly consider requiring schools and daycares to either regularly test for lead 
in their water at all sources used for drinking water in that facility, or else require proactive 
water filtration at those sources, at least until testing is done to show lead is not an issue at 
that tap, i.e., results are lower than .001mg/L or another low standard. 
Lastly, it remains problematic that the LCRI does not mandate immediate publication of 
testing data from schools and childcare centers. EPA asks for comment on this point, 
suggesting that requiring publication of these testing results is too burdensome for water 
systems to comply with. 88 Fed. Reg. 84959. Given the interest parents have in their 
children’s health, any logistical burden associated with placing sampling results online for 

16 
 
parents to review is small by comparison. The LCRI should be revised to require publication 
of school and childcare center sampling results, with relevant contextual information, as soon 
as practicable following the sampling itself.  
 
 
Respectfully submitted this 5th day of February, 2024 
 
/s/ Evan Feinauer 
 
Staff Attorney 
Clean Wisconsin 
634 West Main Street, Suite 300 
Madison WI, 53703 
6082517020x321 
efeinauer@cleanwisconsin.org 
 
/s/ Dan Gustafson 
 
Senior Staff Attorney 
Midwest Environmental Advocates 
634 West Main Street, Suite 201 
Madison WI, 53703 
608.251.5407 x5 
dgustafson@midwestadvocates.org 
 
/s/ Richard Diaz 
 
Chair 
Coalition on Lead Emergency (COLE)

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1385 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
RE: Ensuring Safe Drinking Water at School - Proposed Lead and Copper Rule
Improvements (Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801)
EPA Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for proposing a 10-year deadline for water utilities to replace lead service lines.
Replacing these toxic pipes is a crucial step for protecting the public’s drinking water generally.
However, I also urge you to do more to stop lead from contaminating our kids’ water at school.
For most schools, lead in water comes from plumbing, fountains or faucets inside the school
building.
That’s why the EPA’s Lead & Copper Rule Improvements should require federally regulated
schools to replace fountains with water stations and put filters on all taps used for cooking or
drinking. The EPA should also limit lead in schools’ water to 1 part per billion, as recommended
by the American Academy of Pediatrics. And lastly, the EPA should work with state and local
officials to encourage all other schools to adopt such measures.
You have a historic opportunity to ensure safer drinking water for America. Please go the extra
mile to get the lead out.
Sincerely,

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1338 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Administrator Michael S. Regan
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, D.C. 20460
Dear Administrator Regan:
We write today as elected officials representing constituents in Chicago, IL to submit public
comments on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) issued by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). We share a common interest in protecting our
communities from the adverse health risks associated with contaminated drinking water.
Chicago has approximately 409,000 lead service lines, more than any other city in the country,
and we seek your partnership as we build on our progress to expedite the replacement process.
We applaud the EPA’s leadership in unveiling the LCRI proposal and its commitment to fully
replacing the nation’s lead pipes within 10 years. As you know, low-income communities and
communities of color are disproportionately impacted by contaminated drinking water. Even the
lowest level of lead exposure can cause emotional and behavioral issues in children and
cardiovascular and maternal health issues in adults – sometimes fatal. The presence of lead
pipes is a public health threat and an environmental justice issue, and it’s imperative that our
most impacted communities are prioritized throughout the replacement process.
While there’s a lot to praise in the LCRI proposal, there are a few key components that we urge
the agency to address in order to strengthen the rule:
Reconsider the exception to the 10-year removal mandate: Chicago would receive an
extension of 44.6 to 55.8 years to replace our lead service lines. It is unconscionable to tell
Chicago residents that they have to wait generations for safe drinking water. Although we
appreciate the flexibility we have been offered, we would like to discuss a shortened timeline
that’s coupled with adequate federal funding to complement our efforts.
Require water systems to fully pay for the removal of lead service lines: It can cost
$30,000 or more for a resident to replace a single lead service line in Chicago. Although the
Chicago Department of Water Management is exploring ways to reduce the cost of replacement
and currently offers various programs to incentivize homeowners to take on replacement, we’ve
seen in other cities that it’s less expensive, faster, and more equitable to have the utility cover
the full cost of lead service line replacement. A resident should not be denied access to safe
drinking water because of their lack of ability to pay or landlord absenteeism.
Enact strong protections for schools and childcare centers of all sizes, including filter
installation: While some smaller schools and childcare centers that are serviced by a lead
service line and/or lead fixtures may benefit from the proposed rule, larger schools and
childcare centers will be left out because the proposal’s testing program retains weak elements
from the previous rule. We urge the EPA to require comprehensive lead testing in all schools

and childcare centers and point-of-use filters to protect the health and safety of our children,
regardless of where they’re enrolled.
Reduce lead action level to 5 ppb: We applaud the agency’s step in reducing the lead action
level from 15 ppb to 10 ppb, but it’s important that we take another step and lower the action
level to 5 ppb to be on par with the drinking water standards of other countries, such as Canada
and the European Union, as well as recommendations from the medical and public health
community.
Although there is room for improvement in the LCRI proposal, we commend the EPA’s
commitment to improving drinking water protections across the nation. Chicago has benefited
from this commitment as a recipient of a $336M WIFIA loan to support our lead service line
replacement efforts. As elected officials representing a renter-dominated city, we hope you
consider our recommendations for the best way to achieve success, as we’ve seen in cities like
Newark, NJ, and ensure that our most impacted communities are prioritized.
Thank you Administrator Regan, Assistant Administrator Fox, and all EPA members involved for
your continued support and leadership.
Sincerely,
Chairperson Gilbert Villegas, Committee on Economic, Capital and Technology Development
Chairperson Maria Hadden, Committee on Environmental Protection and Energy
Ald. Daniel La Spata, 1st Ward
Ald. Brian Hopkins, 2nd Ward
Ald. Pat Dowell, 3rd Ward
Ald. Lamont Robinson, 4th Ward
Ald. Desmon Yancy, 5th Ward
Ald. William Hall, 6th Ward
Ald. Peter Chico, 10th Ward
Ald. Julia Ramirez, 12th Ward
Ald. Jeylú B. Gutiérrez, 14th Ward
Ald. David Moore, 17th Ward
Ald. Ronnie Mosley, 21st Ward
Ald. Byron Sigcho-Lopez, 25th Ward
Ald. Jessie Fuentes, 26th Ward
Ald. Ruth Cruz, 30th Ward
Ald. Scott Waguespack, 32nd Ward
Ald. Rossana Rodriguez-Sanchez, 33rd Ward

Ald. Carlos Ramirez-Rosa, 35th Ward
Ald. Samantha Nugent, 39th Ward
Ald. Andre Vasquez, 40th Ward
Ald. Bennett Lawson, 44th Ward
Ald. Angela Clay, 46th Ward
Ald. Matt Martin, 47th Ward
Ald. Leni Manaa-Hoppenworth, 48th Ward

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0781 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0819 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0947 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0875 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
Ms. Radhika Fox 
Assistant Administrator Office of Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, D.C.  20460 
 
Re: 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
 
Dear Ms. Fox: 
 
The South Dakota Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources (DANR) appreciates the 
opportunity to provide comments on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. South 
Dakota supports reducing lead exposure from drinking water and increasing public health 
protection; however, the proposed rule creates a significant burden on the state programs 
responsible for implementing the revised rule and public water systems impacted by the 
proposed rule revisions. 
 
Many of South Dakota’s public water systems are defined as Small Water Systems. In general, 
small systems have limited resources. DANR is very concerned that the impacts of the proposed 
rule will be overly burdensome on these systems, resulting in lower compliance rates which will 
undermine consumer confidence. 
 
The proposed rule improvements are numerous and extremely complex. DANR offers the 
following general comments for specific issues important to South Dakota. Additionally, DANR 
request that EPA carefully consider the comments received from the Environmental Council of 
States, the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators, and the American Water Works 
Association, which are more extensive and provide greater technical detail.  
 
Distribution System and Site Assessment (DSSA): 
 
The proposed rule states that within 30 days of receiving sample results, water systems must 
collect and analyze a follow-up sample at any tap sample site that exceeds 0.010 mg/L and 
collect water quality samples at a site located within a half mile radius of that sample site. South 
Dakota is a rural state and many systems would be challenged to find a sampling location within 
a half-mile radius of the original sample location. DANR suggests that the EPA add additional 
language allowing systems to take a sample at the closest site to the original sampling site should 
one not be available within a half-mile radius.  Additionally, DANR is concerned with the lack 
of resources to train operators and regulatory staff on which components of the DSSA a water 
system will be required to complete.  
 

 
 
Filter Distribution: 
 
The proposed rule states that water systems must provide filters to their entire service area after 
the water system has had three or more action level exceedances. DANR is concerned that by 
having to provide filters to an entire service area, rather than solely to those locations with risks 
of lead and copper exceedances, which are locations with: lead or galvanized service lines 
requiring replacement or unknown service lines; customers will develop an unwarranted distrust 
in their water utility. DANR requests EPA allow states the discretion to require filters, where 
appropriate based on sampling results, data, and corrosion control.  
 
Public Notification: 
 
The proposed rule adds lead exceedances to the list of Tier 1violation’s requiring a 24-hour 
public notice. Tier 1 based exceedances have the potential to have serious adverse health effects 
on human health because of short-term exposure. DANR feels that requiring systems to public 
notice lead exceedances within 24 hours will cause implementation issues for states and water 
systems. One of the most significant issues is the current EPA method allows laboratories to hold 
onto samples after being preserved for several months after the sampling occurred. It does not 
make sense to require systems to report the sample results within 24 hours for samples that may 
have been collected many weeks or months earlier. To remedy this inconsistency, DANR 
recommends that the Tier 1 public notice requirement be changed to a Tier II public notice 
requirement. This change will permit states and water systems to properly assess the sample 
validity and allow adequate time to coordinate the appropriate public notice. If EPA is unwilling 
to change the public notice timing, then at a minimum, DANR recommends that EPA update the 
standard method to reduce the time a laboratory must analyze a sample so a water system to 
achieve timely notification of results to its customers. 
 
Required Testing in Schools and Daycares: 
 
Under the proposed rule, community water systems would be required to conduct lead sampling 
at all schools and all licensed daycares within its distribution system, excluding those constructed 
after 2014 or those facilities who have had full plumbing replacement. While we support testing 
of lead in schools and childcare facilities, the water system should not be considered the experts 
when it comes to plumbing and remediation services within the schools and daycares. This 
requirement will place a great burden upon the small water system with limited resources. 
DANR recommends that any required remediation work be the responsibility of the property 
owner and not be a burden of the public water system. Additionally, with different sampling 
requirements at schools and daycares and the continuous state of flux of daycare facilities, 
DANR has great concern regarding how sampling data from schools and daycares will be 
tracked and managed for compliance. EPA must also communicate where funding and resources 
are available to school and daycares and that they convey that information directly to these 
entities, as well as provide all templates for any public education material that is required.  
 
Data Management/Guidance/Training: 
 
Each of the changes outlined within the proposed revisions increase rather than decrease 
implementation challenges. It is imperative that a fully functional data system be in place a 
minimum of six months prior the rule effective date. Without a proper and functional means to 
manage all the data elements of the final rule, states and systems will be unable to implement or 
comply with the rule. EPA does not currently have a data system in place to manage all the data 

 
 
points required to be collected under the proposed rule. DANR requests that EPA makes 
available all database guidance on implementing the rule If a state must design its own, there will 
be substantial cost to an already stretched state budget.   
 
South Dakota is requesting that guidance documents and training be finalized and shared as soon 
as possible.  The effective date of the rule should be at least six months prior to implementation 
to allow adequate time for training. In addition, DANR requests that clarity and continuity be 
brought into the rule revisions for all applicable water systems.   
 
Corrosion Control Studies: 
 
Corrosion control requirements need to be updated to reflect clear definitions about what will be 
required in a study. Guidance and training should be provided to states on how to review 
corrosion control studies and water quality parameter testing.  
 
Funding:  
 
This proposed rule’s complex nature adds significant requirements to systems and states which 
will surpass most small systems ability to comply. This, in effect, shifts even more burden to 
state programs as they will be required to pull along systems struggling to comply. State 
programs are already stretched to the breaking point. With years of flat or rescission-based 
funding, states will be hard pressed to implement these rule revisions unless significant funding 
increases to the Public Water System Supervision grants are authorized and made available to 
states. Without additional grant funding, state programs will be unable to fully implement the 
rule without adversely impacting other core program areas which in turn reduces overall public 
health protection.   
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Mark A. McIntire, P.E. 
Drinking Water Program Administrator 
South Dakota Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources 
 
 
 
cc: Hunter Roberts, Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources 
      Megan Goltz, Policy Advisor, Governor’s Office 
      Ben Grumbles, Executive Director, Environmental Council of States 
      Alan Roberson, P.E., Executive Director, Association of State Drinking Water Administrators

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0809 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 2, 2024  
 
Submitted via https://www.regulations.gov  
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460  
 
Re: Proposed Rule, Environmental Protection Agency, “National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI),” Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–
0801  
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
On behalf of the Brita® brand and The Clorox Company, we appreciate the opportunity to submit 
comments to the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on the proposed revisions to 
the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) for lead and copper.    
 
We applaud and acknowledge the EPA’s efforts to reduce lead levels in drinking water across this 
country through the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI).  Since 2020, Brita has 
worked directly with more than 100 municipalities and their community water systems to provide lead 
reducing point-of-use filtration products.  Based on our work with these communities, Brita believes that 
every lead service line (LSL) in the ground represents a risk to safe drinking water.  With an estimated 
9.2 million lead service lines (LSLs) in this country, and those lines disproportionately concentrated in 
low-income and people of color communities, we recognize the importance of EPA finalizing its 
comprehensive approach to ensure a clean water solution for all at-risk communities.   
 
The proposed LCRI puts forward several proactive initiatives to address lead exposure from LSLs in the 
country.  We were encouraged to see the LCRI include improved sampling, a lower lead action level, 
and additional protections for at-risk residents & occupants including making pitchers available in 
communities with multiple lead exceedances.  Given the known lead action level (ALE) exceedances1 
that occurs during LSLs replacement, we also strongly support the provision that requires distribution of 
a pitcher and replacement cartridges for six months after a LSL replacement to each occupant to 
ensure non-residency buildings are also protected.  However, even with these positive steps, many 
Americans will be waiting years for LSL replacements, representing a “lead action gap” for many 
residents and communities. 
 
 
1 “Detection and Evaluation of Elevated Lead Release from Service Lines: A Field Study,” Environmental Science & 
Technology, July 23, 2013 

To help the EPA achieve its goal of reducing community exposure to lead sources & improve their 
health outcomes2, Brita encourages the EPA to strengthen the LCRI’s requirements in the following 
areas to bridge the gap and accelerate the necessary protections to vulnerable residents. 
 
 
Bridging the “Lead Action Gap” 
 
To protect vulnerable residents waiting for LSL replacements and achieve the EPA’s goals of 
reducing community exposure to lead sources & improve their health outcomesError! Bookmark 
not defined., Brita encourages the EPA to adopt a proactive requirement to require distribution of 
a pitcher filter, replacement cartridges and public education about using the device to every 
occupant with a lead service line until six months after that line has been replaced. 
 
The model of proactive filter distribution and education has already been successfully deployed by the 
City of Denver, which reports 83% compliance in filter usage by residents enrolled in its Lead Reduction 
Program.  This program was even cited by the EPA as “an example for other communities across the 
country”3  Denver chose a proactive approach, meaning they distribute pitchers and filters to residents 
before a replacement, protecting them from lead while they wait their turn.   
 
Without government action that requires proactive distribution and education, we believe that residents 
will turn to bottled water once they are notified of their LSLs.  The purchase of bottled water has a 
significant environmental impact on our communities, in addition to the financial burden to residents.  
For approximately $50 a family can be protected for a year using available point-of-use filtration on the 
market vs. an average annual cost of $250-$2,700 per year for bottled water4. 
 
We believe proactive distribution of a filter provides fast response to residents with LSLs, while also 
ensuring trust with the water source as cities address exceedances and replace LSLs.  
 
For water systems and communities with lead action level exceedances, we urge the EPA to 
strengthen the pitcher filter requirement by mandating that point-of-use filtration (pitchers) go 
beyond “available” to “distributed” at no cost to residents, while also providing public 
education materials for communities using the filters.   
 
Point-of-use filtration can be a key component and bridge for residents with lead exceedances as they 
wait for their LSLs to be replaced.  The proposed rule acknowledged the unique and critical role of 
filtration for communities with lead exposure.  However, the proposed rule requires point-of-use filtration 
to be “available” to at-risk residents, which puts the burden on the at-risk resident or occupant.  Based 
on our experience with affected communities, residents that must go to a centralized location to acquire 
the filtration device rarely pickup or use those devices.  The EPA should require that filters are 
distributed to at-risk residents with accompanied education materials to ensure that residents can 
address their lead exposure as fast as possible.   
 
 
2 https://www.epa.gov/lead/final-strategy-reduce-lead-exposures-and-disparities-us-communities 
3 https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-finds-denver-waters-lead-reduction-program-effective 
4 https://www.counterpunch.org/2023/11/30/the-real-cost-of-bottled-water/ 

The LCRI proposal currently requires point-of-use filtration when communities have a lead exceedance 
(over a 5-year period), as well as during LSLs replacement.  However, every year that residents have 
an exceedance, or are waiting for the replacement, is putting the resident as risk of lead exposure.   
 
For example, systems with P90 lead level > .01 mg/L must begin using or re-optimize CCT and 
systems with 3 exceedances in a 5-year period must take more aggressive action. However, at 
this point residents have likely already been exposed to unsafe levels of lead.  
 
 
Lead Action Levels and Exceedances 
 
Action Level 
We were pleased to see that the LCRI proposed lowering the lead action level of 15-ppb to 10-ppb in 
the LCRI.  However, given the 5-ppb standard for lead in bottled water and the 5-ppb lead level 
recommended by Canada and the European Union for drinking water, Brita encourages the EPA to 
consider lowering the proposed 10-ppb to an action level of 5ppb in the final LCRI. 
 
Exceedances 
As stated by EPA, there is no safe level of lead exposure in drinking water; even low doses of lead 
pose major health risks and can take 20 years to fully dissipate from the human body 5.  As such, one 
confirmed exceedance can represent a major public health risk and crisis for a community impact. Brita 
encourages the EPA to strengthen the lead action level exceedances by requiring that if a water 
system has a test site with one exceedance, they should immediately retest for confirmation.  If 
the system has a confirmed exceedance, water systems should deliver remedies prescribed by 
the LCRI instead of waiting for 3 positive tests in a 5-year period. 
 
 
Implementation Timeline 
 
We have already seen more than 100+ communities that have proactively commenced lead service line 
replacement projects.  Given that the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) were published in 2021, 
we anticipate that many systems are preparing to replace lines as quickly as possible.  The proposed 
LCRI implementation timeline is three years following the finalization of the LCRI.  Each year residents 
wait for replacements is another year those residents are at risk from their LSLs, which delays health 
and economic benefits that can be realized sooner with quicker implementation of the rule.  As a result, 
we encourage the EPA to strengthen the implementation provisions, by decreasing the 
implementation timeline of the LCRI from 3 years to 2 years.   
 
If EPA is unable to shorten the LCRI implementation schedule, we encourage the EPA to bridge the 
timeline gap with residents by requiring the distribution of point-of-use filtration devices (pitchers) to 
impacted residents.  
 
 
 
 
5 https://grist.org/cities/the-epa-is-aiming-to-get-rid-of-lead-pipes-in-10-years-but-not-in-chicago/ 

Filter Supply 
 
The proposed rule mentions that “stakeholders raised concerns during the proposed LCRI 
engagements about the availability of sufficient quantities in the market to meet new demand created 
by additional rule requirements”.  For the past several years, Brita has invested heavily in its supply 
chain infrastructure and products to meet demand.  With our ongoing work with communities across the 
country, Brita is confident it can adequality meet the demand from the requirements put forth in 
the LCRI.  
 
 
At Brita, our focus is on Better Water, for People and the Planet.  Our mission is reaffirmed as we look 
at the levels of lead in the drinking water in many of our communities.  Point-of-use filtration (pitchers) is 
not the long-term solution for lead in drinking water, but filtration can serve as a necessary bridge for 
many residents as they wait for LSL replacements.   
 
The EPA can bridge the gap by requiring the proactive distribution of filtration, in addition to 
strengthening the lead action levels and protections, to ensure that we can deliver safer, clean, and 
lead-free drinking water to residents at risk of lead exposure.   
 
We applaud the EPA’s effort to enact a national solution to reduce the levels of lead in drinking water 
and we believe that our recommendations complement and strengthen the efforts put forward in the 
proposed LCRI.  
 
EPA’s commitment to protecting people’s health has been evident in the proposed LCRI, as well as the 
Administration’s passage of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law that provided funding for this effort.  We 
believe the LCRI will be critical for disadvantaged communities who may need greater guidance, and 
assistance, with these federal funds.  And we look forward to working with you to ensure that all our 
communities have safe and lead-free drinking water.     
 
If Brita may be of further assistance, please contact me directly at Jackie.ray@clorox.com. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration of these comments. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Jackie Lynn Ray 
Government Affairs Director 
The Clorox Company

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0905 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 3, 2024 
 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to comment on the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
proposals in the Federal Register of December 6, 2023.  These comments address Corrosion 
Control Treatment and testing methods.   
Issue with a Fundamental Assumption in the LCRR and LCRI 
There is a fundamental assumption in the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) (Federal 
Register of January 15, 2021) and in the LCRI proposals that needs to be clarified.  Specifically, 
there appears to be confusion regarding the methods that can be used to test corrosion control 
chemical scenarios.  Two methods are mentioned:  1) harvested lead pipes in pipe rigs 2) metal 
coupon tests.  However, there is a third method that deserves consideration: 3) conditioned 
new metal test pieces that can be applied in a variety of apparatus configurations.  This method 
was first described in the iconic report on lead and copper testing apparatuses in 1990 (EES 
Lead Control Strategies AWWA Research Foundation 1990). 
Harvested versus Conditioned New Test Pieces 
Since 1990, it has been debated as to whether test pieces should be of harvested material or 
conditioned new metal surfaces.  Both sides of the debate agree that metal surface 
Process Research Solutions, LLC 
 
 
 
 
 
www.processresearch.net 

Process Research Solutions, LLC 
February 3, 2024 
Page 2 of 7 
accumulations of chemical scales and biofilms profoundly affect the release of piping metals 
into the water and are key for studying distribution system metals concentrations. 
Harvested test pieces are the ideal for testing.  However, there are issues with their use.  First, 
they are expensive and labor-intensive to obtain.  When lead services lines are being replaced 
in a system, the pipes are often left in the ground and the replacement service line is pushed 
through with minimal digging.  In contrast, to obtain a lead service line test specimen, the 
overburden must be carefully removed to a shallow degree with a machine and then the rest of 
the overburden hand-dug over a length of six feet or more; the pipe must be cut gently by hand 
so that the interior pipe wall accumulations are kept intact.  The pipe must be gently lifted, 
interior water gently poured off, and the pipe capped to keep the pipe wall accumulations 
moist.  The harvested pipe must be installed right away in an awaiting pipe rig and a flow 
regime established.  These are atypical protocols for lead service line replacement and are 
costly to carry out.  In addition, if the existing pipe wall accumulations are disturbed in the 
process, then test results will be compromised.  Finally, it is difficult to know or to carry out the 
proper strategy for selecting pipes from around the distribution system for testing in the 
various chemical scenarios.  Pipe wall accumulations can vary from zone to zone, from street to 
street, from house to house, and even in different segments of the same pipe.  In general, the 
experimental set up with harvested lead pipes can be expensive, difficult to carry out especially 
in a short time frame, and filled with factors that can confound the results of the tests. 
These are the reasons that many practitioners have used conditioned new metal surfaces as 
test pieces.  Conditioned new metal test pieces are relatively inexpensive and easy to obtain; 
uniformity of test pieces can be assured to a higher degree.  The test pieces are installed into 
the apparatus and exposed to the system water over time.  Within four to eight weeks, 
chemical scales and biofilms characteristic of the system water have developed on the metal 
surfaces.  There are statistical techniques that can be performed on the metals release data to 
show that the surfaces are conditioned.  (Note that harvested test pieces must also be 
conditioned to allow time for metal particles disturbed in the harvesting and installation 
process to be cleared out.  That can take a similar length of time or longer.)  In general, the 
experimental set up with conditioned new test pieces attempts to suppress confounding factors 
in order to observe changes due to different chemical scenarios rather than effects of surface 
accumulation variation between test pieces. 
Unproven Assumption Regarding Harvested Test Pieces 
In the regulations, it assumes that harvested accumulations are the only valid representation of 
the distribution system water quality responses.  However, there are no scientific studies to 
prove this.   
A recently published peer-reviewed paper (see Appendix A) shows that the use of conditioned 
new metal test pieces are equally valid representations of distribution system water quality 
responses to various chemical scenarios.  The key is in the makeup of the chemical scales and 
this is defined and compared in the article.  As the article concludes, there is no scientific basis 
to eliminate the use of apparatuses with conditioned new metal test pieces. 

Process Research Solutions, LLC 
February 3, 2024 
Page 3 of 7 
Ambiguous Metal Coupon Immersion Tests 
The article also points out that the use of the metal coupon immersion method is ambiguous 
because the metal surfaces typically remain in an ambiguous state of chemical scale 
development.   
If the metal coupons immersion tests are carried out over a longer period of time, the surfaces 
become conditioned just like any other new metal surface.  However, the immersion test is a 
manual method and becomes impractical to use for a long period of time. 
Benefits of Using Conditioned New Metal Test Pieces 
If conditioned new metal test pieces are allowed by regulation for corrosion control chemical 
scenario testing, water systems of all sizes will be able economically and technically to carry out 
testing as well as water quality sentinel monitoring. 
Please refer to the article in Appendix A for more information including: 
• A description of the seven historical configurations of monitoring apparatuses, some 
using harvested test pieces and some using conditioned new metal 
• A statistical technique to determine when a test piece has been conditioned 
• A comparison of pipe scale analysis between harvested distribution system pipes and 
conditioned new test pieces 
• A comparison of testing apparatus data to residential data 
• The finding that harvested pipe rig data is indistinguishable from conditioned new test 
piece data 
• Four criteria that should be incorporated into any corrosion control testing and 
monitoring program no matter which type of test piece is utilized. 
Comments to LCRI Corrosion Control Treatment Proposals 
The questions posed in the LCRI Federal Register document are commented on below, keeping 
in mind that the use of testing and monitoring apparatuses with conditioned new metal test 
pieces can be less expensive, require less technical skills, have a smaller footprint, and can also 
be used to monitor a system after corrosion control implementation. 
Question 1 under IX. Request for Comment, Corrosion Control Treatment: The proposed 
determination that the CCT treatment technique is feasible and prevents known or 
anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible.   
For public safety, it is important to test a corrosion control strategy off-line before initial system 
implementation.  As an example, lead release increased four times the lead concentration in 
untreated water in one system when a commonly used poly/orthophosphate chemical was 
tested off-line (Journal AWWA Vol 92 No 2 95; doi: 10.1002/j.1551-8833.2000.tb08820.x).   
Also, it is important to study the release of dissolved lead separately from particulate lead and 
dissolved copper separately from particulate copper.  There are different factors that influence 
the release of dissolved lead, particulate lead, dissolved copper, and particulate copper.  Wrong 

Process Research Solutions, LLC 
February 3, 2024 
Page 4 of 7 
conclusions can be drawn if just working with total lead (dissolved + particulate lead) and total 
copper (dissolved + particulate copper).  This is evident in two Water Research Foundation 
reports:  Project 4286 – Distribution System Water Quality Control Demonstration and Project 
4586 – Optimization of Phosphorus-Based Corrosion Control Chemicals Using a Comprehensive 
Perspective of Water Quality. 
More than just looking at lead and copper release based on chemical and dose in testing, a 
more comprehensive approach in testing is necessary to define what additional factors in the 
system encourage the release of dissolved lead, particulate lead, dissolved copper, and 
particulate copper.  A comprehensive approach to testing can be seen in the previously cited 
Water Research Foundation reports.  The details of testing should be guidance suggestions 
instead of regulatory requirements.  Nevertheless, it is important to realize that some corrosion 
control test results may be misleading if more possibilities for influential factors are not 
considered and measured even when dosing a corrosion control chemical. 
The testing should be performed with an apparatus using either harvested test pieces or new 
conditioned test pieces.  Opening the testing to the less expensive and readily available 
apparatuses using new conditioned test pieces allows more water systems to participate in the 
initial testing of corrosion control chemicals.  One particular apparatus configuration using 
conditioned new test pieces has been used in small water systems with less than 3300 people 
up to large systems with 2.4 million people.  The small water systems of less than 3300 people 
were university and prison campuses owned by a state government and not private systems 
where finances and labor may not be available.  However, the apparatus has been used for 
testing as well as for on-going monitoring in systems as small as 4500 people and 19,000 
people.  These examples are given to show that it is possible to operate a testing and 
monitoring apparatus in systems of all sizes, especially when simplified using conditioned new 
metal test pieces. 
The use of the short-term metal coupon immersion test is not a method of final chemical 
scenario testing and possibly does not need mention in the regulation.  Use of the method long-
term when metal surface conditioning can be shown should fall under the category of 
conditioned new metal test method. 
Questions 2, 3, 4 under IX. Request for Comment, Corrosion Control Treatment 
Other questions posed were: 
• Should a water system re-optimize again following an action level exceedance? 
• Should a water system be allowed to delay OCCT until after replacement of lead-
bearing service lines over a five-year period? 
• Should a water system be allowed to adjust existing treatment in dosage or pH without 
performing a new CCT study? 
In response to all these questions, the use of on-going monitoring using one or more “water 
quality sentinels” in the distribution system is advantageous as a gauge of lead and copper 
release potential in a water system.  A water quality sentinel can be locations in buildings that 
are sampled routinely.  Or, a sentinel can be the same type of apparatuses that are used for 

Process Research Solutions, LLC 
February 3, 2024 
Page 5 of 7 
testing.  Here again, either harvested test pieces or conditioned new metal test pieces are valid.  
Apparatuses are good sentinels because they are always available for sampling unlike access to 
building locations.  Also, apparatuses are operated consistently with water usage and flowrate, 
keeping confounding factors at bay. 
Apparatuses used as water quality sentinels located in strategic locations in a distribution 
system can give an early warning to situations pushing the system out of compliance with lead 
and copper release.  Comprehensive data at an apparatus can indicate possible factors that are 
influencing an increase in lead and copper. 
Finally, apparatus sentinels can be used as a gauge to corrosion control chemical dosage and pH 
level.  Instead of re-running CCT off-line demonstrations, make a small adjustment to the 
dosage or pH in the system and wait to determine the effect in the distribution system 
apparatus(es).  Continue slowly and over time with small changes and feedback from the 
apparatuses.  This was done in a small campus system to wean the system off of 
orthophosphate and alleviate a microbiological overgrowth in the system.  It was also done 
with regulatory approval after orthophosphate implementation in a system of 2.4 million 
people to hone the dose found in offline tests.  These are just two examples of using an 
apparatus sentinel for feedback on process control. 
Question 1 under IX. Request for Comment, General Matters: Are the LCRR and LCRI 
proposed treatment techniques effective to prevent known or anticipated adverse health 
effects? 
The Lead and Copper Rule continues to be based on the idealized carbonate models of 
solubility for lead and for copper.  The use of orthophosphate and the use of elevated pH as 
treatment techniques is a direct result of this singular view.  The carbonate model and the 
treatment techniques only address one reason for the appearance of dissolved lead and 
dissolved copper.  They don’t address other reasons for dissolved metal or particulate forms of 
lead and copper. 
Nature is much more complex than carbonate solubility of metals sending a long list of chemical 
compounds, microorganisms, and microbiological nutrients into drinking water systems.  The 
US EPA as well as the American Water Works Association have downplayed or excluded these 
as influencing factors in the past even as studies have shown that chemical scales (e.g.  Schock 
et al. 2014 Journal AWWA; doi: 10.5942/jawwa.2014.106.0064) and microbiologically 
influenced corrosion (e.g. Gale & Totemeier 2004 Smithells Metals Reference Book 8th ed.) play 
a significant role in producing the lead and copper concentrations that are measured in drinking 
water systems. 
 
In 2017, findings in the Water Research Foundation Report 4586 – Optimization of Phosphorus-
Based Corrosion Control Chemicals Using a Comprehensive Perspective of Water Quality was 
downplayed.  By 2021, some of these findings gained acceptance as US EPA personnel 
(Wahman, et al.; AWWA Water Science; doi: 10.1002/aws2.1250) stated that the use of the 
solubility model is best applied to understand theoretical trends in lead concentrations in a 
water system as various water quality characteristics change.  "Over the past several decades, 

Process Research Solutions, LLC 
February 3, 2024 
Page 6 of 7 
… research and field observations have revealed the complexity of mechanisms associated with 
Pb release and corrosion control where factors beyond theoretical solubility considerations also 
play important roles in determining Pb concentrations in drinking water, including pipe scale 
age, structure, and composition, hydraulic and mass transfer considerations, biological 
activity/biofilm, and particulate Pb." 
The LCR, LCRR, and proposed LCRI over-prescribe the treatment and testing for lead and copper 
control.  Orthophosphate is not a magic bullet to lead and copper control.  Other treatments 
and corrosion control strategies are sometimes more appropriate.  Not permitting these 
approaches, when warranted, adversely affects our ability to treat water systems. 
 
Question 2 under IX. Request for Comment, General Matters: Are there additional ways to 
reduce the complexity of the regulatory approach to lead and copper control? 
In terms of testing and treatment, the regulations cross the line into making guidance manual 
options into regulatory requirements.  For regulation, the US EPA needs only to be directed at 
the result of low lead and copper concentrations and not restrict the methods to get there.  The 
goals of low lead and copper concentrations are fixed but the methods to get there change as 
we learn more over time. 
Other aspects of the LCRI are appropriate regulations such as incentives to replace lead-bearing 
pipes, perform regulatory sampling more stringently in residences, and communicate more 
effectively with consumers. 
It is the overly-prescribed testing and treatment methods that have restricted our ability to 
understand and control lead and copper release into drinking water. 
 
 
 
 
 

Process Research Solutions, LLC 
February 3, 2024 
Page 7 of 7 
Appendix A 
 
Peer-reviewed paper: 
“Harvested versus conditioned new test pieces in drinking water lead or copper corrosion 
testing” 
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4876 doi:  10.2166/ws.2023.311 
 
 

ELECTRONIC OFFPRINT 
Use of this pdf is subject to the terms described below 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This paper was originally published by IWA Publishing. It is an Open Access work, 
and the terms of its use and distribution are defined by the Creative Commons 
licence selected by the author.  
 
Full details can be found here: http://iwaponline.com/content/rights-permissions 
 
Please direct any queries regarding use or permissions to editorial@iwap.co.uk 
 
 

Harvested versus conditioned new test pieces in drinking water lead or copper corrosion
testing
A. F. Cantor
a,*, J. Barry Maynardb and Andrew Jacquec
a Process Research Solutions, LLC, P.O. Box 5593, Madison, WI 53705, USA
b Corrosion Scales LLC, 2625 NE 16th Ave., Portland, OR 97212, USA
c Water Quality Investigations, 2581 State Road 92, Suite 2, Mount Horeb, WI 53572, USA
*Corresponding author. E-mail: acantor@processresearch.net
AFC, 0000-0001-7499-8027
ABSTRACT
Corrosion monitoring apparatuses are important tools in drinking water distribution systems for empirically assessing effectiveness of cor-
rosion treatment before application to the entire water system. They are also important for tracking lead or copper release in the distribution
system before, during, and after a treatment strategy is in place. A major debate is whether to use test pieces of pipe harvested from the
distribution system or to use conditioned new metal surfaces. Harvested and conditioned new test pieces were studied in multiple types of
water systems using analysis of chemical scales, bioﬁlms, and metals release data. It was found that both methods of testing are equally valid
if procedures follow certain conditions: (1) apparatus conﬁguration and operation are consistent, (2) properties of distribution system pipe
wall accumulations are known, (3) dissolved and particulate metal fractions are determined, and (4) apparatus metal release data are corre-
lated with residential data. The use of conditioned new test pieces, obtainable with relative ease, lowers corrosion control study costs,
providing a tool for water systems of all sizes to select the most effective corrosion control strategy and to pro-actively track lead and
copper release trends in the distribution system.
Key words: copper, corrosion control treatment study, drinking water quality, lead, lead and copper rule, pipe rig
HIGHLIGHTS
• This research demonstrates that data from conditioned new metal test pieces and harvested metal test pieces are equally representative
of actual lead and copper release in a drinking water distribution system and equally valid when considering and choosing chemical treat-
ments.
• With either harvested test pieces or conditioned new test pieces, the testing or monitoring program should (1) maintain consistency of
apparatus conﬁguration and operation, (2) determine the properties of distribution system pipe wall accumulations, (3) identify metal frac-
tions of the total metal concentration, and (4) place apparatus data in context with residential sampling.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits copying and
redistribution for non-commercial purposes with no derivatives, provided the original work is properly cited (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
© 2023 The Authors
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4876 doi: 10.2166/ws.2023.311

GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT
1. INTRODUCTION
Special test apparatuses are used for controlled monitoring of lead and copper concentrations in drinking water. Using these
apparatuses, lead and copper release trends in a water system can be tracked, corrosion control treatment scenarios can be
compared, and the effectiveness of implementing a corrosion control strategy in a distribution system can be determined
(Cantor et al. 2012; Williams et al. 2018).
A major debate regarding the apparatus conﬁguration is whether to use test pieces of pipe harvested from the distribution
system or to use conditioned new metal surfaces.
Harvested pipe has chemical scales and bioﬁlms on the pipe walls that have built up over decades; these pipe wall accumu-
lations are in contact with the drinking water and inﬂuence the corrosion and release of lead and copper from the piping
material (Schock et al. 2014; Williams et al. 2018). Harvesting pipe sections in a manner that leaves these accumulations
intact and properly wetted is a difﬁcult and expensive process (AWWARF & DVWG 1996; Williams et al. 2018). Even if
lead service lines are being replaced in a distribution system, there is added expense in hand-digging and hand-cutting har-
vested pipes (atypical pipe replacement practices) for installation in a testing apparatus. The integrity of pipe wall
accumulations may be compromised in this process, biasing the data. In addition, pipe wall accumulations usually vary
throughout a distribution system with varying chemical, microbiological, and hydraulic environments (Williams et al.
2018) making it difﬁcult to select a relatively small number of pipes for testing that are representative of the complete
water system.
In contrast, chemical scales and bioﬁlms, characteristic of the water system under study, develop in 4–8 weeks on clean
surfaces of new metal test pieces. After this conditioning phase, all test pieces in an apparatus have accumulations that
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4877

developed at the same time in response to the same water system conditions, unlike harvested test pieces. The conditioned
new test piece data reﬂect the release of lead or copper due to the response of metal surfaces to water without being con-
founded by factors based on differences in pipe wall accumulations. This is a more controlled experiment than with
harvested test pieces. In addition, new metal test pieces are obtainable with relative ease and are, therefore, less expensive
to obtain than harvested pipe sections. Also, apparatuses can be assembled into a more compact conﬁguration. A smaller,
less expensive conﬁguration allows for multiple installations at different locations in a water system for a more encompassing
understanding of system water quality dynamics.
There are seven historical conﬁgurations of monitoring apparatuses to consider, some using harvested test pieces and some
using conditioned new metal:
• The American Water Works Association Research Foundation (AWWARF) pipe rig developed in 1990 was the ﬁrst stan-
dardized apparatus design (EES 1990; Kirmeyer et al. 1994). Conditioned new lead and copper pipes were used as test
pieces to measure lead and copper concentrations that were released to water as the water cycled between ﬂow-through
and stagnating conditions similar to building plumbing.
• Recirculating pipe rigs, with conditioned new metal pipe segments as test pieces, have been used since the 1980s to measure
electrochemical parameters of corrosion as well as metal concentration accumulation in the water (Reiber 1991; AWWARF
& DVGW 1996; Boyd et al. 2012).
• Recirculating pipe rigs with harvested pipe segments as test pieces were used, starting in 2004, to measure lead and copper
concentrations that developed in water as it cycled between ﬂowing and stagnating conditions, similar to the AWWARF
pipe rig but operated as a batch process with frequent water changes (AWWA 2011).
• The Process Research Solutions (PRS) Monitoring Station was developed in 2006 as a non-proprietary apparatus using
stacks of conditioned new metal plates in a test chamber. The ratio of metal surface area to water volume in a test chamber
simulates a small diameter pipe, that in turn simulates building plumbing (Cantor 2018). For this apparatus, ﬂow-through
and stagnation conditions are exaggerated to estimate the greatest potential of lead and copper release for the water system
(Cantor et al. 2012).
• The Water Research Foundation (WRF) Project 4317 pipe rig was developed in 2014 using speciﬁc conditioned new metal
piping components characteristic of building plumbing (Parks et al. 2014). Flow characteristics of building plumbing were
also incorporated into the apparatus operational protocols.
• Since 1990, the AWWARF pipe rig conﬁguration has been used with harvested pipe test pieces in numerous corrosion con-
trol investigations. An example of this usage was presented in an article describing an investigation in Flint, Michigan
(Williams et al. 2018).
• There has been a long history of a batch jar test version of the AWWARF pipe rig operation using new metal test pieces that
are not necessarily conditioned. Renewed interest in this coupon immersion method was shown in two 2019 papers (Corn-
well & Wagner 2019; Hazen & Sawyer 2019).
All of the apparatus conﬁgurations simulate building plumbing using various strategies; all of the conﬁgurations have inher-
ited the basic operational characteristics of the original AWWARF pipe rig. Even though the apparatuses differ in test piece
ratio of metal surface area to water volume, apparatus operations parameters, and sampling requirements, they represent the
use of either harvested test pieces versus conditioned new test pieces.
This research compared the characteristics and performance of harvested to conditioned new test pieces to determine if the
two methods are equally valid for empirical testing and monitoring of lead or copper release in a water distribution system.
2. METHODS
2.1. Testing apparatuses
Data from the seven apparatus conﬁgurations described above were utilized in this comparative study. Photos and diagrams
of the apparatuses can be viewed in the references cited.
As stated previously, all the apparatuses are, essentially, modiﬁcations of the original AWWARF pipe rig concept. That is,
an electrically-actuated valve controlled by a timer that allows water to enter a plastic housing. The water comes in contact
with metal test pieces and periodically is allowed to stagnate adjacent to the test piece surfaces. The water is then withdrawn
as a stagnation sample and tested for lead or copper concentration. The cycle of water ﬂow, stagnation, and sampling is
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4878

repeated over time, with projects lasting from 6 months to several years. One exception is the coupon immersion method,
which is a manual jar test representation of this process and is typically carried out over a short time, on the order of 6 weeks.
Data used in this research were from water quality projects carried out by one of the authors (Cantor) from 1990 to 2020
unless noted as originating from published articles. Table 1 displays the sources of apparatus data used in this paper.
Table 1 also shows that residential building plumbing data were available in seven projects where residential sampling was
performed while a PRS Monitoring Station operated in the same distribution system. Residential lead and copper release data
came from two sources: (1) the maximum concentration found in an American regulatory compliance sampling dataset and
(2) the maximum concentration from proﬁle sampling in individual residences. Regulatory compliance sampling for this study
involved obtaining a 1-L ﬁrst-draw sample of water that had stagnated in building plumbing for 6 h or more for at least 30
residences in each water system (US EPA 2021). First-draw sampling does not capture the highest lead concentration released
from a lead service line upstream of the kitchen faucet but is close or equal to the highest concentration for copper release. In
this study, the maximum lead or copper concentration in each sampling dataset was used for comparison to apparatus metals
release data. Proﬁle sampling is a method of measuring metals release in a residence where successive litres of stagnating
water are taken to ‘map’ lead or copper release from the kitchen faucet, through the building plumbing, and through the
Table 1 | Apparatus data available for comparison
Data source ID
Authors involved
in project
Description
Apparatuses
GW FC 1
Yes
Groundwater (GW) system using free
chlorine (FC) disinfection
PRS Monitoring Station; building plumbing data
GW FC 2
Yes
Groundwater system using free
chlorine disinfection
Coupon immersion testing; AWWARF-type pipe rig with
new pipes; AWWARF-type pipe rig with harvested pipes
GW FC 3
Yes
Groundwater system using free
chlorine disinfection
PRS Monitoring Station
GW FC 4
Yes
Groundwater system using free
chlorine disinfection
PRS Monitoring Station
GW FC 8
Yes
Groundwater system using free
chlorine disinfection
PRS Monitoring Station; building plumbing data
SW Chl 1
Yes
Surface water (SW) system using
chloramine disinfection (Ch 1)
PRS Monitoring Station; building plumbing data
SW Chl 2
Yes
Surface water system using
chloramine disinfection
PRS Monitoring Station; building plumbing data
SW FC 2
Yes
Surface water system using free
chlorine disinfection
PRS Monitoring Station; WRF Project 4317 pipe rig;
building plumbing data
SW FC 3
Yes
Surface water system using free
chlorine disinfection
PRS Monitoring Station; building plumbing data
SW FC 4
Yes
Surface water system using free
chlorine disinfection
Recirculating pipe rigs with new pipes and harvested pipes;
PRS Monitoring Stations; building plumbing data
SW FC 5
Yes
Surface water system using free
chlorine disinfection
PRS Monitoring Station
EES (1990)
No
Groundwater system using free
chlorine disinfection
AWWARF-type pipe rig with new pipes
Williams et al.
(2018)
No
Surface water system using free
chlorine disinfection
AWWARF-type pipe rig with harvested pipes
Parks et al.
(2014)
No
Surface water system using free
chlorine disinfection
WRF Project 4317 pipe rig
Cornwell &
Wagner (2019)
No
See reference
Coupon immersion testing; AWWARF-type pipe rig with
harvested pipes
Hazen & Sawyer
(2019)
No
See reference
Coupon immersion testing
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4879

service line to the water main (Cornwell & Brown 2015). In this study, the maximum concentration of lead or copper
measured in the building plumbing of each proﬁled residence was used for comparison to apparatus metals release data.
Besides residential data, this paper focuses on the reproducibility of responses between test pieces in the same apparatus
and also between apparatuses exposed to the same water at the same time and location.
It is important to note that water quality characteristics of test and system water, such as pH and alkalinity, are not included
in the comparison of results. Response of lead and copper release to various water characteristics is beyond the scope of this
paper.
2.2. Data analysis
Apparatus lead and copper release data as well as other distribution system water quality data are considered non-parametric
time-series data (Wysock et al. 1995). Data analytical techniques used for dataset statistics were:
• Calculation of Shewhart statistics and control charts (Wheeler & Chambers 1992; Cantor et al. 2012).
• Identiﬁcation of ‘stabilized monitoring data’ where initial transitory data from an apparatus during conditioning were elimi-
nated (EES 1990; Wheeler & Chambers 1992; Wysock et al. 1995).
• Comparison of results between two monitoring scenarios using the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test (Wysock et al. 1995) where a
‘W’ statistic or a ‘z’ statistic was used depending on the number of available data points.
• Comparison of data trends between two scenarios using Spearman’s rank correlation (Wysock et al. 1995).
Estimation of the expected maximum lead or copper release in water system residences relied on the Shewhart calculation
of the ‘upper control level’ (average plus three variation units) using apparatus data from a given time period.
With all calculations, comparative data were taken from the same time periods to account for any seasonal temperature
inﬂuences on lead and copper release in water systems and monitoring apparatuses. Locations of sampling sites in a
water system were also taken into consideration.
2.3. Pipe scale analysis
Harvested pipes from water distribution systems as well as conditioned plates from PRS Monitoring Stations were analyzed
for chemical accumulations on the metal surfaces. This was performed by one of the authors (Maynard) using the following
procedures:
• Photography at macro scale, 10 , and 30 with a binocular microscope. Curvature of pipe samples was eliminated using a
stacked series of photographs and image processing software.
• Measurement of crystalline components using X-ray diffraction with Rietveld reﬁnement of the spectra (Harmon et al.
2022).
• Measurement of scale chemistry by X-ray ﬂuorescence and/or inductively coupled plasma followed by mass spectrometry.
• Measurement of localized chemistry using scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive spectroscopy.
2.4. Bioﬁlm thickness assessment
Conditioned plates from PRS Monitoring Stations were analyzed by one of the authors (Jacque) for microbiological populations
within bioﬁlms adhering to the metal surfaces. The conditioned plates were submerged in a lysing agent to release the bioﬁlms
into a solution. With the lysing agent solution separated from the metal components, the solution was analyzed for adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) concentration, which can be translated to a population estimate of bacteria per unit of metal surface area.
The following relationships were also used:
• Plate surface area ¼ 8 square inches ¼ 0.00516  1012 μm2
• Bacterial cell density
o Bioﬁlm density estimate ¼ 40 mg/cm3 (Rittman & McCarty 2001)
o Generic bacterial mass estimate ¼ 91  1015 grams/cell in a stationary phase (Fagerbakke et al. 1996)
o Therefore, bacterial cell density ¼ 0.44 cell/μm3
• Bioﬁlm thickness estimate in μm ¼ [(bacterial cells on a test plate surface as estimated by ATP analysis)/(0.00516 
1012 μm2)]/(0.44 cell/μm3)
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4880

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1. Comparison of chemical scales in pipe wall accumulations
Conditioned metal plates from PRS Monitoring Station test chambers were analyzed regarding the chemical nature of their
surface accumulations at the completion of several projects; harvested pipe scales were analyzed for chemical scale compo-
sition from the same and additional distribution systems.
The scales on new metal surfaces develop during the conditioning period and continue maturing toward thermodynami-
cally stable, less soluble compounds throughout the testing. The most familiar example of this chemical maturation
process in distribution systems is the ageing of copper precipitates (Lagos et al. 2001). The copper ageing progression
when sulfate is not signiﬁcantly present is (1) cuprite (a copper oxide), (2) cupric hydroxide, (3) malachite (a copper carbon-
ate) or tenorite (a copper oxide).
Figure 1 shows three stages of copper compound maturity which were found simultaneously occurring on harvested copper
service lines and also on conditioned copper plates from PRS Monitoring Station test chambers. The scale on the harvested
service lines was thicker than on the conditioned new plates and had a higher proportion of the less soluble, more thermo-
dynamically mature mineral, malachite.
This mixture of many phases in both the older and younger scales is conﬁrmed by an article (Lagos et al. 2001) that reports
the same pattern in comparing new to mature copper building plumbing. Higher copper release is expected from the newer
surfaces because of a higher presence of exposed copper metal and of more soluble cuprite. But older piping also maintains
the more soluble compounds along with the mature, less soluble compounds, narrowing the difference between copper
release from conditioned new surfaces versus older.
Regarding the maturation of lead-based compounds, bare lead surfaces exposed to water quickly form a layer of relatively
soluble Pb2þ oxide, usually litharge but sometimes massicot. This is then followed, commonly, by less soluble lead carbonates
(cerussite or hydrocerussite, or in high pH systems, plumbonacrite).
However, certain environmental factors can favor formation of other lead compounds and override the chemical matu-
ration process. For example, if the oxidation/reduction potential is elevated, the highly insoluble Pb4þ oxide, plattnerite,
can form (Lytle & Schock 2005).
Another phenomenon is seen with the addition of orthophosphate for corrosion control, where highly insoluble lead min-
erals form on lead pipe walls, including pyromorphite (lead phosphate) and intermediate compounds of lead, calcium, and
phosphate called phosphohedyphane (Hopwood et al. 2016).
Figure 1 | Mixed thermodynamic maturity of copper compounds on harvested service lines and conditioned new test chamber plates.
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4881

Figure 2 summarizes the comparison of mineralogy using chemical scale analyses of conditioned PRS Monitoring Station
lead plates versus harvested lead service lines. It was found that lead compounds on harvested lead service lines versus con-
ditioned lead test plates have the same array of minerals, with differences in relative abundances. Lead scales on new surfaces
tend to have more of the soluble lead oxides (litharge and massicot) than harvested lead scales. Therefore, higher lead release
is expected from conditioned new lead test pieces.
Other features of the comparison shown in Figure 2 are:
• The insoluble lead oxide, plattnerite, did not seem to form signiﬁcantly on the test plates in the time frame of their deploy-
ment as the kinetics of plattnerite reactions are slow (Lytle & Schock 2005).
• The spectrum of lead carbonate phases in the single-layer chemical scales that had formed on the lead plates mimicked a
combination of lead carbonate phases in the two layers of chemical scales found on the harvested lead pipes. This similarity
indicates that the use of new conditioned lead is a valid model of alkalinity (carbonate) effects, where lead carbonate solu-
bility is a key aspect of lead corrosion (US EPA 2021).
• The phosphate levels in the single-layer chemical scales of the lead plates were similar to the levels in the harvested lead
pipe scale that had been adjacent to the water. Therefore, the use of conditioned new lead test pieces is a valid model of
orthophosphate effects, where the use of orthophosphate and lead phosphate solubility are key aspects of control of lead
corrosion (US EPA 2021).
Additionally, lead release from harvested pipes has also been found in this research to be confounded by existing scales of
iron and aluminum on pipe walls. The harvested lead service lines studied in Figure 3 came from various locations in one
distribution system and varied in the degree of iron and aluminum scale formation. Figure 3 shows that these scales
hinder the rate that a passivating phosphate ﬁlm can form. Because of the degree of scale variability, harvested pipes as
test pieces for an apparatus must be strategically selected.
3.2. Comparison of bioﬁlms in pipe wall accumulations
In addition to chemical scales, naturally-forming bioﬁlms exist on pipe walls and other surfaces in contact with water.
Microbiologically inﬂuenced corrosion of metals in drinking water systems is a result of chemicals released from microbio-
logical metabolic activity occurring in bioﬁlms on metal surfaces (Gale & Totemeier 2004).
For the context of this research, only the thickness of the bioﬁlm was considered. Oxygen decreases through the thickness
of a bioﬁlm from the water interface to the metal surface, and the microbiological metabolisms change from aerobic to
Figure 2 | Mixed thermodynamic maturity of lead compounds on harvested service lines and conditioned new test chamber plates.
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4882

facultative to anaerobic; different metabolisms produce different chemicals and pathways to metals corrosion (Gale & Tote-
meier 2004).
Testing of conditioned lead plates from ﬁfteen different PRS Monitoring Station installations estimated a range of bacterial
cells per test plate from 3  106 to 3  109. The bioﬁlm thickness was calculated to range from less than 0.01 to 1.2 μm with an
average thickness of 0.14 μm. Testing of conditioned copper plates from 11 different PRS Monitoring Station installations
estimated a range of bacterial cells per test plate from 7  106 to 6  108. The bioﬁlm thickness was calculated to range
from less than 0.01 to 0.25 μm with an average thickness of 0.09 μm.
In contrast, mature bioﬁlms that can be found in building plumbing can be 3–4 μm thick (Liu et al. 2016). Therefore,
‘younger’ bioﬁlms on conditioned PRS Monitoring Station lead and copper plates were thinner with less anaerobic activity
than ‘older’ bioﬁlms on harvested pipes.
Particulate metal release from bioﬁlm is a function of the ability of the bioﬁlm to trap and later release corrosion by-pro-
ducts (Rittman & McCarty 2001; Liu et al. 2016), the determination of which was outside the scope of this article.
3.3. Representation of the water distribution system
Data for copper and lead release from PRS Monitoring Station test chambers using conditioned new test pieces were com-
pared to residential copper and lead release. The test chamber data average and statistical variation were used to estimate the
maximum residential lead or copper release expected in distribution system residences. This number was divided by the maxi-
mum observed lead or copper release measured in residences during the same time period for each water system. A ratio less
than one indicates that the apparatus underestimated residential metal release; a ratio greater than one indicates an overes-
timation of residential metal release.
With this analysis, an overestimation of lead or copper release was expected for the PRS Monitoring Station test chambers,
not only because of the nature of conditioned new test piece scales, but also because the operation of the apparatus is
intended to predict the worst-case lead or copper release for the water system under study by lowering water ﬂow and increas-
ing overall stagnation of water in the test chambers.
For dissolved copper, the copper test chamber estimated dissolved copper release ﬁve times higher than the maximum
values measured in residences on average. This higher but relatively close relationship of copper release between the
copper test chambers and building plumbing was within the expectations set by the analysis of chemical scales shown in
Figure 3 | Interference of passivating phosphate ﬁlm formation by iron and aluminum scales on pipe walls.
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4883

Figure 1. The copper test pieces act similarly to new copper piping in a building (Lagos et al. 2001) and represent a worse-case
scenario.
Particulate copper release was higher in the test chambers than in residences but was a small fraction of the total copper
(dissolved plus particulate copper) concentration. Therefore, total copper comparisons in Figure 4 were similar to the dis-
solved copper comparisons.
Figure 4 | PRS Monitoring Station test chamber estimate of maximum residential metal release compared to measured maximum results
observed in residences during the same time period.
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4884

For lead in Figure 4, there were estimates of residential lead release that were over 1,000 times the release measured in
residences. Those were special circumstances. One circumstance was when proﬁle sampling was performed in arbitrarily
selected residences where maximum residential lead release on the order of 0.01 μg/L (the limit of detection) was compared
to test chamber lead release on the order of 10–100 μg/L, calculating to ratios of 1,000–10,000. Another circumstance
occurred in one scenario where the apparatus was operating in an urban area during the COVID pandemic when people
stopped working from their ofﬁces and worked from their residences. There was low water usage at the location of the appar-
atus coinciding with test chamber particulate lead release at around 3,000 μg/L. This was compared to residences where
water usage had increased, and lead release was lower than usual.
For dissolved lead release, the test chamber conditioned new lead test pieces estimated 200 times the observed residential
release on average.
Regarding the underestimation of dissolved lead release, it was initially thought that the presence of orthophosphate in a
water system may cause lower lead release in test chambers versus in residences. This was based on Figure 2 where the lead/
phosphate mineral, phosphohedyphane, formed more easily on the conditioned newer surfaces than on the harvested sur-
faces. However, the data available in this research did not substantiate that hypothesis.
Particulate lead release from conditioned new surfaces was higher than from residential lead surfaces in the distribution
system and was a signiﬁcant fraction of the total lead release. Particulate lead was overestimated 200 times the observed resi-
dential release on average; total lead release was 100 times the observed residential release.
Data from the Flint, Michigan, harvested lead pipe rig (Williams et al. 2018) were used to calculate similar comparative ratios
between pipe rig data and maximum residential lead release. In this case, data were available from sixteen harvested test pieces
after lead release had stabilized. The average-plus-three-standard-deviation values for total lead release from each test piece
were available to use in estimating maximum residential lead release. In addition, the article presented the maximum concen-
trations from proﬁle sampling at two residences. The comparative ratios ranged from 0.14 to 2.54. This falls into a similar range
as the PRS Monitoring Stations but on the lower end of the range. These results for the harvested pipe rig data may not only be
because of the more mature pipe wall accumulations but also because of the higher water usage in the pipe rig (795 L per day of
water per test piece in the harvested pipe rig versus 114 L per day of water per test piece in the PRS Monitoring Station).
3.4. Replication of test pieces
Variability between similar test pieces can be introduced by factors such as alloy composition, test piece fabrication, and
amount of metal surface exposed to water (Hazen & Sawyer 2019).
The reproducibility of results between replicate test pieces in apparatuses was studied. Figure 5 identiﬁes the test piece pair
results that were statistically similar to each other as determined by the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test. For datasets with less than
25 data points, a ratio of Wcalculated/Wcritical was calculated, where results between two datasets are statistically similar when
the ratio is greater than 1.0. Otherwise, a ratio of zcalculated/zcritical was calculated, where results between two datasets are stat-
istically similar when the absolute value of the ratio is less than 1.0.
It was seen that dissolved copper tended to be reproducible between similar conditioned new test pieces. For dissolved
lead, both conditioned new surfaces and harvested surfaces were studied and both types of test pieces appeared to be repro-
ducible in results.
Particulate copper results appeared to be reproducible. Particulate lead results were less likely to be reproducible between
similar test pieces, indicating the erratic nature of particulate metals release from surface accumulations.
For lead, reproducibility of results was no better or worse for harvested surfaces versus conditioned new surfaces.
Also shown in Figure 5 is a comparison of data trends between pairs of similar test pieces. Trends were compared between
datasets using Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient, where two datasets have similar trends if the absolute value of the
coefﬁcient is between 0.7 and 1.0.
Dissolved copper trends were reproducible between pairs of similar test pieces; dissolved lead trends were ‘moderately’
reproducible. Both particulate copper and particulate lead release trends did not correlate well between pairs of similar
test pieces.
3.5. Comparison of apparatus results
Comparisons were also made of results between pairs of dissimilar test pieces as shown in Figure 6. In all comparisons, there
was little similarity of results between pairs of dissimilar test pieces using the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test and little similarity of
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4885

data trends using the Spearman’s rank correlation test. The difﬁculty in stringently comparing results from different appara-
tuses is that there are confounding factors based on the conﬁguration and operation of the apparatuses. The release of lead or
copper is a function of the surface area of metal exposed to volume of water (EES 1990). Water usage, ﬂowrate, and sampling
ﬂowrate also inﬂuence the quantity of lead or copper released and captured (Parks et al. 2014).
Figure 5 | Replication of test pieces on various monitoring/testing apparatuses.
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4886

Of special interest were comparisons between conditioned new lead surfaces and harvested lead surfaces (A, C, and D in
Figure 6). Seeing no statistical similarities, it was interesting to note that both conditioned new test pieces and harvested test
pieces made the same predictions as to which chemical scenario was the best for lowering lead release. For example, in a
Figure 6 | Comparison between monitoring/testing apparatus results and trends.
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4887

project where two harvested lead pipes were used in an AWWARF-type pipe rig to compare no treatment to orthophosphate
dosing, the results showed that an average of 22 μg/L total lead release was lowered to an average of 6 μg/L total lead release
when orthophosphate was dosed. Two new lead pipes were used at the same time; the results showed that an average of
40 μg/L total lead release was lowered to an average of 4 μg/L total lead release, the same outcome as the harvested pipes.
In another project, untreated versus orthophosphate-dosed scenarios were compared using three types of apparatuses oper-
ating in parallel: (1) recirculating pipe rigs with conditioned new lead pipes, (2) recirculating pipe rigs with harvested lead
pipes, and (3) PRS Monitoring Stations with conditioned new lead plates. The new pipe test showed a reduction from
112 μg/L dissolved lead release to 4 μg/L; the harvested pipe test showed a reduction from 21 μg/L dissolved lead release
to 4 μg/L; the plates in the lead test chambers showed a reduction from 36 μg/L dissolved lead release to 4 μg/L. These
were all the same conclusion of signiﬁcantly lowering lead release with the addition of phosphate.
Another interesting observation involved the nature of the coupon immersion method. With this method, the new test sur-
faces are typically not conditioned and are exposed immediately to various chemical scenarios. In one project, the immersion
tests were performed on new lead coupons comparing untreated water and phosphate-dosed water along with new lead pipes
in an AWWARF-type pipe rig. Dosing began before the piping was conditioned. Figure 6, Item B shows that the total lead
release was statistically similar between the two methods. The similarity was probably due to the fact that both the coupons
and the pipes had new bare surfaces; both tests were performed for only short periods of time and before pipe wall accumu-
lations could be sufﬁciently established.
In a test described by Cornwell & Wagner (2019), extended coupon immersion results matched harvested pipe results after
400 days. This indicated that, given time, the coupons develop surface chemical scales and bioﬁlms similar to harvested sur-
faces. That is, the coupon surfaces become conditioned over time. Before the point of conditioning, coupon immersion test
results represent an unknown point of scale and metal compound maturity.
4. CONCLUSIONS
There are historically seven conﬁgurations of apparatuses for monitoring lead and copper release trends in a drinking water
distribution system. Some of these apparatuses utilize harvested test pieces and some utilize conditioned new test pieces. This
has led to a debate as to which type of test piece produces valid data for empirical evaluation of corrosion control testing and
for tracking metals release in distribution system water. Both sides of the test piece argument agree that metal surface accumu-
lations of chemical scales and bioﬁlms profoundly affect the release of piping metals into the water and are the keys for
studying lead and copper release representative of a water system.
Harvested test pieces with legacy scales and bioﬁlms on the metal surfaces are the ideal test condition. However, selecting
and procuring harvested pipe segments from the distribution system are difﬁcult to do properly, and it is expensive to hand-dig
pipe segments. Any deviation from protocols in pipe segment procurement can impair interpretation of lead and copper
release results when these harvested pieces are installed in a testing apparatus.
With conditioned new metal surfaces, the chemical scales and bioﬁlms, characteristic of the water system under study, are
developed for all test pieces at the same time; all test piece surfaces begin in a similar condition. This allows for test data
reﬂecting the effect of the system water on lead or copper release as opposed to confounding the data with effects of variable
surface accumulations as with the harvested test pieces. The disadvantage of the conditioned new test pieces is that chemical
scales and bioﬁlms are ‘young’ and there are different lead and copper release expectations than for the older accumulations
found on harvested test pieces.
However, both younger and older scales are composed of similar compounds with a larger fraction of more soluble com-
pounds in the younger scales (Figures 1 and 2). The presence of soluble metal compounds translates to higher dissolved metal
concentrations released into the adjacent water.
Figure 4 conﬁrms that the estimated maximum copper release for the distribution system using data from conditioned new
copper test pieces was higher than maximum copper release measured in residences in the distribution system. Given that the
scale comparison between the conditioned new copper test pieces and the harvested test pieces was similar to those described
for chemical scales on newer copper building plumbing versus older copper plumbing, the use of conditioned new copper test
pieces remains a reasonable and representative estimate of worst-case system copper release.
Regarding lead release, Figure 4 implies that the conditioned new lead plates can greatly overestimate the release of lead in
distribution system residences. However, also seen in the data of Figure 4 are many examples where the metals release
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4888

estimations were closer to concentrations measured in residences. Therefore, apparatus data should be put in context with
distribution system data and inconsistencies should warrant residential investigations. Given the similarity of lead com-
pounds between the scales of conditioned new and harvested test pieces, especially regarding lead carbonates and lead
phosphates which are the keys to lead corrosion and control, the use of conditioned new lead test pieces remains a reasonable
and representative estimate of worst-case system lead release and response to corrosion control treatment options.
The consistent conﬁguration and operation of any apparatus, whether utilizing conditioned new test pieces or harvested
test pieces, creates baseline data against which to compare residential data and uncover discrepancies that can further be
investigated. The baseline apparatus data are also compared to trends of other water quality parameters, to empirically
look for correlations and hypothesize inﬂuential factors in the release of lead and copper. When dominant inﬂuential factors
are identiﬁed, the factors can be manipulated for control of lead or copper release.
The test pieces were also compared by looking at how well results can be reproduced between two new conditioned test
pieces and likewise between two harvested test pieces. In terms of reproducibility as displayed in Figure 5, harvested test piece
data cannot be distinguished from conditioned new test piece data.
In comparing results from different apparatuses operating in parallel, no two types of apparatuses had consistent compar-
able results or trends with each other (Figure 6). Figure 6 reﬂects that variability of results are introduced in apparatuses by
differences in test piece ratio of metal surface area to water volume, apparatus operations parameters, and sampling
requirements.
There are no scientiﬁc reasons to eliminate either type of test piece in lead or copper release testing when keeping in mind
the limitations of each method. The observations made in this study suggests that no matter whether test pieces are con-
ditioned new metal or harvested metal, the following criteria should be applied to corrosion control investigations:
• Maintain consistency of apparatus conﬁguration and operation. Test pieces in an apparatus should be consistent with
each other in the ratio of metal surface area to water volume. Apparatus operations should be consistent in water usage
and ﬂowrate throughout a project. The array of scale compounds on test pieces should be similar, or at least, strategically
and purposefully different.
• Determine the properties of distribution system pipe wall accumulations. Samples of harvested pipe for scale analysis
should be analyzed from the distribution system no matter which type of apparatus is used for testing. This will give insight
into the potential of lead and copper in pipe wall accumulations in a system to dissolve into the water or to crumble into
particulates.
• Identify metal fractions of the total metal concentrations. Both dissolved and particulate fractions of lead and copper
should be measured and studied. Dissolved lead and copper represent chemical and microbiological corrosion processes.
Particulate lead and copper represent entrapment of corrosion by-products by chemical scales and bioﬁlms with erratic
release.
• Place apparatus data in context with residential sampling. Apparatus data should be compared to residential sampling
data as was demonstrated in this research in order to interpret apparatus results.
Accepting the use of conditioned new test pieces for testing and monitoring can lower corrosion control study costs, pro-
viding a tool for water systems of all sizes to select the best corrosion control strategy and to pro-actively track lead and
copper release trends in the distribution system.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data cannot be made publicly available; readers should contact the corresponding author for details.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare there is no conﬂict.
REFERENCES
American Water Works Association (AWWA) 2011 Manual of Water Supply Practices – M58: Internal Corrosion Control in Water
Distribution Systems, 1st edn. AWWA, Denver, CO, USA.
American Water Works Association Research Foundation (AWWARF) & DVGW-Technologiezentrum Wasser (DVGW) 1996 Internal
Corrosion of Water Distribution Systems, 2nd edn. AWWARF, Denver, CO, USA.
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4889

Boyd, G. R., Reiber, S., McFadden, M. S. & Korshin, G. V. 2012 Effect of changing water quality on galvanic coupling. Journal AWWA
104 (3), E136–E149. http://doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2012.104.0038.
Cantor, A. F. 2018 Water Distribution System Monitoring: A Practical Approach for Evaluating Drinking Water Quality, 2nd edn. CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL, USA.
Cantor, A. F., Kiefer, E., Little, K., Jacque, A., Degnan, A., Maynard, J. B., Mast, D. & Cantor, J. 2012 Project 4286: Distribution System Water
Quality Control Demonstration. Water Research Foundation, Denver, CO, USA.
Cornwell, D. & Brown, R. 2015 Project 4569: Evaluation of Lead Sampling Strategies. Water Research Foundation, Denver, CO, USA.
Cornwell, D. A. & Wagner, J. A. 2019 Coupon procedures for evaluating lead and copper solubility. Journal AWWA 111 (10), 12–24. http://
doi.org/10.1002/awwa.1377.
Economic and Engineering Services, Inc. (EES) 1990 Lead Control Strategies. AWWARF and AWWA, Denver, CO, USA.
Fagerbakke, K. M., Heldal, M. & Norland, S. 1996 Content of carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur and phosphorus in native aquatic and cultured
bacteria. Aquatic Microbial Ecology 10 (1), 15–27. http://doi.org/10.3354/ame010015.
Gale, W. F. & Totemeier, T. C. 2004 Smithells Metals Reference Book, 8th edn. Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, Kidlington, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
Harmon, S. M., Tully, J., DeSantis, M. K., Schock, M. R., Triantafyllidou, S. & Lytle, D. A. 2022 A holistic approach to lead pipe scale analysis:
Importance, methodology, and limitations. AWWA Water Science 4 (2), e1278. http://doi.org/10.1002/aws2.1278.
Hazen & Sawyer 2019 Lead and Copper Corrosion Bench-Scale Testing Guidance Manual. Colorado Department of Public Health and
Environment, Denver, CO, USA. Available from: https://drive.google.com/ﬁle/d/1G7N_kbwim1VTnD72gtCNbC8jDRAi7VU_/view.
Hopwood, J. D., Derrick, G. R., Brown, D. R., Newman, C. D., Haley, J., Kershaw, R. & Collinge, M. 2016 The identiﬁcation and synthesis of
lead apatite minerals formed in lead water pipes. Journal of Chemistry 2016, 9074062. http://doi.org/10.1155/2016/9074062.
Kirmeyer, G. J., Sandvig, A. M., Pierson, G. L. & Neff, C. H. 1994 Development of A Pipe Loop Protocol for Lead Control. AWWARF and
AWWA, Denver, CO, USA.
Lagos, G. E., Cuadrado, C. A. & Letelier, M. V. 2001 Aging of copper pipes by drinking water. Journal AWWA 93 (11), 94–103. http://doi.
org/10.1002/j.1551-8833.2001.tb09338.x.
Liu, S., Gunawan, C., Barraud, N., Rice, S. A., Harry, E. J. & Amal, R. 2016 Understanding, monitoring, and controlling bioﬁlm growth in
drinking water distribution systems. Environonmental Science and Technology 50 (17), 8954–8976. http://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.
6b00835.
Lytle, D. A. & Schock, M. R. 2005 Formation of Pb (IV) oxides in chlorinated water. Journal AWWA 97 (11), 102–114. http://doi.org/
10.1002/j.1551-8833.2005.tb07523.x.
Parks, J., Edwards, M. & Atassi, A. 2014 Project 4317: Non-Intrusive Methodology for Assessing Lead and Copper Corrosion. Water Research
Foundation, Denver, CO, USA.
Reiber, S. 1991 Galvanic stimulation of corrosion on lead-tin solder-sweated joints. Journal AWWA 83 (7), 83–91. http://doi.org/10.1002/
j.1551-8833.1991.tb07183.x.
Rittmann, B. E. & McCarty, P. L. 2001 Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and Applications. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, USA.
Schock, M. R., Cantor, A. F., Triantafyllidou, S., Desantis, M. K. & Scheckel, K. G. 2014 Importance of pipe deposits to Lead and Copper Rule
compliance. Journal AWWA 106 (7), 87–88. http://doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2014.106.0064.
US Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). 2021 National primary drinking water regulations: Lead and Copper Rule revisions. Federal
Regisister 86, 4198–4312.
Wheeler, D. J. & Chambers, D. S. 1992 Understanding Statistical Process Control, 2nd edn. SPC Press, Knoxville, TN, USA.
Williams, D. J., Parrett, C. J., Schock, M. R., Muhlen, C., Donnelly, P. & Lytle, D. A. 2018 Design and testing of USEPA’s Flint pipe rig for
corrosion control evaluation. Journal AWWA 110 (10), E16–E37. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/awwa.1127.
Wysock, B. M., Sandvig, A. M., Schock, M. R. & Frebis, C. P. 1995 Statistical procedures for corrosion studies. Journal AWWA 87 (7), 99–112.
http://doi.org/10.1002/j.1551-8833.1995.tb06397.x.
First received 10 April 2023; accepted in revised form 17 November 2023. Available online 24 November 2023
Water Supply Vol 23 No 12, 4890

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1141 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Joseph Battistelli <jbattistelli@chn.org>  
Sent: Tuesday, February 6, 2024 6:39 AM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Subject: Group Comment 
 
 
To Whom It May Concern, 
 
I am writing to submit a comment on behalf of 44 organizations.  I had trouble submitting it through the 
portal last night and am not sure if it went through.  I have attached the sign on comment here. 
 
Thank you, 
 
Joe 
 
Joseph Battistelli, PMP 
Director of Outreach & Membership 
Coalition on Human Needs 
1825 K St NW, Suite 411 
Washington, DC 20006 
jbattistelli@chn.org 
202‐223‐2532 x117 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1326 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 1, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: EPA Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 – National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements 
 
On behalf of Children’s Wisconsin, I am writing regarding the Environmental Protection Agency’s proposed 
guidance to industry regarding the proposed revised Lead & Copper Rule. 
 
Children’s Wisconsin (Children’s) is the state’s only independent health system dedicated solely to the health 
and well-being of kids. We serve children and families in every county across the state, with two inpatient 
hospitals and more than 30 primary, specialty and urgent care clinics. We care for every part of a child's health, 
from critical care at one of our hospitals, to routine check-ups in our primary care clinics. Children’s focuses on 
all elements of pediatric well-being by providing dental care, school health nurses, foster care and adoption 
services, family resource centers, child health advocacy, health education, family preservation and support, 
mental health services, pediatric medical research and the statewide poison hotline. 
 
Lead is a significant public health issue in our communities across the state. At Children’s, we understand 
firsthand the effects lead poisoning can have on a child’s health and well-being, including learning difficulties, 
developmental delays and behavioral issues. There is no “natural” level of lead that comes from our diet or 
nature; therefore, any detectable level of lead in a child’s blood as a result of environmental contamination. 
When it comes to lead and children, no level can be considered “safe.” Our children face so many potential 
threats to health and well-being during the first years of life – years that are foundational to their growth and 
development. Lead exposure is one threat that we have the ability to control and mitigate the risks.  
 
As with most other health issues, systemic inequities have contributed to disparities in lead poisoning for those 
who are underserved or living in certain geographic areas. Lead exposure disproportionately impacts families 
with lower incomes and families of color. Wisconsin is ranked among the top 10 states with the highest 
percentages of children with elevated blood lead levels, representing approximately 3.3% of children across the 
state in 2020. While 1.6% of White children in Wisconsin tested had elevated blood lead levels, 6.5% of Black 
children tested had elevated blood lead levels. Lead poisoning rates are twice as high among American Indian 
children, and higher rates also exist among Asian and Hispanic children than their white counterparts. We 
appreciate the proposed rule improvements include significant provisions aimed at decreasing lead exposure.  
 
At Children’s, we are dedicated to providing the best care for children and we have implemented measures to 
increase testing to better identify children in need of care, as well as creating an integrated lead care 
management program to more holistically support children and families with coordinated care. We follow 
Wisconsin Lead Poisoning Prevention Program guidelines and recommendations for testing, including enhanced 
testing for children at greater risk of lead poisoning, including children covered by Medicaid and those residing 
in the cities of Milwaukee and Racine. We have equipped each of our Primary Care sites with point-of-care 
instruments so lead results can be shared with both families and the local health department and any follow-up 
testing and care can be initiated. In addition to comprehensive work across Children’s system to close lead care 
gaps for our patients, we’re proud to be partnering with several community organizations to implement 
community-based lead testing and better coordinating care with the City of Milwaukee Health Department. 

Despite our enhanced efforts, Children’s continues to see children who are hospitalized for chelation therapy 
due to lead poisoning. This is an issue we cannot ignore; lead poisoning of children must be addressed.  
 
We appreciate the Administration’s commitment to addressing this critical public health challenge our children 
face. The proposed rule includes significant provisions aimed at decreasing lead exposure. That includes a 
proposed requirement to replace the vast majority of lead service lines (LSLs) in our communities within 10 
years by locating LSLs and creating plans to replace them. We sincerely appreciate the Agency’s urgency in 
encouraging communities to take the threat of lead poisoning from LSLs seriously. We know water systems 
across Wisconsin have been working diligently to understand the scope of LSLs in their communities and replace 
them in an efficient and equitable manner. Including requirements for an updated public lead service line 
inventory and a plan to address this issue will help ensure that community members have accurate information 
about their home and ensure water systems are working proactively to address this important issue. We also 
know the private side of LSLs, not impacted by this proposed rule, continue to pose lead poisoning risks for 
children as well as significant financial barriers for already burdened families. Full LSL replacement, including 
both public and private, would be a meaningful step towards more fully mitigating the risk of poisoning from 
LSLs. 
 
We encourage the Administration to ensure water systems and communities have access to the financial 
resources they need to achieve this ambitious goal and address the workforce and supply chain issues that may 
impact full realization of this provision. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the American Rescue Plan Act 
funds were certainly helpful in supporting communities to begin to address lead poisoning prevention, however 
we believe the scope of this issue, with more than 150,000 LSLs across Wisconsin, requires additional 
investment and resources. In addition, of course we encourage continued focus and funding on efforts to reduce 
the other environmental sources of lead poisoning in our communities, including lead paint dust. 
 
Another significant proposed provision includes lowering the lead action level from 15 μg/L to 10 μg/L and 
requiring water systems to reduce lead exposure through additional corrosion control, water filters or other 
measures. While we believe this level could be lower still, we believe this adjustment will help take a step 
towards more swiftly reducing the levels of lead in our water. We encourage water systems to provide 
community members with free and easy access to the information and resources they need to help mitigate the 
risk of lead poisoning in their children. 
 
Eliminating the sources of lead in our community will continue to take committed and coordinated action by 
community, health and government entities. We appreciate local, state and federal officials looking at this as a 
public health issue and we encourage increasing focused efforts and resources aimed at lead poisoning 
prevention. Thank you for the opportunity to share comments on the proposed rule improvements.  
Sincerely, 
 
 
Bob Rohloff, MD 
Lead Program Medical Consultant 
Children’s Wisconsin

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0742 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Gineida Acevedo‐Lorenzo <gacevedo@GPTX.org>  
Sent: Wednesday, December 6, 2023 4:55 PM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Subject: LCRI Questions 
 
 
Good afternoon,  
  
I am with the City of Grand Prairie. I was reading the new proposed rule and I have some questions.  
  
1. Is this statement correct? 
“EPA is proposing a compliance date of three years after promulgation of a final rule and is 
proposing that systems continue to comply with the LCR until that date, with the exception of the 
LCRR initial LSL inventory, notification of service line material, associated reporting 
requirements, and the requirement for Tier 1 public notification for a lead action level 
exceedance under subpart Q. 
2. Does the lead service line replacement plan and tap sampling compliance date would be 
extended to three years after promulgation of a final rule? 
  
Thank you, 
  
Gineida Acevedo 
Environmental Quality Supervisor 
Public Health & Environmental Quality Department 
City of Grand Prairie 
300 W Main St  
Grand Prairie, TX 75050 
(972) 237‐7564 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0935 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESIDENT 
John Entsminger 
Las Vegas Valley Water Dist. 
 
 
Julie Anderson 
Denver Water 
 
 
Edward Campbell 
Portland Water Bureau 
 
 
Yann Le Gouellec 
Newport News Waterworks 
 
Todd Swingle 
Toho Water 
VICE PRESIDENT 
Vacant 
 
 
Mike Armstrong 
WaterOne 
 
 
Shane Chapman 
Metropolitan Water District of 
Southern California 
 
Angela Licata 
New York City Department of 
Environmental Protection 
 
Timothy Thomure 
Tucson Water 
 
 
TREASURER 
Jeffrey Szabo 
Suffolk County Water Authority 
 
 
Verna Arnette 
Beaufort-Jasper Water & Sewer 
Authority 
 
Vacant 
 
Lindsey Rechtin 
Northern Kentucky Water District 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARY 
Calvin Farr 
Prince William County Service 
Authority 
 
Tad Bohannon 
Central Arkansas Water 
 
 
Scott Dewhirst 
Tacoma Water  
 
 
Holly Rosenthal 
Phoenix Water Services 
Department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jeff Brown 
Onondaga County Water 
Authority 
 
Randy E. Hayman 
Philadelphia Water 
Department 
 
Brian Steglitz 
Ann Arbor Water 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER 
Tom Dobbins 
 
 
Chris Browning 
Oklahoma City Water Utilities 
Trust 
 
Ghassan Korban 
Sewerage and Water Board of 
New Orleans 
 
John P. Sullivan, Jr. 
Boston Water and Sewer 
Commission 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan  
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
Via electronic submission 
 
Re: Docket ID #: EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801; National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) welcomes the opportunity to provide 
feedback on EPA’s proposed revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation 
(NPDWR) for lead and copper, also known as the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). 
AMWA is an organization representing the largest publicly owned drinking water utilities in the 
United States, and collectively its membership serves more than 160 million people. The 
association has been involved with the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) since its inception and values 
all the work that EPA has done to decrease the risk posed by lead and copper to public health. All 
along, we have sought a rule that is achievable, practical, and enforceable. 
 
EPA promulgated the LCR Revisions (LCRR) on January 15, 2021, and subsequently announced 
its intent to further revise the rule prior to the October 16, 2024, compliance date. These proposed 
revisions ultimately became known as the LCRI. AMWA has several suggestions for how this 
proposed rule could be improved upon, as well as thoughts on the components the association 
believes should be retained. The proposed LCRI encompasses a complete reworking of numerous 
of the provisions included in the LCRR and LCR, and details new requirements that the agency 
declined to include in previous iterations of the rule.  
 
 

 
 
 
                                                                               
 
AMWA is pleased to submit the attached comment letter for EPA’s consideration. If you have any 
questions, please contact Erica Brown (Brown@amwa.net), AMWA’s Chief Policy and Strategy 
Officer. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Tom Dobbins 
Chief Executive Officer 
 
Attachment 
 
cc:  
Radhika Fox, OW 
 
Bruno Pigott, OGWDW 
 
Jennifer McLain, OGWDW 
 
Eric Burneson, OGWDW 
 
Hannah Holsinger, OGWDW 
 
Michael Goldberg, OGWDW 
 
 

 
 
 
                                                                               
 
 
 
 
Comments on 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Section 1: Introduction .......................................................................................................... 3 
Section 2: Service Line Replacement ...................................................................................... 5 
Section 2.1: 10-Year Replacement Timeline ..................................................................................5 
Section 2.2: Galvanized Requiring Replacement ...........................................................................9 
Section 2.3: Calculating Service Line Replacement Pool ............................................................. 11 
Section 2.4: Water System Access to the Private Side of the Service Line .................................... 12 
Section 2.4.1: Reasonable Effort to Obtain Property Owner Consent ............................................................... 14 
Section 2.4.2: Rental Properties ......................................................................................................................... 14 
Section 2.5: Partial Service Line Replacements ........................................................................... 15 
Section 2.6: Inclusion of Lead Connectors and/or Galvanized Service Lines that Were/Are 
Downstream Lead Connectors Under Mandatory Replacement ................................................. 15 
Section 2.7: Annual Rolling Average ........................................................................................... 16 
Section 3: Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan ................................. 17 
Section 3.1: Updating Service Line Replacement Plans ............................................................... 18 
Section 3.2: Lead Connectors ...................................................................................................... 19 
Section 3.3: Non-Lead service Line Validation ............................................................................ 20 
Section 3.4: Unknown Identification Timeline ............................................................................ 21 
Section 4: Tap Sampling ...................................................................................................... 21 
Section 4.1: Tiered Sampling System .......................................................................................... 22 
Section 4.2: Sampling for Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) Efficacy .................................... 23 
Section 4.3: Addition of First Liter Sample ................................................................................. 23 
Section 5: Lead Action and Trigger Levels ........................................................................... 24 
Section 6: Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) .................................................................... 26 
Section 6.1: CCT Feasibility ........................................................................................................ 26 
Section 6.2: Repeated Re-Optimization After Action Level Exceedances .................................... 27 
Section 6.3: Delaying Optimized CCT Until After All LSLs/GRRs are Replaced in Five Years ... 27 
Section 7: Public Education ................................................................................................. 28 
Section 7.1: Public Education Feasibility .................................................................................... 28 
Section 7.2: Capacity of Water Systems to Conduct all the Required Public Education Activities 
in 30 days .................................................................................................................................... 29 

 
2 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Section 7.3: Capacity of Water Systems to Provide Individual Tap Sampling Results in Three 
Days ............................................................................................................................................ 31 
Section 7.4: Types and Timing of Outreach Activities Proposed for Failing to Meet LSL 
Replacement Rate ....................................................................................................................... 32 
Section 7.5: Notification of a Service Line Disturbance ............................................................... 33 
Section 7.6: Increased Frequency of Public Education Requirements ......................................... 34 
Section 7.7: Streamlining Public Education Requirements ......................................................... 35 
Section 8: Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances
 ........................................................................................................................................... 36 
Section 8.1: Definition of Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances ............................................ 37 
Section 8.2: Providing Filters to all Consumers After Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances . 38 
Section 9: Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities ............................................ 39 
Section 9.1: Previous Non-Regulatory Efforts to Promote School Testing ................................... 39 
Section 9.2: List of School and Child Care Facilities ................................................................... 40 
Section 9.3: Testing Requirements .............................................................................................. 41 
Section 9.4: Sampling Protocol.................................................................................................... 43 
Section 9.5: Waivers .................................................................................................................... 43 
Section 10: Compliance Dates.............................................................................................. 44 
Section 11: Economic Analysis and Affordability.................................................................. 45 
Section 11.1: Overall Costs.......................................................................................................... 46 
Section 11.2: HRCCA/Economic Analysis for the Proposed Rule ................................................ 47 
Section 11.3: Annualized costs not representative of compliance timeframe ................................ 48 
Section 11.4: Cost of Orthophosphate Removal and Clean Water Act (CWA)/ Safe Drinking 
Water Act (SDWA) Connection ................................................................................................... 49 
Section 11.5: Feasibility............................................................................................................... 50 
Section 11.6: Affordability .......................................................................................................... 51 
Section 12: Conclusion ........................................................................................................ 53 
Appendix A.............................................................................................................................. 
Appendix B ............................................................................................................................. 
Appendix C ............................................................................................................................. 
Appendix D ............................................................................................................................. 
 

 
3 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Section 1: Introduction 
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) is pleased to offer these comments on 
EPA’s National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI). AMWA acknowledges the consideration EPA has put into the proposed 
changes to the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) and recent Revisions (LCRR) and supports EPA’s 
efforts to address the complex issue of eliminating exposure to lead in drinking water. AMWA has 
been involved with the LCR since its inception and values all the work that EPA has done to 
decrease the public’s exposure to lead through drinking water.  
 
Addressing lead in drinking water is particularly challenging because – unlike most other 
contaminants – lead is typically not present in drinking water sources, and, therefore, it cannot be 
removed at the treatment plant. Instead, lead is introduced into drinking water in the distribution 
system, when treated water passes through buried service lines and premise plumbing containing 
lead. To minimize the absorption of lead into drinking water, water systems take a variety of 
measures that make water less corrosive to pipes, decreasing the likelihood that any lead in service 
lines or household plumbing will be released into the water. Because water systems may not have 
adequate information on the number and location of lead service lines and cannot control 
individual residents’ premise plumbing, there is no easy solution that can quickly and completely 
eliminate the problem of lead in drinking water. 
 
The revisions outlined in the LCRI far exceed simply mending the existing regulations and instead 
effectively upend the LCR. Water systems will need to devote significant time and resources to 
meet the full lead service line (LSL) replacement goal proposed in the LCRI. However, EPA has 
incorporated substantial additional requirements beyond this goal, many of which will become 
impractical once a water system has located and removed its LSLs and galvanized requiring 
replacement (GRR) lines.  
 
At the root of this proposed rulemaking is the goal of removing 100 percent of lead service lines 
within 10 years. AMWA aligns wholeheartedly with EPA’s shared objective to swiftly identify, 
remove, and replace lead service lines and agrees that the complete removal of all lead service 
lines is the ultimate goal. AMWA appreciates EPA's acknowledgment that this objective may not 
be universally attainable for every water system in the timeframe specified in the proposal. 
Because of this, we urge the agency to tailor the rule, using AMWA’s recommendations in these 
comments, to allow water systems to primarily focus on this principal goal of removal LSLs. 
Overloading systems with multiple concurrent requirements can divert essential money, time, and 
personnel from lead service line replacement efforts. 
 
In order to achieve the primary goal of the LCRI, full lead service line replacement, EPA, in this 
proposal, seems to equate access to private property with control of the private side of the service 
line. While AMWA does appreciate EPA recognizing instances in which the private side will not 
be accessible to the water system, the association cautions EPA against putting water systems in 

 
4 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
the untenable position of forcing individual customers to replace their side of the line. The 
feasibility of ultimately replacing the private side of the line comes down to funding: either the 
availability of state and federal funds to finance the private side replacement, or the entirety of the 
costs, in one form or another, falling on the ratepayers. 
 
The immense amount of public notification, education, and outreach requirements included in the 
proposed rule has the potential to disrupt ongoing programs designed to accelerate LSL 
replacements by utilities. Such notifications may inadvertently impede the positive momentum 
generated by utilities actively engaged in these replacement initiatives. One significant concern is 
the potential to create confusion among customers, particularly those with service lines of 
unknown material, who may perceive the notification as a cause for alarm or an indication of 
immediate risks. The public may question the effectiveness of ongoing LSL replacement 
programs, and the water system's commitment to ensuring safe drinking water might be called into 
question. The potential setback in progress resulting from public confusion or distrust highlights 
the delicate balance that water systems must strike in their communication strategies.  
 
Throughout the LCRI preamble, EPA uses anecdotal examples of cities and water systems that 
were able to identify and remove all LSLs in a short time to reinforce the agency’s claim that 
expedient, full removal is possible. While AMWA applauds these systems for the immense amount 
of time, resources, and planning that went into these efforts, and their ultimate achievements, these 
individual examples do not equate to data that justifies a sweeping, national mandate. Applauding 
the highlighted water systems for their commendable achievements is important, as it recognizes 
their commitment to addressing lead-related concerns. However, it is equally important to 
acknowledge the unique circumstances, local contexts, and resources available to each system. 
Anecdotal evidence, by its nature, tends to focus on specific instances that may not be 
representative of the broader spectrum of challenges faced by diverse water systems across the 
nation. 
 
AMWA also believes it is important to note that two major regulations under the Safe Drinking 
Water Act are expected to be finalized in 2024, including this rule and the National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) for six Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS). Each 
of these proposals carry three-year compliance dates from promulgation. These two rulemakings 
alone are estimated by EPA to cost up to a combined $4.8 billion annually to implement. In 
addition to complying with other regulations, there is a pressing demand for water systems to 
modernize aging infrastructure, improve customer experiences, and adapt to increasing threats 
from climate change and extreme weather. The escalating costs of materials and labor, influenced 
by supply chain disruptions, inflation, and workforce shortages, further compound these 
challenges.  
 
Publicly owned water systems are not-for-profit agencies that supply drinking water, a crucial 
and critical human necessity, at cost to the public. These water systems must balance the costs it 
takes to supply clean water and the rates it must charge customers to provide it. Contrary to the 
claims made by other stakeholders, water systems typically cannot pay for LSL replacement or 

 
5 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
any other infrastructure project, treatment process, or maintenance, without the funds coming 
directly from the ratepayers or from local, state, or federal sources, when available, which is 
ultimately, financed by the taxpayer. In either case, the general public will ultimately be 
responsible for footing the bill. Additionally, costs for test pits and investigations which do not 
result in construction of new infrastructure cannot be capitalized and thus must come from the 
utility’s operating budget. 
 
It is essential to dispel misconceptions and recognize that the financial burden of these increased 
costs is likely to be disproportionately felt by low-income communities. As water systems strive 
to meet stringent regulatory requirements and ensure the provision of safe and clean drinking 
water, the economic realities they face underscore the importance of exploring sustainable funding 
mechanisms and seeking support from various levels of government. Acknowledging these 
challenges is pivotal in fostering a nuanced understanding of the financial dynamics involved in 
the essential task of maintaining and upgrading water infrastructure for the benefit of communities. 
 
AMWA will delve further into each of these topics throughout this comment letter and asks that 
EPA consider these recommendations and suggestions. In this letter, AMWA also requests 
clarifications on several aspects of the proposed rule. The association believes our comments will 
provide EPA with valuable suggestions that, if adopted, will ensure the proposed rule is achievable, 
practical, and enforceable. We thank you in advance for your consideration. 
Section 2: Service Line Replacement 
 
AMWA supports EPA’s objective to attain full lead service line (LSL) replacement – not partial – 
and agrees that the end goal should be the removal of the entire lead service line. AMWA 
appreciates EPA’s acknowledgement of situations where a partial lead service line replacement 
would be unavoidable. AMWA firmly believes that water systems will need adequate flexibility 
and resource support to achieve 100% LSL replacement and urges EPA to consider the following 
before finalizing the rule.  
 
As EPA works to finalize the LCRI, the association urges the agency to allow for flexibilities and 
refrain from “one-size-fits-all” approaches that will not work at all water systems. While AMWA 
recommends changes in this letter, a central theme throughout our comments is this: The main 
goal of the Safe Drinking Water Act is to protect public health via the provision of safe drinking 
water, and a main component of the LCRI is to remove LSLs, which do not always pose an 
immediate risk to public health. Any final rule should keep this difference in mind and refrain from 
concurrent requirements that can spread resources too thinly, diverting essential money, time, and 
personnel from lead service replacement efforts, with little increased health benefits. 
 
Section 2.1: 10-Year Replacement Timeline 
 

 
6 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
A major component of this proposed rule is the requirement that public water systems (water 
systems) remove all LSLs and galvanized requiring replacement (GRR) lines within 10 years of 
the compliance date of the rule. GRRs are galvanized lines that are, or were, ever downstream of 
an LSL. AMWA emphasizes that any revisions to the LCR must consider the practical challenges 
faced by water systems seeking to replace all publicly and privately-owned LSLs (See: Appendices 
A, B, C, and D). While EPA has addressed some of these concerns, of which AMWA is 
appreciative of, the association continues to highlight obstacles that must be addressed to finalize 
a rule that water systems and states can fully implement.  
 
AMWA appreciates EPA’s acknowledgment that some water systems will be unable to meet the 
proposed requirement to complete LSLs replacement within 10 years. These include water systems 
that have over 100,000 known LSLs/GRRs and would be required to replace over 10,000 lines 
annually, and those with a high proportion (0.039 or 39 replacements per 1,000 households) of 
LSLs and GRR service lines in their distribution system relative to their total number of households 
served. AMWA does believe that these thresholds are high, and will affect few systems, but 
otherwise is pleased to see some avenues for systems that have a heavy burden to lift to replace all 
lines. AMWA’s suggestions for a more appropriate threshold for systems with a high number of 
lines is explained in this section. 
 
EPA requests comment on if the 10,000 LSLs replaced annually should be the maximum threshold, 
or if another number such as 8,000 would be more appropriate. To put this into perspective, utilities 
required to replace 10,000 lines per year would need to conduct approximately 40 LSL 
replacements daily. The following equation assumes utility crews would work only Mondays 
through Fridays, not work on federal holidays, and could replace lead lines year-round. 
 
 
 
10,000 service lines / ~250 working days a year = 40 lines a day 
 
As currently proposed, AMWA does not believe the replacement rate of 10,000 lines annually will 
be feasible for several systems. A single crew of workers would likely only be able to replace a 
couple lines a day, meaning multiple crews would need to be working every day to meet this goal. 
Water systems located in northern climates, where below-freezing temperatures and winter 
weather is an issue, could see those days cut by 1/3, or even more, meaning that they would have 
to replace approximately 60 lines per day to remain on schedule. This is assuming perfect weather 
the rest of the year, 100% focus on LSL replacement, adequate work crew availability, and other 
conditions where LSL replacement can take place.  
 
In reality, the number of lines that would need to be replaced daily would be much higher than the 
estimate of 40 lines a day. Furthermore, a water system would need to coordinate the efforts of 
work crews, assure all permissions and preparations by homeowners have been acquired, and 
devote significant financial and time resources to the task of line replacement. These actions would 
all occur while water systems have a vast number of other priorities that require attention. A 
lowered threshold would allow water systems to make progress on LSL replacement while also 

 
7 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
addressing other public health and system maintenance responsibilities and spreading out limited 
resources.  
 
EPA has also proposed a threshold ratio of 0.039 annual replacements per household served (39 
replacements per 1,000 households). If replacing all LSLs and GRRs causes a system to exceed 
this ratio, a system is eligible for a deferred deadline. AMWA appreciates EPA’s recognition that 
the quantity and density of LSLs can create barriers to replacement plans. While this ratio may not 
cover many utilities, it does recognize that there are limits to what a water system can accomplish 
in terms of LSL replacement rates. AMWA would like to emphasize that this rate will leave many 
water systems below the threshold but still unable to meet the challenges of the replacement 
requirements. EPA’s anecdotal examples of water systems able to meet these rates do not use data 
that can be scaled to all other water systems.  
 
EPA should shape the rule in such a way that water systems with elevated lead issues will have 
the resources they need to quickly remove LSLs. Since the presence of an LSL alone does not 
itself automatically result in an individual drinking water sample exceeding the action level, there 
should be avenues for water systems that have documented success at controlling lead 
concentrations within their system, whether through corrosion control or another method, to 
replace service lines at a rate that does not sacrifice other critical treatment and infrastructure 
projects.  
 
For example, Cleveland Water is ranked high among the water systems with the largest number of 
LSLs in the system, but lead levels detected in samples have been below 15 ppb since 1997, and 
constituently below 5 ppb since 2009.1 Cleveland Water would qualify for one of the deferment 
methods proposed, however, the system will have to divert significant resources toward meeting 
this replacement goal, even though lead levels are far below the proposed action level. If water 
systems were able to couple LSL replacement with things like water main replacement, this would 
present a cost-effective solution that gets LSLs out, but also does not cripple a water system 
financially.  
 
Easing these thresholds could have increased public health benefits by allowing water systems to 
evaluate where resources can best be utilized to reduce public health risks from a variety of 
sources, like PFAS or aging infrastructure. Currently, AMWA members continue to be plagued by 
ongoing supply chain disruptions, inflation, and workforce shortages2. These issues continue to 
delay critical water treatment and infrastructure work, while simultaneously driving up costs of 
 
1 Farr, Andrew. (January 29, 2024). Inside Cleveland Water’s Ambitious Lead Service Line Replacement Program. 
Trenchless Technology. https://trenchlesstechnology.com/inside-cleveland-waters-ambitious-lead-service-line-
replacement-program/.  
2 Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA). December 20, 2023. AMWA comments on availability of 
products for water infrastructure projects. https://www.amwa.net/system/files/linked-
files/AMWA_EPA_2023%20comments%20on%20products%20for%20water%20infrastructure%20projects.pdf  

 
8 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
projects. Easing the thresholds would ensure systems with the highest risk have the materials, 
labor, and financial assistance to address LSL replacement issues.  
 
While AMWA recognizes, and is extremely encouraged by, examples of cities and water systems 
that have been able to replace all LSLs in 10 years or less, it is important to acknowledge that 
many of these instances included either extenuating circumstances or as EPA admits “relatively 
low number of LSLs (<1,000).” While many systems will have fewer than 1,000 LSLs, EPA 
cannot ignore the very real challenges that systems with more LSLs will face. EPA cites Flint, 
Michigan and Newark, New Jersey as examples of cities where LSL replacement has taken less 
than 10 years. AMWA applauds the efforts of these cities but points out the immense exposure 
and media these cities received because of elevated lead levels, and as a result, the federal funding 
these cities received in a timely manner. This resulted in outside funds being made quickly 
available, and while it streamlined the LSL removal process, it also required lead to be the focus 
of those utilities, demanding the vast majority of time and resources to address it. Not all cities 
with LSLs have exceeded the lead action level, and therefore cannot justify this type of response 
while other pressing updates are needed to address other regulations, aging infrastructure, and 
other priorities. AMWA would like to reiterate that EPA should include options for systems that 
do not have elevated lead levels to remove LSLs at a rate that allows them to focus on other public 
health risks in their system, particularly for systems that might have both PFAS and LSLs.   
 
It seems unfair that EPA would point to exceptional circumstances in which water systems were 
able to complete LSL replacement in 10 years or less but then proceed to say, “While EPA is aware 
that some systems completed their service line replacement programs in more than 10 years, EPA 
does not interpret these examples as conclusive or dispositive evidence that a 10-year deadline is 
infeasible.”3 AMWA understands a 10-year timeline will be possible for many water systems and 
does not dispute that they should strive to meet this goal if financially and technically feasible. 
However, EPA should allow systems with legitimate concerns regarding compliance within 10 
years, and those who are able to demonstrate that lead concentrations do not exceed the action 
level, flexibility with the 10-year timeline.  
 
One member water system in California detailed their efforts to remove LSLs that were installed 
during the World War II era when copper was unavailable. The water system ramped up efforts to 
replace these LSLs in the 1990s but was only able to remove approximately 200 per year without 
adversely impacting other critical work that needed to be done. This underscores the importance 
of recognizing that replacement is one of many projects water systems must accomplish to protect 
public health, and EPA must take risk into account when finalizing a regulation, so the agency is 
not choosing a water systems priority for them without taking other factors into account.  
 
 
3 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (December 6, 2023). Preamble, National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements. https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-
0036.  

 
9 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Other obstacles that could delay full lead service line replacement can be found in the federal tax 
code. If a water system attempts to finance the replacement of both the public and private portions 
of a lead service line with tax-exempt bonds, which are a common and cost-effective infrastructure 
financing mechanism, it must first navigate the IRS’ “private business use test” to certify that a 
disproportionate portion of the bond issuance would not benefit a private, home-based business.4 
This process adds months of work and expense to the process, as utilities must document whether 
each property with a private lead service line is the location of a rental property or a home-based 
business. Any final LCRI rule must be created with the knowledge that the US tax code currently 
imposes difficulties on utilities using tax-exempt bonds to pay for private-side lead service line 
replacement. 
 
AMWA also requests that EPA consider how setting such high thresholds could affect water 
systems whose primacy agencies accelerate their replacement timelines because EPA has deemed 
10,000 LSL replacements a year as feasible. By setting such a high threshold, EPA risks some 
primacy agencies setting unrealistic, accelerated timelines for some water systems solely because 
EPA chose an arbitrary maximum yearly replacement that will be difficult, if not impossible, for 
some water systems to attain. For example, if a system has 10,000 total service lines assigned lead, 
GRR, or unknown status, a primacy agency could say that EPA has deemed 10,000 replacements 
a year as feasible and require that system to finish everything in one year. However, as EPA details 
throughout the preamble, it will take time for identification, obtaining permissions, planning, etc. 
EPA should caution primacy agencies against accelerating timelines unless a consultation with the 
water system results in a mutual understanding that it can be accomplished.  
 
Section 2.2: Galvanized Requiring Replacement 
 
AMWA supports the inclusion of galvanized lines downstream of lead service line within the 
definition of lead service line since galvanized pipe can absorb lead particles; the association 
believe this designation is the most protective of public health. The current proposed rule defines 
a GRR line as one that is, or ever was, downstream of an LSL or a service line with an unknown 
lead status.  
 
AMWA is concerned with the inclusion of “ever was” within the determination of galvanized pipe 
which is downstream of a lead service line or a pipe of unknown material. This distinction is 
problematic as water systems may not have specific records for service lines that go back to the 
initial installation and may be unable to definitively prove or disprove what material may have 
been upstream of the galvanized line throughout the life of the service line. Additionally, current 
and long-term employees who are aware of past practices, and have a first-hand account, are able 
to certify that the water system did not have lead lines preceding galvanized pipes without this 
 
4 Office of Representative Dan Kildee. (March 8, 2022). Kildee Introduces Bill to Help Communities Replace Lead 
Pipes. https://dankildee.house.gov/media/press-releases/kildee-introduces-bill-help-communities-replace-lead-pipes  

 
10 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
information being in historical records. EPA could allow this information to be used by water 
systems when historical records were not kept. 
 
EPA cites several published studies that document evidence that iron scales in galvanized pipes 
can act as a sink and source for drinking water lead, and therefore determines all GRRs must be 
replaced regardless of the length of time that has passed since the LSL was removed. EPA says, 
“While one stakeholder recommended that galvanized lines that were downstream of an LSL 
should be classified as non-lead after a period of time, stating that these lines eventually stop being 
a lead source (USEPA, 2023j), EPA disagrees with this stakeholder.” EPA does not provide 
adequate reasoning for its disagreement.  
 
Water systems are seeing instances where the LSL was removed many years previously, and 
current lead concentrations at the galvanized lines are an order of magnitude lower than the 
proposed action level. While AMWA is aware that EPA in the preamble addresses this, the 
association believes EPA should reassess this determination and consider the costs and benefits of 
removing galvanized lines that have not been downstream of an LSL for a prolonged period from 
the mandatory replacement. It is possible that there are no health benefits of removing GRRs after 
a certain amount of time since these galvanized lines may not result in elevated lead levels. EPA 
should consider revisiting state of the science regarding whether GRRs are a source of lead after a 
period.  
 
For example, the McFadden study from Washington, D.C. cautioned the following:  
 
The fact that substantial lead release from pipe loops and from residential galvanized 
plumbing after full LSLR continued even after months of exposure indicates that iron 
scales can be a persistent source of lead over extended periods…However, substantial 
variation in magnitude of lead release within this data set indicates that the question of 
whether this phenomenon might result in lead release that persistently exceeds the LCR 
AL over the long term must be determined on a case-by-case basis. Although these data 
suggest that any home with galvanized plumbing and historical lead service may 
potentially be susceptible to a high lead risk, the seven sampled homes with galvanized 
plumbing provided insufficient statistical significance to quantify that risk for general 
application. Substantial additional study is required before general guidelines can be 
developed.5 
  
A recent Water Research Foundation study, Evaluating Key Factors That Affect the Accumulation 
and Release of Lead from Galvanized Pipes, suggests a decision tree whereby utilities can classify 
 
5 McFadden, M., Giani, R., Kwan, P., and Reiber, S.H. (April 1, 2011). Contributions to drinking water lead from 
galvanized iron corrosion scales. Journal AWWA, 103(4): 76–89. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1551-
8833.2011.tb11437.x  

 
11 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
their galvanized pipes as “low risk” or “high risk” of lead release based on various factors.6 The 
LCRI should allow water systems with old GRRs to determine whether their site-specific 
conditions create this phenomenon. As Edwards et. al noted: “This research provides methods for 
utilities to identify and classify their unique scenario using profile sampling, scale analysis, lead 
isotope ratios, and element co‐occurrence within water samples and pipe scale.” Similar to 
conducting a corrosion control study, water systems with historical GRRs should be allowed to 
conduct an investigation to determine whether their GRRs are or are not a source of lead, and 
therefore whether or not removal is justified from a public health standpoint. 
 
AMWA would like EPA to reconsider its proposal for a galvanized line to be considered a GRR 
if it is downstream of a lead status unknown service line. The proposed rule would require systems 
to identify all their unknown service lines by the 10-year deadline for replacement, so water 
systems will know if their galvanized lines are/were downstream of an LSL by that time. 
Therefore, in AMWA’s view, this provision is not needed in the definition of GRR and could result 
in galvanized lines being replaced that don’t need to be, since the unknown upstream may later be 
classified as non-lead. This will save resources and allow water systems to focus on replacing 
known LSLs and GRRs.  
 
Section 2.3: Calculating Service Line Replacement Pool 
 
EPA is proposing in the LCRI that water systems calculate their replacement pools at the start of 
the year by adding up the total number of LSLs, GRRs, and unknowns in their system. At the start 
of each following year, this replacement pool only changes as water systems identify the 
composition of their unknown service lines. AMWA seeks further clarification on EPA’s inclusion 
of unknown service lines as part of the replacement pool. Many systems have many or even a 
majority of unknown service lines due to the lack of available records, and some water systems’ 
inventories may include only non-lead and unknown status service lines. While these utilities are 
likely making significant efforts to identify these unknowns, it is not feasible to expect water 
systems to have all their unknowns classified after year 1, particularly utilities with thousands of 
unknown lines.  
 
Since the replacement pool is calculated at the start of each year, some water systems could run 
into the issue where the number of unknowns in their system will set an unrealistic replacement 
goal for the year. For example, if a system has 40,000 unknown service lines, with all others 
classified as non-lead, that system, under EPA’s proposed rule would be required to replace ~4,000 
services in the first year (10% annual removal; 40,000 x 0.10). If, throughout their efforts, a utility 
cannot find 4,000 service lines to replace, or finds no lead among the “unknowns,” that first year 
will result in a less than a 10% replacement rate and could therefore affect their ability to reach 
10% in a rolling annual average calculation. Even if said utility exceeded the replacement rate in 
 
6 Edwards et al. (2022). Evaluating Key Factors That Affect the Accumulation and Release of Lead from 
Galvanized Pipes. https://www.waterrf.org/research/projects/evaluating-key-factors-affect-accumulation-and-
release-lead-galvanized-pipes  

 
12 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
the next two years, a 0% replacement in the first year, or in subsequent years, would result in being 
out of compliance even when the system has not identified any LSLs or GRRs.  
 
Therefore, AMWA recommends EPA include only LSLs and GRRs in the replacement pool 
calculation. Water systems already need to have all unknowns identified in the 10-year deadline, 
so the incentive to classify these unknowns is already there. In addition, further incentive is offered 
by the proposed deferred deadline calculation for the 0.039 ratio that only includes known LSL 
and GRRs. As a system classifies its unknown service lines, it should be required to add any newly 
identified lead lines to the replacement pool for the following year’s 10% calculation. 
 
Section 2.4: Water System Access to the Private Side of the Service Line 
 
EPA, in this proposal, seems to equate access to private property with control of the private side 
of the service line. AMWA cautions that this assumption is not true for water systems. To 
understand the difficulties associated with full lead service line replacement, it is important to 
understand the ownership of service lines that connect water mains to the building inlet of each 
home served by a water system. Typically, ownership of service lines is shared by a community 
water system and a customer. The water utility usually owns the portion of the service line from 
the water main to the curb stop or meter, and the private property owner usually owns the portion 
of the service line from the property line to the building inlet. The water system is generally unable 
to access the customer-owned portion of the service line without the customer’s permission, nor is 
the utility under any obligation to replace, or pay for replacement of, the customer portion of a 
service line. In short, the customer portion of a service line is the customer’s private property, akin 
to premise plumbing inside the home. 
 
This does not mean that water systems are wholly unable to financially aid in the replacement of 
privately owned lead service lines. Many utilities often offer to replace the customer-owned 
portion of a service line at cost to the customer, in conjunction with the water system’s replacement 
of the publicly owned portion. Additionally, some utilities and localities have developed plans to 
fully replace lead service lines without charging customers individually. Some opportunities and 
challenges of these approaches will be discussed further in these comments.  
 
AMWA requests that EPA clarify in the final rule and develop specific guidance for instances 
where utilities are barred by state or local statutes from spending certain utility funds on privately-
owned service line replacement. Specifically, AMWA is concerned about the implications for 
homeowners who cannot afford to pay for replacement and whether water systems will be 
considered “in control” of a privately-owned service line that the water system legally cannot pay 
to replace. For example, in some states and localities, water systems are barred by statute or 
regulation from using certain funds for individual customer benefit – including replacing privately-
owned sides of a lead service line. In instances where the water system identified a privately-
owned side of a service line composed of lead, homeowners may not be able to pay to replace the 
line but nonetheless want it replaced. AMWA appreciates that EPA included a provision in the 

 
13 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
LCRI for water systems to record when local or state authorities do not permit the use of certain 
funds for individual customer benefit. AMWA is specifically concerned about the implications 
this potential scenario will have for low-income communities.  
 
AMWA appreciates the proposed provisions in the LCRI allowing a water system to designate a 
service line as "out of its control" in specific situations; however, AMWA seeks clarification on 
the consequences once a service line is deemed out of the system's control. For instance, what is 
required after the 10-year period if systems still have LSLs in their inventory due to refusals from 
homeowners to replace lines? Are recordkeeping, outreach efforts, monitoring of building 
ownership, etc., for these LSLs included in the cost-benefit analysis? EPA must provide clear 
guidance on actions regarding LSLs out of a system's control while ensuring simplicity and 
streamlining to minimize time and financial burden. 
 
Some water systems may have minimal publicly owned lead portions in their service lines, 
resulting in LSLs or unknowns being mostly located on the private side. This places water systems 
entirely dependent on property owners to meet replacement rates and identify unknown 
compositions. The first-year replacement calculations for these water systems will be particularly 
challenging, requiring substantial outreach, permission-seeking, planning, and coordination to 
access the private side or obtain information on service line composition. There is no guarantee of 
obtaining sufficient approvals, potentially leading to non-compliance with the 10% replacement 
rate in the first year. This may necessitate additional resources in the subsequent years to maintain 
compliance with the annual rolling average. The process must not unduly burden water systems, 
especially considering their concerns about LSLs under their control and other priorities. 
 
Replacing LSLs on the private side involves many instances where people’s yards, gardens, 
foundations, walls, and other private property features could be disturbed. Replacing those lines 
creates questions as to who is responsible for any damage done during replacement, but also who 
is responsible a few years down the road if something goes wrong. If a utility can cover the cost 
of a replacement, but several years later there is an issue with that line, will the customer expect 
the utility to come back and handle it, free of charge, since they installed it years ago? If not, will 
this lead to animosity from customers who feel they shouldn’t have to pay for their private side at 
all? EPA should consider this when determining requirements for private side replacement.  
 
While many water systems across the country can and do offer incentives to encourage 
homeowners to cooperate on LSL replacement projects, in the absence of the enactment of local 
ordinances that compel homeowners to take action, water systems themselves are extremely 
limited in their ability to force a homeowner to consent to the replacement of a privately-owned 
LSL. Any revised rule therefore should not hold water systems responsible for falling short of 
prescribed replacement targets due to lack of customer cooperation on private-side replacement. 
EPA must reflect in this rulemaking what it has presented in initiatives like the “Get the Lead Out” 
event – that LSL replacement is a community-wide effort that will require cooperation and buy-in 
from community groups and citizens themselves.  
 

 
14 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Section 2.4.1: Reasonable Effort to Obtain Property Owner Consent 
 
EPA is proposing that a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent is four outreach 
attempts using two different communication methods. While AMWA believes this to be excessive, 
the association insists that EPA not increase this number of communications in its final rule. Water 
systems already have a multitude of new recordkeeping requirements in this proposed rule; adding 
more will only increase the burden. If a property owner does not respond after four attempts with 
two different modes of communications, the odds are the property owner will not respond at all.  
 
Obtaining permissions at all properties within a distribution system will not be as simple as 
contacting the account holder. This is because the account holder in many cases is not the property 
owner. It could be that a member of the family owns the home, the property is a rental (address 
below), or the property is not a primary residence and therefore uninhabited for much of the year. 
In each of these situations, water systems will have to track down the owners, get contact 
information, conduct the outreach, and wait for responses. Many of these property owners could 
be located out of state or even out of country. Water systems will have to use significant resources 
and time to conduct this outreach. 
 
Section 2.4.2: Rental Properties 
 
AMWA has many concerns regarding the LCRI’s implications for water systems’ interaction with 
rental properties. These concerns include substantial difficulties contacting rental property 
inhabitants and property owners, obtaining permission to replace lines from the property owners, 
and replacing the LSLs on rental properties. Furthermore, AMWA is concerned that without 
community support and coordination, occupants of rental units could miss out on benefits of LSL 
replacement.   
 
In nearly all cases, water utilities require the permission of the property owner to conduct a lead 
service line replacement on the customer property side. Without adequate support to connect with 
property owners, which can range from individuals managing a few properties to large 
organizations with multiple, multi-unit properties, many utilities may not be able fully replace lead 
service lines where rental residents would benefit. For example, in multi-unit rental buildings, 
water systems may not have the individual addresses for each occupant or a total count of units. 
Water systems need substantial resources, time, and support to carry out the provision of LSLR on 
rental properties, as it will be a significant undertaking for any water system meeting all other 
provisions included in this proposed rule. 
 
AMWA recommends that EPA provide additional guidance and assistance to help with targeted 
outreach and mandates to landlords, public officials, and community groups in neighborhoods with 
high proportions of rental housing served by LSLs. The occupants of rented homes generally lack 
the authority to initiate or approve private-side LSL replacement work, and therefore could 
continue to be served by an LSL if a rental property owner is unresponsive to water system 

 
15 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
outreach or refuses to allow the water system to conduct LSLR. In developing guidance and 
support on connecting with rental property owners and community groups, EPA should account 
for the increased time and resource commitment this will require. 
 
The situation could also arise where a property owner approves a replacement and a water system 
proceeds to do the work, but a renter was not consulted or disagreed with the approval. This could 
create unnecessary discomfort for water system employees trying to do their job but could also 
present dangers to employees as well. These situations highlight the need for EPA to consider 
additional flexibilities in circumstances where the water system must make decisions that affect 
the safety of their employees.  
 
Finally, AMWA requests EPA reevaluate whether the agency accurately described “customer” and 
“consumer” accurately in the LCRI. These terms are not interchangeable. A customer is an account 
holder who pays a water bill and whose information a utility typically has. A consumer is anyone 
drinking water from a utility’s distribution system.   
 
Section 2.5: Partial Service Line Replacements 
 
AMWA agrees with EPA’s discouragement of partial lead service line replacements in its 
proposed rule; partial replacements carry few public health benefits and allow lead pipes to remain 
in the ground. However, a total ban on partial replacements, as some have advocated, is ill-advised 
as it could interfere with the realities of emergency water main replacement work and planned 
replacements alike. For example, emergency water main replacement work may offer an 
opportunity for a water system to simultaneously replace the publicly owned portion of a 
household’s lead service line in a cheaper manner. Likewise, a planned water main replacement 
project may result in a new alignment or spacing of the main, necessitating replacement of at least 
part of a lead service line. Ideally the privately owned portion of the lead line would be replaced 
at the same time, but a water system’s ability to do so is often contingent upon that customer’s 
willingness to allow work on his or her property (and, in many cases, for the customer to pay the 
costs associated with replacing the privately owned portion). Simultaneously replacing LSLs 
within control on the water system during planned water main projects is also significantly less 
expensive in the long run. The proposal recognizes that there will be situations where customer 
consent cannot be quickly obtained, and in those limited cases permits a water system to at least 
remove the publicly owned portion of a lead service line when the emergency main repair projects 
or other scheduled infrastructure work has provided an opportunity to do so. 
 
Section 2.6: Inclusion of Lead Connectors and/or Galvanized Service Lines that Were/Are 
Downstream Lead Connectors Under Mandatory Replacement  
 
EPA requests comment on whether the Agency should include lead connectors or galvanized 
service lines that are or were downstream of a lead connector as part of mandatory replacement. 
AMWA agrees with EPA’s approach to not include lead connectors or galvanized service lines 

 
16 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
downstream of a lead connector for the reasons EPA states in the preamble, including that “…in 
many cases connector material records are not available, and field investigating all connector 
material in the absence of records ‘would not be feasible or practical for most systems’ as material 
identification would generally require disturbing pavement and repaving.” 
 
Requiring a system to identify every single connector in its distribution system is simply not 
feasible, and AMWA thanks EPA for recognizing that. The proposed LCRR and LCRI require 
systems to replace lead connectors as they are encountered. AMWA recommends EPA keep this 
provision in the final rule to ensure these potential sources of lead are removed as they are 
uncovered but urges EPA to refrain from including lead connectors and galvanized service line 
downstream from lead connectors as part of the mandatory replacement requirement.  
 
Section 2.7: Annual Rolling Average 
 
EPA is proposing a three-year rolling average for required replacement rates of LSLs. AMWA 
prefers that EPA consider using a “cumulative average” to determine a water system’s compliance 
with a mandated percentage target and replacement goal. AMWA is however appreciative that in 
moving from the LCRR to the proposed LCRI, EPA increased the number of years included in the 
rolling average from two to three. If EPA does not amend the proposal to include a cumulative 
average in the final rule, which is AMWA’s preference, the association asserts that the number of 
years should not decrease.  
 
Allowing for a cumulative average will ensure that water systems are given credit for their previous 
accomplishments and are provided flexibility for the difficulties which may arise through no fault 
of the system. It is likely that a water system will have more success finding customers who will 
agree to pay for the replacement of their portion of the service line during the water system’s initial 
outreach efforts. As the water system’s replacement program continues, the pool of willing 
customers will likely diminish as the water system goes through subsequent rounds of outreach to 
customers who have previously chosen to forgo replacement. 
 
A hypothetical example of how this cumulative average might be implemented with a 10% 
mandated replacement target is shown in the table below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
17 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Table 1: Hypothetical comparison of cumulative average versus three-year rolling average 
 
Year 
Percentage of 
LSLs Replaced 
Cumulative Average 
Percentage of LSL 
replaced 
Three-Year 
Rolling Average 
1 
10 
10.00 
10.00 
2 
12 
11.00 
11.00 
3 
12 
11.33 
11.33 
4 
11.5 
11.38 
11.83 
5 
8.5 
10.80 
10.67 
6 
12 
11.00 
10.67 
7 
6 
10.29 
8.83 
8 
10 
10.25 
9.33 
9 
10 
10.22 
8.67 
10 
8 
10.00 
9.33 
 
This hypothetical situation could reflect some systems LSL replacement compliance realities. 
Some water systems may be able to replace more LSLs earlier in the 10-year period if they have 
completed inventories and the resources needed from sources such as the Bipartisan Infrastructure 
Law (BIL). Using the cumulative average approach, the above hypothetical system, at the end of 
the 10 years, would remain in compliance and have a cumulative average of 10% LSL replacement 
annually. However, under the three-year rolling average approach, starting in year seven, this 
system would be out of compliance. This alternative approach still allows water systems to work 
toward 100% in the require time, but would allow for more flexibility in scheduling, as there may 
be more variability in replacement rates, particularly between the start and end of the replacement 
period.  
 
As seen with the cumulative average example, allowing for flexibility could lead to the 
replacement of LSLs at a faster rate, because a water system would know that any additional lines 
beyond the mandated percentage replaced in one year would still count toward its replacement 
mandate in future years. Water systems should not be penalized for replacing a larger number of 
LSLs earlier on in the 10-year period, and the proposed three-year rolling average discourages 
that.  
Section 3: Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
 
AMWA supports EPA’s goal for lead service line inventories and agrees inventories are a good 
method for informing the public about the extent and scope of the lead service lines in their 
community. Information on lead service line locations is also necessary for water systems to target 
areas for potential lead service line removal in an LSLR plan. AMWA agrees with the agency’s 
understanding that many systems do not have complete records on LSL locations and would 

 
18 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
struggle to quickly obtain this data. With this lack of full data in mind, AMWA appreciates any 
additional time and flexibilities EPA has provided to water systems to continually update 
inventories, rather than have a completed (no unknowns) inventory by the compliance date.  
 
Section 3.1: Updating Service Line Replacement Plans 
 
AMWA agrees that any state and local laws and water tariff agreements that could prevent a system 
from full LSL replacement should be well documented in a water system replacement plan. 
AMWA asks for further clarifications in the final rule as to what happens when these state or local 
laws cause delays in or prevent LSL replacement. For water systems in states with ambiguous 
laws, AMWA also asks that water systems be able to provide opinion from legal counsel 
demonstrating that state law does not provide enough information to give the system clear 
authority to use rate revenue, or other available funds, to fund private lead service line replacement. 
Without express statutory authority, a clear mechanism for how water systems should handle these 
situations should be laid out clearly in a final rule, and the remedies should neither be overly 
burdensome nor costly.  
 
Across the nation, many states have ambiguous or altogether no statutory language regarding 
whether water systems may use revenue from ratepayer funds to fund lead service line 
replacements. This ambiguity has led many legal counsels of water systems to discourage water 
systems from using revenue from rates – typically a system’s largest source of funding – to fund 
private side replacement. In 2019, researchers from the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) and 
Harvard Law School reviewed state laws and policies in 13 states with the highest number of LSLs 
(at the time of publication) and found no explicit barriers to the use of ratepayer funds for lead 
service line replacement in seven of the 13 states.7 However, a lack of explicit legal barriers is not 
the same as explicit statutory authority. Many water systems are not willing, nor have the financial 
or legal resources, to risk a legal battle over their ability to fund lead service line replacements. 
Moving forward with a program that uses ratepayer revenue for replacing the private side of a LSL 
is an untenable option for utilities that do not have express authority; doing so could go against the 
advice of utility attorneys or risk lawsuits that could immediately halt a program and cost a water 
system more in damages or legal fees.   
 
The complexity and uniqueness of each state’s grant of legal authority to water systems for 
conducting and funding service line replacement on the property owner’s side of the service line 
(private side replacement) is important for EPA to recognize. It is well established that inspections 
of private property to determine compliance with laws, codes, regulations, etc. are considered a 
search of private property and must comply with the requirements of the Fourth Amendment - 
meaning the inspection must be conducted with consent of the owner/occupant, or pursuant to an 
administrative inspection warrant.  
 
7 Goho., S. A., Saenz, M., & Neltner, T. (2019). “Rates could fund lead pipe replacement in critical states.” 
https://clinics.law.harvard.edu/environment/files/2019/04/Rates-Fund-LSL-Replacement-
States_Harvard_EDF_2019.pdf  

 
19 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
In Kentucky, water systems are either special purpose government entities (Special Districts), 
owned by municipalities, or privately owned.  In each case, the rules and authority of the water 
system vary. For Special Districts, their statutory authority is limited to furnishing a public water 
supply. Special Districts are regulated by the Public Service Commission, which specifically ends 
water system ownership at the meter pit located near or at the property line. Furthermore, the 
Public Service Commission, by statute, limits the scope of how rates can be collected and how 
funds are dispersed to ensure a particular customer or set of customers do not obtain any special 
advantage or subject to a disadvantage not experienced by the entire customer base. For private 
water systems, the authority to enter private property is similarly limited.    
 
Alternatively, Kentucky municipal owned water systems are not regulated by the Public Service 
Commission and may, depending on the type of municipality it is, have greater latitude under their 
statutory and constitutional obligations to enter private property, conduct, and fund private side 
replacement.  While some states such as Michigan and Illinois have already addressed these myriad 
legal authority concerns through legislative action, many states have not and must tackle under 
their statutory and constitutional framework that provides enumerated protections for citizens on 
their private property.  For each of our members, implementing the proposed rule will require 
significant legal analysis based on the statutory and legal constraints facing each water system and 
for many systems where state legislatures have not made a clear mandate or allowance, it could 
result in numerous legal challenges against the water system. 
 
Furthermore, AMWA is concerned EPA is downplaying the barriers that exist for water systems 
when a section of the preamble is entitled “perceived barriers,” particularly in relation to using 
ratepayer funds to conduct private side replacement. EPA intimates that water systems falsely 
believe they have these barriers and points to some states that do not have prohibitions on funding 
private side replacement. While some states do have explicit permission to use ratepayer funds and 
some water systems have developed novel funding methods to fund private replacements, EPA 
should neither diminish the serious lack of clarity available to water systems and their legal 
counsels on whether systems may use ratepayer revenue to fund private lead service line 
replacements, nor should EPA expect every water system to take on the burden of pursuing 
exhaustive measures of alternative funding or risk legal challenges to fund their replacement 
programs.  Furthermore, that kind of language makes it incredibly difficult for water systems that 
do encounter legal counsel opinions to not pursue funding private replacement or that have state 
and local laws that prevent timely LSL replacements to communicate this to the public. This only 
further erodes the public’s trust in their drinking water utility. 
 
Section 3.2: Lead Connectors 
 
AMWA supports the provision in the proposal for utilities to keep track of known lead connectors 
and appreciates EPA recognizing that the identification of all connectors will not be feasible, 
particularly for large systems. However, AMWA believes that this information is more 

 
20 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
appropriately housed in the materials evaluation, not in the LSL inventory. AMWA also supports 
the requirement to replace lead connectors as they are encountered. This will ensure lead 
connectors are not only replaced but are replaced in the most cost-effective way.  
 
AMWA does have concerns with EPA’s definition of a connector, specifically with the provision 
defining them as having a maximum length of two feet. While AMWA understands EPA must 
provide specificity as to what constitutes a connector, the EPA definition is inconsistent with 
normal practices at many utilities. For example, the New York City “Rules Governing and 
Restricting the Use and Supply of Water” definition of gooseneck requires the connector to be 
between three and five feet in length.8 If EPA finalizes the definition of connector as is, every 
connector in New York City would need to be identified, inventoried, and potentially replaced 
depending on the composition. Since EPA has stated it does not deem it feasible for this to happen, 
AMWA recommends redefining the definition of connector to be less than five feet to account for 
this.  
 
Section 3.3: Non-Lead service Line Validation 
 
EPA is proposing to require water systems to validate a pool of service lines that have been 
identified as non-lead by any other action besides records review or visual inspection of two points 
of the line. While AMWA understands the intent behind this requirement, the association has 
several reservations about it as proposed and recommends two revisions.  
 
First, many systems have already began their customer outreach campaigns to identify the private 
side of the service line. EPA requiring two visual inspections may be more than what systems have 
been doing to reach out to customers and having them perform tests (e.g., magnet test, etc.) and/or 
submit pictures to identify their service line. This may have been done only at one access point. 
These service lines deemed non-lead from customer validation should not be subject to further 
validation as they have already done the outreach to the customer, and further outreach will be lost 
in the immense amount of other public education and notification requirements included in this 
proposed rule.  
 
Second, AMWA encourages EPA to develop a flexible timeline for validation requirement, if 
retained in the final rule. AMWA agrees with EPA’s decision to not include service lines identified 
as non-lead using record reviews in the validation pool. AMWA understands why EPA would 
want to validate certain other methods used to determine non-lead status, but questions whether 
this validation process being conducted during the first seven years is the best use of water system 
and the public’s resources. As mentioned previously in this comment letter, the main goal of this 
rule is removing sources of lead through LSL replacement. Simultaneously requiring the validation 
of service lines already deemed non-lead takes precious time and resources away from a utility 
 
8 Title 15 Chapter 20; Rules of the City of New York, Rules Governing and Restricting the Use and Supply of 
Water. https://www.nyc.gov/assets/dep/downloads/pdf/about/water-and-sewer-forms/rules-of-the-city-of-new-
york/title-15-rules-city-of-new-york-chapter-20.pdf.  

 
21 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
that wants to focus on known LSL replacement. If a validation requirement is retained in the final 
rule, a timeline should be developed to let water systems concentrate on removing known LSLs 
first before spending the extra time and resources on validation requirements. AMWA 
recommends having the validations be due post-removal of all other known LSLs and GRRs.  
 
Section 3.4: Unknown Identification Timeline  
 
AMWA agrees with EPA’s decision to not establish a quicker deadline for all unknowns to be 
classified prior to the 10-year replacement compliance date. This will allow systems to focus more 
time and resources on replacing known LSLs and GRRs and identifying unknowns as quickly as 
possible. This decision provides the type of flexibility that must be incorporated throughout this 
rule, as not all systems are the same. For this reason, EPA should retain in the final rule the absence 
of a provision to complete all unknown classification before the 10-year replacement deadline.  
 
AMWA would like to take the opportunity to point out that water systems will be significantly 
limited in their ability to identify the composition of privately owned portions of service lines. In 
some cases, the water system will be completely dependent upon individual property owners’ 
willingness to cooperate with requests to inspect the line or otherwise document a line’s 
composition. Should any individual property owner not agree to this review, the water system 
would have to classify the privately owned portion of the line as an “unknown” material and 
include it within the system’s lead service line inventory and replacement calculations. EPA must 
also make it clearer what happens after the 10-year replacement period if unknowns still exist in 
an inventory due to the refusal or non-response of a property owner and not the water system.  
 
AMWA agrees that a privately owned portion of a service line whose composition is unable to be 
determined due to lack of cooperation or response by the property owner, should be considered 
“unknown” in the water system’s inventory. However, AMWA believes this line should be 
excluded from calculations used to develop system’s lead service line replacement goals. This 
exclusion would recognize that if the lack of property owner cooperation is the only impediment 
to identifying the composition of the line, no reasonable assumption can be made about the line’s 
composition; including the line in the system’s replacement calculations could artificially inflate 
the system’s required 10 percent replacement rate. 
Section 4: Tap Sampling 
 
As EPA states in the preamble, tap sampling is used to evaluate corrosion control treatment (CCT) 
performance rather than to assess human exposure to lead and copper in drinking water. AMWA 
urges EPA to keep this in mind as it revises the rule. These tap samples are important information 
for water systems to evaluate their corrosion control efficacy but are not necessarily representative 
of the water flowing to most homes in the service area. These samples often represent the most 
vulnerable locations to lead and are used to optimize CCT to prevent further corrosion of lead in 
drinking water. AMWA has comments on several of EPA’s proposed provisions including 

 
22 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
revisions to the tap sampling protocol and the use of tap sampling results for certain public 
education requirements.  
 
Section 4.1: Tiered Sampling System  
 
EPA is proposing the following revised tiered structure to better detect sites at a higher risk of 
elevated leads levels: 
 
● Tier 1 sampling sites are single-family structures with premise plumbing made of lead 
and/or are served by a lead service line. 
 
● Tier 2 sampling sites are buildings, including multiple-family residences, with premise 
plumbing made of lead and/or served by a lead service line. 
 
● Tier 3 sampling sites are sites that are served by a lead connector. Tier 3 sites are also sites 
served by a galvanized service line or containing galvanized premise plumbing that are 
identified as ever being downstream of a lead service line or lead connector in the past. 
Tier 3 for community water systems only includes single-family structures. 
 
● Tier 4 sampling sites are sites that contain copper pipes with lead solder installed before 
the effective date of the State's applicable lead ban. Tier 4 for community water systems 
only includes single-family structures. 
 
● Tier 5 sampling sites are sites that are representative of sites throughout the distribution 
system. In this case, a representative site is a site in which the plumbing materials used at 
that site would be commonly found at other sites served by the water system. 
 
EPA has included sites with premise plumbing made of lead in tiers 1 and 2, and galvanized 
premise plumbing in tier 3. AMWA cautions that many water systems do not know the 
composition of premise plumbing at many of, or any of, the properties (e.g., single-family 
structures, multiple family residences, etc.) within their distribution system. AMWA requests 
clarification, and agrees with this interpretation, that this addition does not require water systems 
to inventory premise plumbing composition. If the information is readily available, then AMWA 
would agree this would represent sites that are at risk of elevated lead, but the association would 
like to emphasize a premise plumbing inventory should not be a requirement of this rule.  
 
Water systems typically do not survey beyond the meter or examine what is in the basement where 
the meter is located. This material is not always representative of the household premise plumbing, 
and therefore could be inaccurate without further inspection that water systems do not, and should 
not (as its private property), have access to. Some homes, particularly in states like Florida, do not 
have basements and therefore meters are outside the home, so a water system would never be able 
to examine the composition of the premise plumbing. 

 
23 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
Some water systems have expressed concern that sites served by a lead connector, tier 3, are 
automatically deemed higher priority than those that may contain a service line with lead solder, 
tier 4. Sites solely served by a lead connector could be included in tier 4 if there are not also 
galvanized pipes downstream (tier 3).  
 
Section 4.2: Sampling for Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) Efficacy  
 
EPA specifically asks for comment on “whether samples from non-LSL sites that have higher lead 
concentrations than samples from LSL sites should be included and whether these higher values 
should replace lower values from LSL sites in the 90th percentile calculation.” AMWA has two 
major concerns with this concept if it were to be incorporated into the final rule.  
 
The first concern is that this would disincentivize water systems from generating more than the 
minimum data required. Large water systems may voluntarily collect samples from thousands of 
locations (as opposed to 100 or less samples collected pursuant to required monitoring). Any 
provision that would direct water systems to switch the highest samples out for required 
monitoring would pose a tremendous burden and could possibly cause many large water systems 
to cease offering voluntary sampling to customers. This sampling method as proposed would 
change tap sampling from assessing CCT efficacy to assessing the highest values of lead regardless 
of cause. 
 
The second concern is that in instances where there is not an LSL, elevated lead levels would likely 
be a result of lead solder or brass fixtures with high lead content in premise plumbing. Not only 
do water systems lack control or jurisdiction over premise plumbing, but this would also not be an 
overall indication of CCT effectiveness. In many instances, premise plumbing contains a lot of 
particulate matter, which is not necessarily reflective of a system’s CCT.   
 
Section 4.3: Addition of First Liter Sample 
 
EPA is proposing that systems must take first- and fifth-liter samples for lead from LSL sites and 
use the higher to calculate the 90th percentile lead level. In the preamble, EPA explains that samples 
from various liters have not conclusively pointed to which number liter has resulted in the most 
elevated lead levels. Because of this variability, it is impossible to really predict how this change 
will affect water systems except that it will be extremely likely to increase the number of samples 
that exceed the action level.  
 
It has long been assumed that the first liter draw is more reflective of premise plumbing and the 
fifth liter is more reflective of the service line. While this is still debated, the first liter is clearly 
comprised of water that is in the plumbing closest to the faucet or fixture used to take the sample. 
As mentioned above, elevated lead from premise plumbing is not necessarily indicative of CCT 
effectiveness. Additionally, water systems have zero jurisdiction or control over premise 

 
24 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
plumbing. If elevated levels are a result of premise plumbing, a system will consistently exceed 
the action level, resulting in a water system having to constantly notify its customers and further 
eroding the public’s trust in drinking water.  
 
CCT optimization will not always impact elevated lead levels caused by premise plumbing, and 
water systems must balance changes to CCT with other risk trade-offs, such as disinfection 
byproducts formation and nutrient pollution. AMWA will go into more detail about CCT in 
Section 6 of the comment letter, but the purpose of sampling for lead at the specified locations 
above is to evaluate sites most likely to have elevated leads levels, which can assist in assessing 
CCT efficacy. Additionally, these samples are taken after a six-hour stagnation period, which is 
meant to capture the water with the most contact time with pipes, and therefore highest 
concentrations. It is important to note that these samples are not at all representative of the water 
individuals drink throughout the day. EPA is using these samples as justification for system-wide 
public notification and education requirements when these samples do not reflect the general lead 
concentrations of the system. These public notification requirements center on health effects, but 
this action level is not a health-based requirement.   
Section 5: Lead Action and Trigger Levels  
 
As stated in section 4, the lead and copper action levels were designed to reflect a water system’s 
CCT efficacy, which in turn limited the amount of water systems that needed to complete a detailed 
demonstration of its CCT installation. The action level (AL) serves a different purpose than a 
maximum contaminant level (MCL) in that an exceedance of an action level triggers a response, 
not an MCL violation. These required responses to AL exceedances have included optimizing 
CTT, replacing lead service lines, and educating/notifying the public. The action level for lead is 
not synonymous to an MCL, since what is being measured is not exposure to lead, but the efficacy 
of corrosion control. 
 
EPA has proposed the elimination of the trigger level and lowering the action level from 15 parts 
per billion (ppb) to 10 ppb – in which a water system is in exceedance if the 90th percentile 
concentration is greater than this value. AMWA agrees that both a trigger and action level created 
more confusion, and eliminating the trigger level does reduce some of that confusion. However, 
AMWA would like to point out some concerns related to lowering the action level from 15 ppb to 
10 ppb to measure CCT efficacy and identify systems most at risk of elevated lead levels.  
 
EPA’s tiered sampling pools are designed to find the places most likely to have the highest lead 
levels and are not at all representative of the entire system. This process enables water systems to 
find areas where lead pipes/lead sources are present and determine if a system’s CCT is preventing 
leaching of lead. Selected sites are places where the highest levels are lead in a system are expected 
and are not reflective of the water most consumers in a service area drink daily. Therefore, AMWA 
urges EPA to consider how exceedances of this action level impact the public’s trust and 
perception of its drinking water.  

 
25 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
EPA has proposed to require water systems to remove 100% of LSLs over the next 10 years, 
essentially eliminating a significant source of lead exposure and a major reason for implementing 
CCT in that time. Water systems will be working toward this goal each year, with the expectation 
that action level exceedances would decrease as LSLs are replaced. If action level exceedances do 
not decrease, the next likely lead source could be the premise plumbing, of which water systems 
have no jurisdiction over and, as mentioned in Section 4, is not necessarily indicative of CCT 
efficacy. As EPA also states in the preamble, even a system with optimized CCT could be at risk 
of continually exceeding this action level. Decreasing the action level will initially result in more 
utilities exceeding the level and having to spend time and resources looking at their CCT rather 
than out replacing LSLs. EPA should ease burdens from these additional requirements to facilitate 
LSL replacement so that water systems can focus time, money, and other resources on replacement 
goals rather than other provisions that will be less impactful once the LSLs are gone.  
 
EPA is concurrently proposing that water systems sample the first and fifth liter after a six-hour 
stagnation period. It is unclear exactly how many water systems this new requirement will impact 
in terms of lead action level exceedances, but as EPA states in the preamble, it will generally 
increase the number of utilities that exceed the lead action level. Doing both first- and fifth-liter 
sampling and lowering the action level at the same time compound each other and could lead to 
many systems exceeding the action level after the first sampling period. While EPA should not 
make decisions based solely on how many systems would be affected, it should consider that this 
action level was designed to be reflective of CCT efficacy and is not a health-based standard. 
Additionally, it is unlikely that customers are drinking water of the highest concentrations found 
in the 90th percentile samples, as they are not consuming the first draw or even the fifth liter of 
water once the day’s activities using water have progressed. AMWA is concerned that having 
many water systems exceed this action level could result in widespread panic or worry for every 
consumer, rather than just those at risk for elevated lead levels.    
 
Alternatively, EPA could implement one of the provisions it has proposed, i.e. the 1st and 5th liter, 
and consider proposing a change to the action level until after the agency has seen how this addition 
affects exceedances, or vice versa. The last thing EPA should want is members of the public 
panicking and avoiding drinking water because a utility exceeds the action level when the actual 
lead concentrations in their home drinking water may be nowhere near 15 or even 10 ppb. Once 
all LSLs are replaced, the available legal avenues for both EPA and water systems to safeguard 
the public from lead become significantly limited. Therefore, it becomes imperative for this rule 
to center its focus on the comprehensive replacement of LSLs. 
 
EPA requests comments on further lowering the action level to 5 ppb. AMWA is extremely 
concerned that this action level will be unattainable for many systems, even with optimized CCT, 
and asks EPA to not decrease the action level further in the final rule. An action level of 5 ppb will 
exacerbate the issues AMWA outlined above. EPA has proposed a sampling protocol that searches 
for the highest instantaneous levels of lead in a system after a long stagnation period. EPA has not 

 
26 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
provided data that demonstrate that this action level will be achievable for water systems while 
also keeping in compliance with other EPA regulations.  
Section 6: Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) 
 
The original LCR included CCT as one of four treatment techniques used to reduce lead and copper 
in drinking water. CCT methods include alkalinity/pH adjustment or the use of corrosion 
inhibitors. Many water systems across the country are already optimizing CCT in a way that 
reduces lead leaching in plumbing material to the lowest extent possible.  
 
Section 6.1: CCT Feasibility 
 
EPA requests comment on the determination that a CCT treatment technique is feasible and 
prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible. While water systems 
are currently deploying CCT to try and ensure action level exceedances are reduced, AMWA 
would like to point out that even systems with optimized CCT currently collect samples that exceed 
the action level.  
 
In this proposal, EPA eliminates the trigger level, lowers the action level, and revises sampling 
protocols by including the first- and fifth-liter samples, which are all expected to increase the 
number of action level exceedances water systems encounter. EPA does not provide analysis on 
how all these changes will affect action level exceedances beyond saying stating they will likely 
increase; therefore, EPA has not demonstrated that CCT can feasibly be used to keep systems from 
exceeding thew 90th percentile lead and copper levels. AMWA reiterates its claim from section 5 
that implementing only one of these provisions during this rulemaking would ease burdens on 
water systems and allow EPA time to thoroughly research how these requirements would affect 
water systems.  
 
Currently, it is unclear what happens in situations where a wholesale provider supplies water to 
other systems, and at least one of those systems does not have its own treatment facility. If the 
wholesaler supplies to its own customers and does not have an action level exceedance, or it 
provides to multiple other systems and only one of them has an action level exceedance, who is 
responsible? It is not feasible for a wholesaler to alter CCT that works for all its other customers 
and/or its own customers, but not for one of its buyers if the system it sells to does not have its 
own treatment facility. EPA must make it clear what happens in this situation and recognize that a 
wholesaler cannot tailor CCT to one buyer.   
 
While many systems are using CTT, EPA must refrain from being overly prescriptive in the final 
rule. CCT is not a one-size-fits-all approach, and water systems must have some flexibility to enact 
treatment that best meets unique needs. As AMWA has emphasized throughout this comment 
letter, EPA should be allowing water systems to focus on LSL removal, while easing burdens of 
concurrent requirements.  

 
27 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
Section 6.2: Repeated Re-Optimization After Action Level Exceedances 
 
EPA is proposing that systems that have re-optimized once and continuously meet optimal water 
quality parameters would not be required to re-optimize again after subsequent action level 
exceedances. AMWA agrees that if EPA maintains the CCT optimization requirements for the 
first action level exceedance, it should not continue to do so for any exceedances that follow. Re-
optimization often takes extensive study and review, and drinking water systems need to be 
focusing on other aspects of the rule. 
 
As EPA proposes a lower action level and revised sampling protocols, it will become increasingly 
difficult for water systems to make changes to treatment without encountering other simultaneous 
compliance issues. Water chemistry in drinking water treatment is a delicate balance. Alterations 
to treatment should not be made hastily or without adequate data to demonstrate that there will not 
be unintended consequences.  
 
One method of CCT is adding additional orthophosphate, which can lead to adverse outcomes, 
such as increased disinfection byproducts and negative environmental impacts in surface waters. 
Specifically, the addition of phosphates to drinking water can lead to increased nutrient loads to 
surface waters, resulting in eutrophication and harmful algal blooms. In fact, EPA in 2019 issued 
a variance for Denver Water for the system’s phosphorous discharges to nearby surface waters, 
citing Denver Water’s plan to remove 100% of LSLs9. As removal is a central provision in this 
proposed rule, EPA should focus less on CCT requirements and more on providing assistance and 
support to water systems for LSL removal.  
 
Section 6.3: Delaying Optimized CCT Until After All LSLs/GRRs are Replaced in Five 
Years 
 
EPA is proposing to allow a system with a lead action level exceedance to defer installing or re-
optimizing CCT if the system can replace 100 percent of its LSLs and GRR service lines within 
five years of the date the system first exceeds the action level. AMWA agrees that a system that is 
focusing on LSL replacement should be able to forgo this requirement. AMWA does recommend 
using a similar three-year or cumulative average for this 20% replacement calculation. A system 
could still remove 100% of LSL/GRRs in 5 years even if it’s replacing an average of 20% of lines, 
rather meeting 20% or more yearly.  
 
Additionally, AMWA asks for more clarification on what happens when a utility has replaced all 
the LSLs and GRRs in its system and has identified all unknowns, but, due to refusals from 
 
9 EPA. (December 20, 2019). Approval of variance decision pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act; Alternative 
treatment technique for national primary drinking water lead and copper regulations for Denver Water. 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/12/20/2019-27487/approval-of-variance-decision-pursuant-to-the-
safe-drinking-water-act-alternative-treatment  

 
28 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
property owners, still have LSLs or GRRs in their inventory that cannot be replaced. AMWA 
believes water systems should not be held accountable for property owners’ refusal to allow water 
systems to replace privately-owned lines. Additionally, water systems should not be punished if 
they are barred by state or local statute or attorney recommendations from using ratepayer funds 
to replace privately-owned LSLs and therefore cannot replace a line a property owner cannot or 
will not finance. If an LSL is out of the control of a water system, the system should still be eligible 
for this deferment.  
Section 7: Public Education  
 
AMWA appreciates that the proposed rule makes great strides in ensuring timely public 
notification of testing results that indicate elevated levels of lead in the system. Transparency and 
education of risk are an important part of a drinking water system’s communication strategies. 
While AMWA recognizes public education and communication as critical components of 
consumer service, AMWA asks EPA to carefully consider the purpose of public education as a 
component of the treatment technique requirements of the LCRI. AMWA believes the purpose of 
the public education is to educate customers in a utility’s service area, particularly those with LSLs 
and GRRs, that they can take steps to reduce potential exposure to lead in water from either LSLs 
or premise plumbing. There is a critical need to balance providing enough timely and specific 
education for consumers without sharing too much or too frequently to cause consumers to ignore 
messages. In this section, AMWA offers suggestions to ensure effective communications to 
consumers.  
 
Section 7.1: Public Education Feasibility 
 
EPA requests comment on whether “the proposed determination that the public education 
treatment technique is feasible and prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the 
extent feasible.” AMWA believes that EPA mischaracterizes “treatment technique” in this request 
for comment by describing public education as one of the components of a “treatment technique” 
required for an elevated action level. AMWA believes that the overall treatment technique, which 
combines optimized corrosion control, lead service line replacement and galvanized line requiring 
replacement, is “infeasible” as proposed, which we have discussed throughout these comments.  
 
Regarding public education provisions in the LCRI specifically, the proposed rule includes 
timelines and deadlines that are currently infeasible for many water systems. EPA includes 
multiple forms of public education in multiple situations that could overwhelm customers, either 
causing undue panic, or resulting in communications being ignored as they are too frequent and 
repetitive.  
 
For example, 88FR85067 (§141.84(h)) of the proposed rule, Protocols for notification and 
mitigation for partial and full-service line replacements, requires written notice “to the owner of 
the affected service line, or the owner’s authorized agent, as well as non-owner occupants.” It is 

 
29 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
unclear how a utility would identify an “owner’s authorized agent,” and it is unclear to AMWA 
which party EPA is referring to in this section. Additionally, this requirement could be impossible 
or unduly burdensome to fulfill in several instances, including: 
 
● The property owner (landlord) does not pay the water bill and is not part of the utility’s 
recordkeeping for any number of reasons; and 
● The non-owner occupant does not pay the bill and is not known by the utility (such as 
multi-unit properties with a single meter).  
 
EPA also proposes to require water systems to repeat certain notification upon change of property 
ownership. This requirement is not feasible as many water systems do not become notified of 
ownership changes. Under this rule as proposed the burden falls upon the water system to somehow 
track property ownership in addition to its other obligations. EPA should not require water systems 
to track property sales, especially as it proposes a myriad of other public notification requirements 
that will reach customers to provide information on lead.  
 
Section 7.2: Capacity of Water Systems to Conduct all the Required Public Education 
Activities in 30 days 
 
AMWA believes that requirements for systems to conduct the required public education within 60 
to 90 days following a lead AL exceedance is more realistic particularly as the list of required 
education activities is long, and coordination with states will need to occur. This coordination 
includes the initial notification by the primacy agency to the utility that an exceedance has 
occurred, prompting the public education requirements, and AMWA assumes that the notification 
by the state to the utility is when the clock would begin.  
 
EPA is proposing that water systems must conduct public education activities within 60 days of 
the end of the tap sampling period in which the action level exceedance occurs, regardless of 
whether the exceedance is a consecutive one or not. These education activities include several 
activities that will require internal coordination and approvals, which in larger, more complex 
organizations would take more time and include the following:  
 
● Delivering written materials to each bill paying customer and delivering to multifamily 
dwellings either to each unit or posted in conspicuous location. 
● Communicating with customers most at risk - doing so by contacting the local health 
agencies and other organizations listed in the proposed rule. 
● Including the information, no less often than quarterly, on each water bill for as long as the 
system exceeds the action level.  
● Post the information to the water system website. 
● Submit a press release to media outlets. 
● Three additional activities from the following list: 
o Public service announcement; 

 
30 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
o Paid advertisements; 
o Public area information displays; 
o Emails to customers; 
o Public meetings; 
o Household deliveries; 
o Targeted individual customer contact; 
o Direct material distribution to all multifamily homes and institutions; 
o Contact organizations representing plumbers and contractors; or 
o Some other method approved by the state.  
 
AMWA generally agrees with EPA that the time it takes to develop materials, coordinate with 
state primacy agencies, and carry out the delivery of materials would be extremely difficult if not 
impossible in 30 days. Even 60 days can be difficult depending on the activities chosen from above 
and the delivery method. Therefore, AMWA recommends that EPA keep the timeline at 60 days 
and consider raising it to 90 days.  
 
Individuals whose drinking water testing results were elevated are already getting notified of this 
through other proposed provisions, and EPA has also proposed to require water systems to offer 
supplemental tap sampling for customers served by LSLs, GRRs, or unknowns. Most individuals 
whose drinking water test results reveal elevated lead levels will have already been notified prior 
to this proposed public outreach protocol because compliance sampling is based on sites most at 
risk of elevated lead concentrations and utilities must inform customers of sample results sooner 
than they report system-wide exceedances.  
 
AMWA is concerned that this increased amount of public notification will lead to customers either 
becoming desensitized to communications from the water system, or that it will deter them from 
consuming tap water entirely. When people receive the same information over and over, the 
message loses its urgency. This has implications far beyond the LCRI. Consider that under this 
rule proposal, customers could potentially receive in one year (two sampling periods), from this 
one proposed requirement alone: 
 
● Two direct mail deliveries;  
● Four water bills with the information;  
● Two emails;  
● Two targeted individual customer contacts; and 
● Several printed or television notifications. 
 
Consumers could start to ignore communications from the water systems. Public notification is 
important, but EPA should not require water systems to overwhelm customers with dozens of 
contacts a year when fewer could be more effective and, therefore, more protective of public 
health.  
 

 
31 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Importantly, action level exceedance outreach comes in addition to various other public outreach 
requirements in the LCRI. There are notifications of service line material, notifications for failing 
to meet the replacement rate, compliance tap sampling results, supplemental monitoring results, 
notification of a service line disturbance, and required language and information in consumer 
confidence reports. EPA should re-evaluate the number of outreach materials that are required and 
create a more condensed and streamlined approach to reduce the amount of communication 
materials customers receive while still being provided this information.  
 
EPA should refrain from imposing too many public outreach requirements that are 
overburdensome without any public health gain. For example, as proposed, constant notification 
of action level exceedances may not be very effective since this entails multiple forms of 
communication that would reach the same customers in several times. EPA could keep this 
requirement for the first lead action level exceedance, but if a system continues to have lead action 
level exceedances, reduce the number and frequency of materials that need to go out.  
 
Section 7.3: Capacity of Water Systems to Provide Individual Tap Sampling Results in 
Three Days 
 
EPA is proposing that water systems provide consumer notices of individual tap sampling results 
within three calendar days of obtaining them, regardless of whether those results exceeded the 
action level. EPA requests comment on whether this is feasible, or if a longer time frame is needed 
(e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 calendar days).  
 
One major uncertainty is whether both lead and copper samples apply to this three-day time frame, 
as EPA does not specify a timeframe in the “copper” section of the “Individual Notification of Tap 
Sample Results” portion of the preamble. The preamble simply says, “EPA is proposing to require 
water systems to provide consumer notice of an individual’s copper tap sampling results,” and 
adds that lead and copper sampling results can be combined into one single notice if both sample 
results are available. AMWA requests EPA make it clear if the three-day window applies to both 
lead and copper sample results and suggests EPA make it clear throughout the proposed rule which 
provisions apply to lead and which apply to copper. The most direct way EPA can address this is 
by developing a table that includes each provision in rows and whether the provisions apply to 
lead, copper, or both in columns.  
 
Regarding the timeframe, AMWA is concerned that a three-calendar day notice is infeasible. For 
example, many AMWA members indicated they batch samples to be run on Thursdays, and often 
receive sample results Friday afternoon. If the following Monday was a holiday, or an observed 
holiday that fell over the weekend, water systems would potentially be out of compliance with this 
notice, as they would not be able to send notices until the following Tuesday. AMWA suggests 
five business days as an adequate turnaround time that will ensure timely delivery of results in a 
realistic timeframe for water systems. If EPA is adamant that the provision stays three days, 
AMWA urges the agency to consider changing it to three business days. While this is not the 

 
32 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
association’s first preference, three calendar days is not feasible given standard five-day work 
week schedules that many water system laboratories and offices follow.  
 
AMWA would like to emphasize that this time frame is not dependent on whether the samples 
exceed the action level or not. Therefore, this incredibly short turnaround time will have very little 
public health benefit, as most samples will likely be below the action level. In addition, the water 
system already must provide many public education and outreach materials to households at risk 
of elevated lead levels. Sites that must be sampled include those with LSLs and other situations 
where elevated lead might occur, but these households would already be aware of these risks 
through other communication materials. Consequently, a five-business day notice of results is 
sufficient and would account for times when a three-calendar day turnaround is not possible.   
 
Section 7.4: Types and Timing of Outreach Activities Proposed for Failing to Meet LSL 
Replacement Rate 
 
EPA is proposing to require outreach activities for systems that fail to meet the mandatory service 
line replacement rate. Systems serving over 3,300 individuals would be required to do one of many 
activities at least once in the year after failing to meet the replacement rate, and annually after that, 
until the rate is reached, or all LSLs, GRRs, and unknowns are identified. The list of activities is 
below: 
 
● Conduct a townhall meeting; 
● Participate in a community event to provide information about the service line replacement 
program; 
● Contact customers by phone, text message, email, or door hanger; or 
● Use another method approved by the State to discuss the service line replacement program 
and opportunities for replacement. 
 
Alternatively, if a system fails to meet the mandatory replacement rate, systems would be required 
to conduct at least two of the following activities: 
 
● Send certified mail to customers and persons served by LSLs or GRR service lines; 
● Conduct a social media campaign; 
● Conduct outreach via the media including newspaper, television, or radio; and/or 
● Visit targeted customers (e.g., customers in areas with lower service line replacement 
participation rates) to discuss the service line replacement program and opportunities for 
replacement. 
 
While AMWA does not dispute that notification may be necessary in this case, the association 
again emphasizes the sheer amount of public education and notification requirements included in 
this proposed rule and cautions EPA against diluting the message of LSL replacement. EPA should 
also consider how successful water systems have been using public education to promote and 

 
33 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
obtain public support for voluntary lead service line replacement programs. If every provision in 
the proposed rule results in some sort of notification or outreach, the messages could potentially 
lose meaning, cause consumer confusion, or negatively affect utility communication for current 
programs that have occurred outside of EPA’s proposed regulatory construct.  
 
AMWA also requests clarification as to when a water system stops providing notice of failure to 
meet the replacement rate. AMWA asks EPA to clarify what it means by, “The water system must 
conduct the activity in the year following the deadline for calculating the rolling average and 
annually thereafter until the water system meets the replacement rate... [emphasis added].” Does 
this mean if the system meets a 10% replacement in the following year, regardless of its rolling 
average over the past three years, it is able to terminate the annual notices? AMWA believes this 
should be the case, as a system that returned to replacing at or over 10% of LSLs (or meeting the 
cumulative average replacement rate that AMWA advocates for in these comments) should be 
relieved of this requirement to reduce public notifications.  
 
EPA describes examples in the preamble of how community outreach events and activities are 
consistent and able to achieve high levels of success, with examples from the American Water 
Works Association, LSL replacement collaborative, and Clean Water Fund. AMWA would like to 
point out that community partnerships are successful when they are able to be tailored to individual 
localities, and not with overly prescriptive steps and language provided from a national standpoint. 
Generally, these example programs achieved success following persistent, hard work with many 
partners working together. Allowing water systems the flexibility and ownership of outreach 
activities could result in increased partnerships with local community groups, as water systems 
will have more time and resources to devote to these efforts. Ultimately, water system community 
needs are unique, and public outreach and education cannot be viewed with a one-size-fits-all 
approach.  
 
Section 7.5: Notification of a Service Line Disturbance 
 
EPA is proposing to require water systems that cause a disturbance to an LSL, GRR service line, 
or unknown service line to notify persons at the connection and provide them with information to 
reduce lead exposure from this disturbance. In addition, water systems must provide pitcher filters 
or point of use devices and replacement cartridges to last 6 months. This provision is triggered by 
“actions that result in a shut off or bypass of water to an individual service line or a group of service 
lines, or other actions that cause a disturbance…such as undergoing physical action or vibration 
that could result in pipe-scale dislodging and associated release of particulate lead.” Some 
examples of disturbances covered under this provision that EPA includes in the preamble are 
replacement of an inline water meter, a water meter setter, or connector.  
 
AMWA supports customer notification when the water system conducts work that would result in 
a significant disturbance to a line, such as the replacement of a water main or connector. EPA has 

 
34 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
covered disturbances due to LSL/GRR placement in a different section of this proposed 
rulemaking.  
 
Additionally, while pitcher filters may be warranted in some cases, AMWA does not believe 
pitcher filters are always necessary (e.g., in instances like water meter replacements). Some 
AMWA members do thousands of water meter replacements a year and providing pitcher filters 
would be costly and at times difficult given limited availability. Some disturbances may only 
require other actions, like an aggressive flushing protocol, that could similarly reduce risks to lead 
exposure from the disturbance. AMWA addresses pitcher filter availability in section 8.2 of this 
comment letter but emphasizes to EPA that provisions that require making pitcher filters available 
could put strains on a water system’s ability to obtain them. To maintain availability and the cost-
effectiveness of pitcher filters, EPA should require their distribution only in times they are needed, 
not in circumstances where other, less costly, options will produce the same result.  
 
Section 7.6: Increased Frequency of Public Education Requirements 
 
EPA requests comment on whether additional public outreach and education requirements should 
be included to incentivize LSL replacement. Specifically, EPA asks if water systems that have 
LSLs, GRRs, and/or unknowns five years after the compliance date for the LCRI should be 
required to increase frequency of the notification of service line materials from annual to every six 
months.  
 
AMWA does not believe that water systems should have to increase frequency of the notification 
of service line materials from annual to every six months after the compliance date. Water systems 
should be encouraged to focus efforts on LSL/GRR replacement efforts rather than ramping up 
notification requirements just as water systems are running out of time to complete service line 
replacement plans. Increasing the notification of service line material from annual to every six 
months would not provide any further protection to public health. The information would not be 
changing, and customers would have already received it five times previously (the first five years 
of compliance). Customers would likely be annoyed with multiple mailings and other forms of 
communication repeatedly including the same information. Furthermore, EPA does not point to a 
solid collection of research supporting that increased communication notices improve consumer 
outcomes and actions.  
 
EPA does not need to include more “incentives” for water systems to complete their LSL/GRR 
replacement in the required compliance period. This implies that the proposed requirement to 
replace LSLs/GRRs in 10 years is somehow not enough to incentivize water systems to remove 
LSL/GRRs. AMWA members want to reduce consumer exposure to lead and protect public health, 
so to imply that they need further incentive to do so undermines the immense amount of work 
many water systems have already accomplished toward this goal. Implying water systems need 
“incentives” to comply with regulations only serves to communicate to the public that water 
systems do not have their best interest in mind.  

 
35 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
EPA should use communication techniques that highlight its partnerships with water systems, 
support water system’s efforts toward LSL replacement, and recognize that public water systems 
take all possible actions to provide the best quality drinking water to their consumers. AMWA 
asks EPA to rethink some of the language it uses in the preamble, and in other publicly available 
materials, that may inaccurately or unintentionally imply otherwise.  
 
Section 7.7: Streamlining Public Education Requirements 
 
EPA is seeking comment on additional ways to streamline public education and associated 
certification requirements. AMWA is significantly concerned with the time and resources that 
water systems will have to dedicate to the public education and outreach requirements and urges 
EPA to streamline processes and ease burdens associated with these requirements.  
 
EPA should refrain from having water systems supply customers with the same information too 
often. This happens when water systems must continually notify customers of their service line 
material, notify certain customers that may continually get their tap sampled due to their service 
line composition, include comprehensive information in consumer confidence reports, and provide 
annual notifications based on action level exceedances or failure to meet the replacement rate. 
These public outreach protocols also include reaching people through numerous methods of 
communication for the same notification requirement.  
 
Since EPA intends to finalize revisions to the Consumer Confidence Report (CCR) rule by March 
2024, the agency should assess how these revisions will also impact a water system’s 
communications strategy. Water systems must plan and devote additional resources to compliance 
with this upcoming rule, including the potential to have to supply CCRs twice a year. AMWA 
recommends EPA use the CCR rule to streamline some of the public notification and education 
requirements included in this proposal based on what the agency includes the final rule. 
 
An example where EPA’s public notification requirements can be viewed as overly prescriptive 
can be found in § 141.85 (a): 
 
(a) Content of written public education materials — (1) Community water systems and non-
transient non-community water systems. Water systems must include the following elements in 
written materials (e.g., brochures and pamphlets) in the same order as listed in paragraphs 
(a)(1)(i) through (vii) of this section. In addition, language in paragraphs (a)(1)(i), (ii), and (vii) 
of this section must be included in the materials, exactly as written, except for the text in brackets 
for which the water system must include system-specific information. States may approve changes 
to the content requirements if the State determines the changes are more protective of human 
health. Any additional information presented by a water system must be consistent with the 
information in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through (vii) of this section and be in plain language that can 
be understood by the general public. Water systems must submit a copy of all written public 

 
36 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
education materials to the State prior to delivery. The State may require the system to obtain 
approval of the content of written public education materials prior to delivery. 
 
This requirement as proposed in the LCRI will result in a dense text (language in paragraphs 
(a)(1)(i), (ii), and (vii) of this section that be included in the materials, exactly as written) that is 
not widely read, which would increase the risk of exposure rather than decreasing it. The proposed 
rule language does not seem to give any indication that context can be added, e.g., graphics on 
service lines, explanation of what a service line is, etc., since all information must be included “as 
written” and “in the same order as listed in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through (vii) of this section.” Any 
changes, including adding graphics or additional information, must be approved by the state. If 
this needs to happen for every communication, will the states have the capacity to turn these 
materials around in a timely manner? Will these brochures be helpful to customers if they contain 
only text with no graphics? If information must be put in order, what is the correct order to place 
the information in a three-column brochure (is it left column, top to bottom then center column top 
to bottom, or is it top left to top right then bottom left to bottom right)? These are the questions 
that will remain if EPA retains these overly prescriptive requirements for public education, 
notification, and outreach in the final rule.  
 
AMWA believes it is not EPA’s intent to discourage the public from drinking tap water. However, 
many actions EPA is proposing in the LCRI may inadvertently do that. Additionally, the 
alternatives to tap water – particularly tap water that is in compliance with current EPA regulations 
– are not demonstrably better, or in fact could be worse, for public health. Bottled water 
alternatives to tap water are also more expensive than tap water.  AMWA is concerned that the 
inclusion of the line, “There is no safe level of lead in drinking water,” at the beginning of the 
mandatory lead health effects language will erode public trust in drinking water systems, because 
it is impossible for a water system to certify that there is absolutely “no” lead in the water provided 
to customers. This is particularly worrisome in cases where water systems have replaced 100% of 
its LSLs/GRRs but still have very low levels of lead in tap samples due to components in premise 
plumbing. EPA should consider contextualizing this statement to say something along the lines of, 
“The goal is to reach undetectable levels of lead in drinking water and remove all lead service 
lines.”  
Section 8: Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead 
Action Level Exceedances 
 
EPA is proposing to require additional actions be taken by systems with multiple lead action level 
exceedances, specifically three or more in a five-year rolling period. Systems that fall into this 
provision would be required to conduct at least one more outreach activity every six months until 
the water system no longer meets the criteria for multiple lead action level exceedances. 
Additionally, water systems would be required to make pitcher filters available to all consumers 
within 60 days of having met this criteria.  
 

 
37 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Section 8.1: Definition of Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances 
 
EPA’s proposed requirements for water systems that exceed the lead action level three or more 
times in a five-year period will create many compliance issues. To start, EPA has not provided an 
analysis of how many systems are going to be triggered under this proposed requirement. The 
agency proposed to remove the trigger level, reduce the action level, and include first- and fifth-
liter draw for sampling, and there is not an accurate estimation of how many water systems will 
be impacted. Since these proposed actions are assumed to increase the number of action level 
exceedances, we could see the unfortunate situation where, 18 months after the compliance date 
(three monitoring periods), countless water systems could have three consecutive action level 
exceedances, triggering these additional requirements. These water systems would then be 
required to issue notices to customers every six months for the next 3.5 years (the remainder of the 
five-year rolling period), even if the system subsequently comes into compliance with the action 
level through future sampling.   
 
EPA should not create a situation in which a system must continue telling the public it has an 
action level exceedance for 3.5 years if the water system is not actually exceeding the action level 
during that time. Even further, the action level exceedance is not a health-based indicator. If a 
water system can reduce lead exposure to customers and not have any more action level 
exceedances, they should not have to needlessly worry the public with the false notion that the 
water isn’t safe. EPA should allow systems to stop these public notifications after two consecutive 
monitoring periods (one year) without a lead action level exceedance.  
 
The lead action level is meant to be reflective of a system’s CCT. If a system has optimized its 
CCT once and is within the specified range of water quality parameters, then a system no longer 
needs to re-evaluate its CCT. If a system cannot optimize its CCT anymore to reduce lead levels 
further, then this constant public education should not be in effect. EPA should not require water 
systems to notify the public of exceedances if there is nothing it can do to further optimize its CCT. 
Instead, water systems should be allowed to focus on the goal of removing LSLs and not diverting 
resources away from this with unnecessary public education requirements. It is incredibly difficult 
for a water system to focus on LSL replacement while simultaneously developing several public 
notification and outreach plans.  
 
AMWA agrees that an initial notice of the first exceedance may be warranted, however, EPA must 
remember the action level is not a health-based limit. Sample pools are derived from the places 
were lead levels are most likely to be elevated, so action level exceedances are not necessarily 
representative of a water system’s overall drinking water quality. Additionally, individuals with 
LSLs/GRRs are already receiving information on ways to reduce lead with the requirement to 
notify customers of service line materials. EPA is piling on notifications that are redundant in some 
situations and create unnecessary burdens for water systems and the public who receives them.  
 

 
38 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Section 8.2: Providing Filters to all Consumers After Multiple Lead Action Level 
Exceedances 
 
EPA has proposed that, in the event of three action level exceedances in a five-year rolling period, 
water systems must make pitcher filters and six months’ worth of replacements available to all 
consumers – not only those with documented lead service lines, or service lines of unknown 
composition. One of AMWA’s biggest concerns with this proposed provision is the unlikely 
availability of the number of filters this requirement will force water systems to procure and/or 
have on hand in the event of multiple action level exceedances. For example, in a city like New 
York City (NYC), the NYC Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) provides drinking 
water to approximately 8.5 million people within the city. If this system were to have three action 
level exceedances in the first 18 months from the compliance date, or three monitoring periods, 
then the city would have to make filters available to all 8.5 million residents. Even if only a fraction 
of consumers in NYC made the effort to procure these filters, the city would still need to have 
millions on hand to meet the potential demand. In addition, they must do this every six months for 
the remainder of the five-year rolling period, meaning for a total of seven monitoring periods. EPA 
in its cost benefits analysis estimates only 20% of consumers will request filters10. Even with this 
likely low estimate, NYCDEP would need to provide almost 12 million filters and/or replacements 
over that 3.5-year period following three lead action level exceedances.  
 
While NYC is one of the largest examples, this will be true for every water system. Not only is the 
sheer number of filters this provision could require infeasible, but to supply these within 60 days 
following the third lead action level exceedance would be impossible. One AMWA member 
indicated that they have been waiting four months to obtain just 500 filters. The large number of 
filters that would need to be acquired quickly by several water systems would drive up costs and 
leave some water systems waiting months, or even years, to get the amount they need in stock. 
After the first three monitoring periods, there will likely be many water systems struggling to 
procure the number of filters needed to supply to all interested consumers if they had an action 
level exceedance each period.  
 
EPA must drastically reduce the number of filters that are required to be distributed in these 
circumstances. At the very least, EPA should reduce it to just those with LSLs, GRRs, or 
unknowns. EPA even insinuates that this is what should be in the proposed rule in figure 23 of the 
preamble. In the “Proposed LCRI” column it reads “Systems with multiple ALEs must make filters 
available to all customers with service lines of known or potential lead content.” In this table, the 
delivery to all consumers is listed under “other options considered.” However, pitcher filters 
should not be a blanket requirement and may be beneficial in situations mutually agreed upon 
between a water system and its primacy agency. The term “potential lead content” could be used 
for classifying unknowns as “potentially lead” or “not likely lead” to better allocate resources to 
 
10 EPA. (2023b). Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. 

 
39 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
service lines that are likely to include lead. EPA is again trying to apply a one-size-fits-all approach 
to situations where this is not feasible.  
 
AMWA urges EPA to refrain from provisions that take away resources from LSL and GRR 
replacement activities. Removing LSLs is a more effective way of reducing lead exposure in most 
cases than providing pitcher filters and also addresses the root problem (a more permanent 
solution). One study suggests that these pitcher filters do not always work properly, and in some 
instances the pitcher filter treated water still exceeds the 10 ppb action level of lead11. This study 
underscores the importance of EPA letting water systems focus on LSL replacement rather than 
spending precious time and resources acquiring and distributing pitcher filters.  
Section 9: Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities  
 
AMWA recognizes that the presence of lead in the drinking water of schools and licensed childcare 
facilities is an issue of the highest concern to the public. While virtually all lead that is present in 
the drinking water of these facilities comes from premise plumbing, we understand that school 
officials and parents may look to their local water systems for guidance in identifying the scope of 
lead contamination in the water of a given school or licensed childcare facility building. AMWA 
believes that water systems should be willing to help school officials carry out water quality 
testing, upon request, as water systems have no authority to enforce mandatory testing 
requirements on schools and childcare facilities.  
 
Section 9.1: Previous Non-Regulatory Efforts to Promote School Testing 
 
In 2019, AMWA was a signatory with EPA and other federal agencies and water sector 
stakeholders to a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on “Reducing Lead Levels in Drinking 
Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities.”12 As part of this MOU, AMWA and EPA agreed “to 
facilitate actions that reduce children’s exposure to lead from drinking water at schools and child 
care facilities.” Agreed-upon actions included “encourag[ing] schools and child care facilities to” 
test their drinking water for lead, and “encourag[ing] the drinking water community to assist 
schools and child care facilities in their efforts to understand and reduce lead exposure from 
drinking water.” 
 
11 Jeannie M. Purchase, Rusty Rouillier, Kelsey J. Pieper, and Marc Edwards. (2021). Understanding Failure Modes 
of NSF/ANSI 53 Lead-Certified Point-of-Use Pitcher and Faucet Filters. Environmental Science & Technology 
Letters, 8(2), 155-160. DOI: 10.1021/acs.estlett.0c00709  
12 EPA. (2019). MOU on Reducing Lead Levels in Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities between 
EPA, AMWA, and others. 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/201910/documents/mou_reducing_lead_in_drinking_water_in_schools_final.
pdf  

 
40 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Additionally, in 2018 EPA published a revised manual entitled 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking 
Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities: A Training, Testing, and Taking Action Approach.13 
According to EPA, this 3Ts manual “is intended to serve as a resource to help schools and child 
care facilities implement a voluntary program for reducing lead in drinking water.”12 The manual 
recommends that schools and child care facilities follow a prescribed “2-step sampling 
procedure”12 when testing individual outlets. 
 
Both the MOU and 3Ts manual recognize that local school officials are primarily responsible for 
testing the quality of their buildings’ drinking water, but AMWA appreciates that public drinking 
water systems are in a unique position within their communities to provide guidance and facilitate 
effective testing. However, while local water systems should be available to help individual 
schools and licensed childcare centers carry out water testing and understand the results, AMWA 
has concerns that the proposed rule promotes unrealistic expectations and goes too far in 
transferring the responsibility for school testing onto individual water systems. 
 
Section 9.2: List of School and Child Care Facilities 
 
EPA is proposing to require water systems to compile and submit to the state a list of all schools 
and childcare centers within the service area. The process, as described, is challenging for several 
reasons. Particularly, in the case of large metropolitan water systems, a comprehensive and 
accurate list of all schools and licensed childcare facilities in the system’s service area will number 
in the thousands.  
 
For example, Greater Cincinnati Water Works, a water system serving more than 240,000 
residential and commercial accounts, provides water to roughly 400 schools and an estimated 
1,000 licensed childcare centers. While that system currently carries out a program to assist these 
facilities with lead testing, it reports that identifying licensed childcare facilities for testing is a 
significant challenge, in part because the precise number of such facilities is always in flux as 
licensed childcare centers open and close regularly within the city. Similarly, most water systems 
would have no existing inventory of such schools and facilities, so it would be a tremendous 
exercise to initially develop such a list. Under the proposed rule, this exercise would have to be 
repeated every five years as water systems would be required to “submit a revised list” of school 
and licensed childcare facilities to the state. 
 
AMWA recommends EPA instead allow water systems the option to instead communicate with 
the local educational or regulatory agencies charged with operation or oversight of the 
community’s schools and licensed childcare facilities. Even if the final rule does not include the 
requirement to test a certain percentage of facilities each year, AMWA believes that outreach to 
schools and licensed childcare facilities about opportunities for testing could be more successful – 
 
13 EPA. (2018). 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities: A Training, 
Testing, and Taking Action Approach. https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-07/epa-3ts-guidance-
document-english.pdf. 

 
41 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
particularly in metropolitan communities that may host hundreds of different schools – if 
coordinated through local educational or regulatory oversight agencies. 
 
Under AMWA’s alternative approach, a water system would have the option to provide the 
appropriate regulatory agencies with a notice about the opportunity to have schools and licensed 
childcare facilities tested for lead in drinking water by the water system. A water system utilizing 
this option should further request the agency to share this information with each school or licensed 
childcare facility. This agency could also provide a representative list of such facilities that should 
be tested each year if EPA maintains certain quantified testing requirements in the final rule.  
 
Section 9.3: Testing Requirements 
 
EPA is proposing to retain most of the LCRR requirements for water systems to conduct public 
education and sample in schools and childcare facilities. Water systems must notify elementary 
schools and childcare facilities that they are eligible to be sampled for lead by the water system 
and for the first five years sample 20 percent annually of all elementary schools and childcare 
facilities. Secondary schools must also be notified of the availability of lead testing annually.   
 
AMWA understands the importance of identifying elevated lead levels at schools and childcare 
centers. However, the proposed rule makes the mistake of designating water systems as the 
appropriate entity to compel schools and licensed childcare facilities to carry out testing to detect 
lead in the water of their buildings. In attempting to encourage schools and childcare facilities to 
test their water for lead, the proposal charges water systems with the task, while also holding water 
systems accountable for a school or childcare facility’s compliance. Because the Safe Drinking 
Water Act includes no authority for EPA to require schools and childcare facilities to test their 
water for lead – unless that school or childcare facility is itself a non- transient non-community 
water system – it is patently unfair for the proposed rule to create a school and childcare facility 
testing regime that is only enforceable against community water systems. This lack of authority is 
precisely why EPA has worked with the Department of Education, Department of Health and 
Human Services, and several other federal agencies to create the MOU noted above.  
 
AMWA therefore believes that the final rule should eliminate all annual school and childcare 
facility testing benchmarks, and only require water systems to assist in the testing of a school or 
childcare facility’s water when requested to do so by that facility. AMWA does appreciate EPA’s 
recognition that water systems will likely not get responses from all facilities and that this should 
not be counted against the system’s 20 percent annual goal. AMWA members have reported 
immense difficulties in obtaining sufficient engagement from schools and childcare centers. 
Having flexibility in this area will ensure utilities are not held responsible for things outside of 
their control. While AMWA appreciates EPA allowing nonresponse and refusals to count toward 
the 20 percent, the entire provision adds to the immense records water systems must develop and 
state primacy agencies must review.  
 

 
42 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
AMWA proposes another approach to identifying and interacting with schools and licensed 
childcare facilities that should be more aligned with the testing process highlighted in the MOU 
and the 3Ts manual. Primarily, AWMA believes that rather than requiring water systems to attempt 
to conduct testing in 20 percent of schools and 20 percent of licensed child care facilities in the 
system’s service area each year, the final rule should require water systems to conduct outreach to 
local schools and licensed child care facilities to make them aware of the water system’s 
availability to carry out water testing in a school or licensed child care facility upon request. 
 
This approach is justified based on EPA’s own data. In the preamble to the proposed LCRR, EPA 
stated that the amount of testing conducted under the “upon request” option “is highly dependent 
on the percentage of facilities that request to participate in the sampling program.” EPA goes on 
to estimate that only five percent of schools and licensed childcare facilities would volunteer for a 
sampling program offered by a community water system. However, the mandatory 20 percent 
testing program would be equally dependent on schools positively responding to outreach from 
the water system, and there is no reason to think that the response rate under one scenario would 
dramatically differ from the other. In each case, the water system would have to alert schools and 
licensed childcare facilities to the opportunity for testing, and school or facility administrators 
would have to agree to allow the testing to occur. 
 
It is therefore unclear how the agency would expect every water system to achieve a mandate to 
conduct testing at 20 percent of schools and 20 percent of licensed childcare facilities each year. 
A higher level of participation on the part of schools and licensed childcare facilities cannot be 
expected simply because of a mandate. So, following EPA’s own assumptions, even if a water 
system was required to attempt to test 20 percent of schools in a year, only a small subset of those 
schools will agree to the testing. 
 
An “upon request” school and licensed childcare facility testing program should be consistent with 
the MOU and the 3Ts manual, while also establishing a recurring pattern of communication 
between local school and water system officials. Under this option, water systems should be 
required to periodically conduct outreach to schools and licensed childcare facilities, encouraging 
them to take advantage of the option to have water system officials test their facility’s water for 
lead. With time, schools and licensed childcare facilities will come to know that they have an 
opportunity for their local water system to assist with the testing of their water, while water systems 
will be relieved from (as the rule currently proposes) spending significant resources attempting to 
attain participation from 20 percent of schools and 20 percent of licensed child care centers on an 
annual basis. AMWA strongly believes that this is the most practicable and beneficial approach 
and encourages EPA to incorporate the “upon request” school testing structure into the final rule. 
 
This would reduce burdens on water systems that would have to keep track of outreach attempts, 
and ensure the system either tested, or received no response/refusal, from 20 percent of facilities. 
Both options involve water systems providing education to facilities and offering to test for lead, 
and both options completely rely on the school or childcare facility to be responsive. The 

 
43 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
alternative AMWA supports here includes the bonus of reducing burdens on water systems while 
still being protective of public health.  
 
Section 9.4: Sampling Protocol 
 
AMWA appreciates that the school and licensed childcare facility testing procedures outlined in 
the proposal reflect many of those recommended in the 2018 3Ts manual.12 It is, however, not 
clear why the proposed rule requires samples to be collected from five different locations in 
schools and two different locations in licensed childcare facilities. AMWA requests further 
information as to how these sample locations were determined. Furthermore, the 3Ts manual 
recommends that a school collect a subsequent 250 ml “30-second flush sample” if the initial test 
results indicate elevated levels of lead. This second test is recommended “to determine if the lead 
contamination results are from the fixture or from interior plumbing components,” but this step is 
absent from the testing requirements of the proposed rule. To help ensure that schools nationwide 
are receiving consistent testing advice and assistance from EPA and their local water systems, 
AMWA suggests amending the school testing procedures in the proposed rule to conform with the 
recommendations in the 3Ts manual. 
 
Section 9.5: Waivers  
 
EPA is proposing to allow states to exempt water systems from the school and daycare facility 
sampling requirements if said facilities are sampled for lead in drinking water under a state or local 
law or program that meets the frequency requirements for elementary schools, childcare facilities, 
and secondary schools, and includes the associated sampling protocol requirements. States may 
also issue a waiver for samples taken at school and childcare facilities sampled between January 
1, 2021, and the compliance date of this rule. 
 
AMWA appreciates EPA’s willingness to provide the option for waivers of these testing 
requirements and asks the agency to simplify and maintain waivers in the final rule. AMWA is 
concerned that the intricate sampling protocol that EPA has constructed for this rule will result in 
other state or local programs not qualifying for this waiver because they developed a different 
sampling protocol. EPA includes specific locations and number of samples that must be taken at 
facilities that are not based on any protocols in the 3Ts manual (the manual details possible 
sampling sites but does not define what a representative sampling protocol would entail), and 
therefore existing programs may not qualify water systems for waivers. AMWA requests that EPA 
make this protocol simpler and more streamlined, or at the very least, allow other state and local 
testing programs that have their own protocols to still qualify a water system for a waiver.  
 
EPA proposes that only school sampling programs conducted between January 2021 and the 
compliance date of the rule are eligible for waivers. We recommend EPA broaden this date. In 
California, all water systems were required to conduct sampling from all schools in their service 
area. Sampling was completed during 2018 – 2019. The 3Ts protocols and analytical methods were 

 
44 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
used, and there have been no changes in plumbing codes related to lead-free materials between 
2017 and 2021. There is no reason not to count this large sampling effort as the first round, and 
then offer “as requested” sampling moving forward. Therefore, AMWA recommends that EPA 
allow for any water system that has conducted sampling in 2017 or later, using the 3Ts protocol, 
to be eligible for waivers. 
 
Again, AMWA appreciates that the proposed rule strives to promote water testing at schools and 
licensed childcare facilities, and we maintain our support for the MOU and 3Ts manual outlining 
how to best accomplish this goal. We further believe that water systems can and should actively 
engage with local schools, licensed childcare facilities, and the local regulatory agencies that 
oversee them to make certain that the owners and administrators of these facilities are informed of 
opportunities for assistance in testing their water for lead. The above suggestions will provide for 
an implementable rule that facilitates school and childcare facility testing while simultaneously 
reducing burdens on water utilities.   
Section 10: Compliance Dates 
 
EPA proposes an LCRI compliance date of three years following rule promulgation. Additionally, 
EPA proposes that systems comply with the LCR until this date, except for the following 
provisions included in the LCRR that will go into effect October 16, 2024: 
 
● The initial LSL inventory; 
● Notification of service line material;  
● Associated reporting requirements; and 
● Tier 1 public notification for a lead action level exceedance. 
 
In section 2 of this comment letter, AMWA highlighted the formidable challenge, if not 
impossibility, of achieving a 100% Lead Service Line (LSL) replacement for certain water 
systems. The period between promulgation and compliance is crucial, affording systems limited 
time to initiate planning, preparation, and, in some cases, execution of necessary requirements 
within this condensed time frame. EPA has solicited comments on the possibility of shortening 
this period; AMWA does not support a shorter timeframe. This timeframe is critical for systems 
facing difficulties due to their state having a "no more stringent than clause" concerning EPA 
regulation. These systems in particular require time to allocate resources and gear up for 
compliance with this rule within the three-year timeframe. 
 
EPA also requests comment on if there are any other LCRR provisions besides those listed above 
for which the October 16, 2024, date should be retained. AMWA agrees with EPA that allowing 
states and water systems this time to focus on preparing to comply with these provisions is 
necessary “because of the significant level of effort required by water systems to plan for 
compliance with LCRI, coupled with the complexity of the LCRR.” AMWA agrees with EPA’s 
determination that its focus on its LSL replacement accelerator initiative and other technical 

 
45 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
assistance programs will be more effective than implementing LCRR provisions that will be 
replaced in just a few short years. AMWA asks EPA to give water systems as much time in 
between promulgation and compliance as possible, but no less than three years.  
 
AMWA is very concerned about the potential scenario where the LCRI is not promulgated before 
the LCRR's compliance date. After the LCRI public comment period, ending on February 5, 2024, 
EPA has approximately five months for reading, analyzing, and incorporating edits from the 
submitted public comments, followed by roughly 90 days of review usually taken by the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB). This brief window poses a challenge for EPA to promulgate the 
rule while incorporating meaningful public input, particularly as its LCRI proposal is significantly 
more complex than the LCRR it would replace. AMWA recommends delaying the LCRR's 
compliance date to prevent potential confusion. Otherwise, water systems will need to prepare for 
LCRR compliance until confirmation that the LCRI is finalized, utilizing valuable time and 
resources leading up to October 2024. 
Section 11: Economic Analysis and Affordability  
 
An accurate and comprehensive economic analysis is essential for the public and regulatory 
agencies to fully understand the financial impacts of agency actions. As individuals across the 
country continue to struggle financially, EPA should account for the massive financial implications 
a rulemaking of this nature will have on the public, particularly on vulnerable communities. 
Because publicly owned water systems are not-for-profit agencies, any substantial costs associated 
with this rulemaking will unfortunately be the responsibility of the ratepayers, or in the event of 
local, state, and federal funding, the taxpayers.  
 
Public water systems are financed primarily through ratepayer funds, so the costs of new 
rulemakings are passed off nearly completely to each water system’s population. In some cases, 
public water systems may receive funding from a limited pool of federal financial support in the 
form of low-interest loans and grants. In rare cases, public water systems may receive funds from 
unique or limited state or local taxes or other programs. This limit on available funds outside of 
rates means that in nearly all cases, public water systems must pass off the costs of new 
rulemakings to ratepayers. When a system passes on new required costs to ratepayers, low-income 
and other economically disadvantaged households face the highest disproportionate burden.  
 
Moreover, costs from new rulemakings come in addition to greater concerns about water 
affordability in the United States. American water infrastructure requires billions of dollars to 
maintain adequate infrastructure, prepare for climate change resilience, and protect public health. 
EPA’s 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment14 report to Congress 
estimated that drinking water systems alone will need $625 billion to replace pipes, upgrade 
treatment plants, improve storage tanks, and enhance other critical assets to ensure the public 
 
14 EPA. (September 2023). Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment 7th Report to Congress. 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-09/Seventh%20DWINSA_September2023_Final.pdf 

 
46 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
health, safety, and economic well-being of communities. These costs do not include any proposed 
rulemakings and will ultimately be passed on to all ratepayers but will be felt most severely by 
those with limited incomes. Furthermore, in April 2023, AMWA was one of five water sector 
organizations that released a report15 including a first-of-its-kind needs assessment that found that 
many as 21.3 million households nationwide may have trouble paying their water and wastewater 
bills now; this figure does not account for water systems adhering to the LCRI. 
 
EPA is estimating that this rulemaking will cost between approximately 2.1 (3 percent discount 
rate) and 3.6 (7 percent discount rate) billion dollars annually. The agency estimates that these 
costs will accrue over a 35-year period. In the preamble, EPA says it does not capture the costs of 
compliance after this period but does account for future benefits occurring after this date.  
 
Section 11.1: Overall Costs 
 
AMWA is concerned with the cost increases that will result from transitioning from the LCRR to 
the much more complex LCRI framework. EPA is aware that absent additional funding from the 
federal government, the overall costs for the rule and removal of all LSLs will primarily be borne 
by thousands of water systems, and by extension, their ratepayers. As the largest publicly owned 
water utilities that will have the most LSLs of all the utility population size categories, AMWA 
members will by-and-large experience the highest overall costs. Many commenters outside of the 
water sector community suggest that water utilities should “pay” for lead service line replacement 
– however, these commenters neglect to acknowledge that without additional grant funding, this 
payment ultimately is built into the rates – or in rare cases, taxes or other fees – which fund the 
operations of a water system. 
 
EPA recognizes the need for federal funding and other grant money to help water systems pay for 
the cost of replacing LSLs. Despite that acknowledgement, EPA is greatly underestimating the 
costs of implementing this rule. Therefore, AMWA encourages EPA to reconsider its cost 
estimates in the final rule, particularly in light of continued inflation and known escalation in water 
system treatment and materials cost as noted in AMWA’s May 30, 2023, comments to EPA on the 
proposed PFAS national primary drinking water regulations (NPDWR).16  In all likelihood, the 
increased demand for materials and labor from this rulemaking and others like PFAS will drive up 
already increasing costs, putting further strain on how far water system’s resources can go. 
Additional requirements like those from Build America, Buy America (BABA) will only 
exacerbate the issues.  
 
 
15 Low-Income Water Customer Assistance Program Assessment. (April 20, 2023). 
https://www.amwa.net/publication/low-income-water-customer-assistance-program-assessment 
16 AMWA. (May 30, 2023.) AMWA comments on PFAS National Primary Drinking Water Regulations. 
https://www.amwa.net/testimonycomments/amwa-comments-proposed-pfas-national-primary-drinking-water-
regulation.  

 
47 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
The sheer cost of this rulemaking is like no other EPA has proposed in recent years. Looking 
toward the future, this rulemaking and the PFAS NPDWR are set to be finalized this year, with a 
three-year compliance period ending in 2027 as proposed. In total, water systems nation-wide can 
expect costs to increase $2.87 to $4.8 billion a year to comply with both the LCRI and the PFAS 
NPDWR, both of which EPA aims to finalize in 2024. In reality, these costs will not be borne 
evenly among water systems, and some with large numbers of LSLs and concentrations of PFAS 
above the MCL will see astronomical increases in cost of compliance. At a time when the 
Administration has focused on environmental justice, it seems antithetical to ignore the reality that 
such rules will impose enormous costs onto water systems, which will have to increase customer 
rates to fund compliance with these rules. Even further, these two proposed rules are not the only 
actions that water systems need to invest in. 
 
A more refined and accurate cost analysis/estimate would help inform future budget requests by 
the White House, in particular to support President Biden’s goal of 100% removal of LSLs and 
assist appropriators in Congress, who have the ability to provide the level of support water systems 
need.  
 
Section 11.2: HRCCA/Economic Analysis for the Proposed Rule  
 
EPA’s methodology in its proposal falls short of the best practices its 2010 Guidelines for 
Preparing Economic Analyses.17 Specifically, EPA neglected to consider all the opportunity costs 
of its proposal. Per EPA’s Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses, the social costs of a 
rule represent the total burden that a regulation will impose on the economy. Social costs are 
defined “as the sum of all opportunity costs incurred as a result of a regulation where an 
opportunity cost is the value lost to society of any goods and services that will not be produced 
and consumed as a result of a regulation.”18  
 
EPA’s analysis underestimates the costs of the rule in several ways, including not accounting for 
the social cost of carbon dioxide (SC-CO2). Additionally, in EPA’s 2023 Proposed Rule: New 
Source Performance Standards for Greenhouse Gas Emissions from New, Modified, and 
Reconstructed Fossil Fuel-Fired Electric Generating Units the Regulatory Impact Analysis 
includes an appendix with economy-wide modeling results.19 EPA finds that including these 
additional costs for the social cost of carbon increases the social cost of the rule by 35 percent. 
This is a significant amount and should be accounted for in the cost analysis for this rulemaking. 
In the preamble, EPA includes many non-quantified, non-monetized benefits but neglects to 
include opportunity costs that will be associated with the provisions in this proposal.  
 
 
17 EPA. (2010). Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses. Chapter 8: Analyzing Costs. 
https://www.epa.gov/environmental-economics/guidelines-preparing-economic-analyses.  
18 Ibid. 
19 EPA. (2023, May 5). https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-05/FRL-8536-02-
OAR%20111EGU%20NPRM%2020230504_Admin.pdf.  

 
48 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
As with EPA’s analysis under the proposed PFAS NPDWR, for the LCRI cost analysis, EPA did 
not quantify real market costs that are affecting the water utility community, such as the near-term 
additional costs water systems face due to scarcity in the labor force and supply chain constraints; 
the opportunity costs associated with periods of time required to remove LSLs and GRRs; site 
restoration, time to distribute , etc.; and the economy-wide general equilibrium (GE) effects as the 
regulation shifts resources from consumption of other goods and services to very specific capital 
investments. 
 
EPA modeled the GE effects of a $100 million regulation in different sectors of the economy to 
measure how higher prices and capital shifts affected the entire economy.20 For the water sector, 
the report found the economy-wide reduction in consumption is 15 to 18 percent. In other words, 
the social costs of a regulation in the water sector are expected to be 15 to 18 percent higher than 
the engineering costs. 
 
EPA includes about five pages of cost components that water systems will incur each step of the 
way as it implements the requirements of this proposed rule. When calculating this total, a pivotal 
first step is knowing approximately how many systems will be triggered into these requirements. 
So far, EPA has not been able to show that it has an accurate number. For example, without 
knowing how many systems will be triggered by a lowered action level and the inclusion of first- 
and fifth-liter sampling, EPA cannot provide an accurate estimate of costs associated with this 
rulemaking.   
 
Many of the costs EPA does estimate have an incredibly wide range based on the amount of 
assumptions EPA makes. EPA pieces together a long line of unknowns of what will happen when 
new requirements of this proposed rule are finalized. If the agency must make so many 
assumptions, it would make sense to perform additional data and information collection to close 
these gaps. EPA should not be imposing enormous costs on the public if it has not done the research 
and information collection needed to provide an accurate cost analysis. The amount of financial 
strain EPA is teeing up for water systems could have unintended consequences. Water systems 
will need to prioritize projects in order to stay in compliance, and potentially put off important 
projects that could have negative implications on public health and safety.   
 
Section 11.3: Annualized costs not representative of compliance timeframe 
 
EPA’s cost analysis annualizes the costs of the critical components of the rule – including LSL 
and GRR replacement, filter provisions, public notifications, and others – over 35 years. In reality, 
these costs will be borne over a much shorter time frame as the rule lays out a framework to have 
most of the proposed rule’s major requirements done in 10 years. Therefore, it is extremely 
misleading to say it will $2.1-$3.6 billion annually ($73.5-$126 billion over 35 years). If most of 
 
20 Marten, A. L., Garbaccio, R., and Wolverton, A. (2018). Exploring the General Equilibrium Costs of Sector-
Specific Environmental Regulations. https://www.epa.gov/environmental-economics/exploring-general-equilibrium-
costs-sector-specific-environmental.  

 
49 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
the work to comply with this proposed rule occurs in the first 10 years, water systems could 
potentially see costs of $7.35 to $12.6 billion dollars annually for the first 10 years.  
 
While water systems may incur debt service for LSL replacement, for which the overall costs can 
be spread according to bond terms, the vast majority of other components are operational costs 
that will be incurred in the first 10 years after the compliance date, not 35 years. EPA must do 
more to communicate this to the public, as stretching these costs over 35 years deceives the public 
into thinking this rule is less costly annually than it is. EPA must address this discrepancy in the 
final rule.  
 
In the case of delivering filters in particular, the useful life for those filters is much shorter than 
the 10-year timeframe after the compliance date that AMWA anticipates the vast majority of costs 
occurring (and certainly not 35 years). Pitcher filters have a lifespan of much less than 10 years 
and the proposed rule requires water systems to provide pitcher filter cartridges that last only six 
months. EPA then annualizing these costs over the next 35 years is misleading, as the amount of 
pitcher filters that will need to be distributed will likely severely decrease as the 10-year deadline 
approaches and many water systems are near completion of their LSL replacement plans.  
 
Section 11.4: Cost of Orthophosphate Removal and Clean Water Act (CWA)/ Safe Drinking 
Water Act (SDWA) Connection 
 
In the economic analysis, EPA estimates an annual cost of $4.2 to $5.9 million for the addition of 
orthophosphates as a form of CCT. However, this estimation significantly underestimates the 
efforts required to prevent potential harm to waterways from increased nutrients, such as 
phosphates. The EPA's assumption of negligible costs associated with wastewater removal of 
nutrients is flawed, as any expenses incurred will ultimately be shouldered by the same ratepayers 
funding the proposed rulemaking. 
 
A pivotal aspect of the Clean Water Act (CWA) involves reducing nutrient pollution, and the EPA 
has allocated substantial resources toward achieving this objective. States, mandated by the Clean 
Water Act, must develop total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) for all waters identified on their 
Section 303(d) list of impaired waters. A notable example is the collaborative effort among states 
within the Chesapeake Bay watershed, working jointly to reduce nutrient pollution and address 
issues like eutrophication. The introduction of orthophosphates poses a challenge to these ongoing 
goals, and the EPA must acknowledge the associated costs of mitigating these adverse 
consequences. 
 
Moreover, EPA regulates nutrient pollution through the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination 
System (NPDES) permitting. The costs linked to nutrient removal at wastewater treatment plants 
should be considered, as these financial burdens will be borne by the same ratepayers responsible 
for covering the expenses of the LCRI. It is imperative for the EPA to recognize, in the final 

 
50 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
rulemaking, the substantial costs associated with mitigating nutrient pollution and not overlook 
the considerable efforts undertaken by its own agency to address this environmental concern. 
 
Section 11.5: Feasibility 
 
A major component of regulating something under the Safe Drinking Water act (SDWA) is 
determining when actions are feasible. The term “feasible” is defined as “mean[ing] feasible with 
the use of the best technology, treatment techniques and other means which the Administrator 
finds, after examination for efficacy under field conditions and not solely under laboratory 
conditions, are available (taking cost into consideration).”21 The last piece, “taking cost into 
consideration,” is an extremely important, often seemingly forgotten, portion of this definition. 
 
Assigning a timeline to 100% LSL replacement automatically increases the price tag of this 
rulemaking. Time sensitive actions often cost more money, cause increasing demand, and create 
shortages of necessary materials and labor. If water systems were allowed more flexibility with 
the timeline of LSL replacement, costs would ultimately go down and these systems would be able 
to couple other projects with replacement, cutting on costs to excavate and pay crews to do the 
work. The massive price tag of this rulemaking has been deemed “feasible” by the Administrator, 
but neglects to provide any assurance for disadvantaged and underserved communities that will be 
forced to foot the bill for these efforts. AMWA asks EPA to take into consideration some of the 
recommendations the association has included throughout this comment letter to reduce the 
financial burdens this rulemaking will have.  
 
EPA also seems to look at this rulemaking through a singular lens. The LCRI is far from the only 
significant rulemaking EPA is considering now. This year, EPA also intends to finalize the PFAS 
NPDWR that it estimates will cost ratepayers $770 million to $1.2 billion. Even further, other 
estimations of the cost of that rulemaking are 3-6 times higher.22,23 Meanwhile, EPA is intending 
to utilize, or already is using, SDWA to revise the Microbial and Disinfection Byproduct (MDBP) 
rules,24 revise the Consumer Confidence Report (CCR) rule,25 regulate perchlorate in drinking 
 
21 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(4)(D). 
22 American Water Works Association. (2023 March 7). WITAF 56 Technical Memorandum. PFAS National Cost 
Model Report. 
https://www.awwa.org/Portals/0/AWWA/Government/2023030756BVFinalTechnicalMemoradum.pdf?ver=2023- 
03-14-102450-257.  
23 AMWA. (2023). AMWA comments on PFAS NPDWR. https://www.amwa.net/testimonycomments/amwa-
comments-proposed-pfas-national-primary-drinking-water-regulation.  
24 EPA. (July 24, 2023). Potential revisions of Microbial and Disinfection Byproducts Rules. 
https://www.epa.gov/dwsixyearreview/potential-revisions-microbial-and-disinfection-byproducts-rules.  
25 EPA. (April 5, 2023). National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Consumer Confidence Report Rule 
Revisions. https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0015.  

 
51 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
water,26 and implement the Unregulated Contaminate Monitoring Rule (UCMR 5).27 Complying 
with all of these proposed and finalized rules will add significant costs to  water systems planning, 
operations, and maintenance. Outside of SDWA, EPA is taking actions through other authorities 
that will also financially impact water systems: designating PFOA, PFOS, and additional PFAS as 
hazardous substance under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act (CERCLA),28,29 amending the Risk Management Program regulations,30 and Clean 
Water Act worst case discharge planning,31 to name a few.  
 
In addition, our economic development has simply outpaced our capacity for workers to fill open 
positions. There simply haven’t been enough people born to fill the jobs that are being created. 
The idea that the “market will correct” and support the existing labor/workforce concerns with 
LCRI is simply unfounded when you consider the findings and data included in The Demographic 
Drought: Bridging the Gap in Our Labor Force.32 
 
While AMWA recognizes the importance of many of these actions, the association seeks to 
illustrate to EPA the importance of implementing requirements in a cost-effective and less 
burdensome way. These proposed and intended rulemakings listed above are but a snapshot of 
some of the current actions EPA is taking, and AMWA is concerned the compounded costs of all 
of them are going to make compliance with EPA regulations infeasible.  
 
Section 11.6: Affordability 
 
Despite the much appreciated $50 billion dollars of federal investment in the water sector from 
recent legislation, our country’s water infrastructure still requires billions more to maintain 
adequate infrastructure, prepare for climate change resilience, and protect public health. The 
American Society of Civil Engineers’ (ASCE) Failure to Act study33 found that the U.S. water 
 
26 EPA. (January 5, 2024). Perchlorate in Drinking Water. https://www.epa.gov/sdwa/perchlorate-drinking-water.  
27 EPA. (February 1, 2024). Fifth Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule. https://www.epa.gov/dwucmr/fifth-
unregulated-contaminant-monitoring-rule.  
28 EPA. (September 6, 2022). Comprehensive environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act Hazardous 
Substances: Designation of Perfluorooctanoic Acid. https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OLEM-2019-
0341-0001.  
29 EPA. (April 13, 2023). Addressing Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in the Environment.  
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OLEM-2022-0922-0001.  
30 EPA. (August 31, 2022). Accidental release prevention requirements: risk management programs under the Clean 
Air Act; Safer Communities by Chemical Accident Prevention. https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-
OLEM-2022-0174-0003.  
31 EPA. (March 28, 2022). Clean Water Act Hazardous Substance Worst Case Discharge Planning. 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OLEM-2021-0585-0001.  
32 ESMI. (2021). The Demographic Drought. https://lightcast.io/resources/research/demographic-
drought#Download.  
33American Society of Civil Engineers. (2021). 2021 Report: Economic impacts of status quo investment across 
infrastructure systems. https://infrastructurereportcard.org/the-impact/failure-to-act-report/.  

 
52 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
sector in 2021 needed over $400 billion to meet engineering standards, and these costs will only 
increase with additional treatment, climate change, and inflation. The existing water system 
financing model assumes that most of the money for addressing local water supply issues, whether 
that issue is aging infrastructure, water quality, lead pipes, cybersecurity, or water supply 
reliability, can be dealt with largely with local resources (i.e., customer water rates, or other local 
funding mechanisms). Given the large funding gap needed without the LCRI, it is essential that 
the EPA adequately assess costs in its final rulemaking and create the NPDWR with accurate 
estimates. 
 
As stated in section 11.3, over the 35-year period, this rulemaking can expect to cost a total of 
$73.5-$126 billion. This far exceeds the $15 billion allocated for LSL replacement funds in the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) of 2021. Therefore, AMWA is concerned that an EPA 
requirement for water systems to carry out full lead service line replacements would represent a 
massive unfunded mandate for communities that do not receive BIL funding. These communities 
would likely have to turn to increased customer water rates to cover these replacement costs, which 
could be expected to disproportionately impact low-income customers. The overwhelming 
majority of water systems are limited to grants, loans, and user rates to cover the costs of providing 
drinking water service, and federal funds to date alone will not cover the full costs. 
 
Customer bills will not only be impacted by rising operating expenses due to inflation but also 
higher interest rates that accompany periods of higher inflation. AMWA conducts a biennial 
survey of its members on financial trends, and a 2022 analysis by Raftelis Financial Consultants 
indicated that “on average, utilities are projecting to increase rates by almost 5% per year over the 
next five years. This increase is 37% higher than the expected future increases reported in the 2020 
survey (4.94% compared to 3.6%) and 25% higher than expected future increases reported in the 
2018 survey (4.94% compared to 3.94%), indicating that while future expected rate increases are 
anticipated to be on average fairly moderate, these increases are also anticipated to be higher than 
in previous years.”34   
 
Community water systems face additional challenges in their authority to increase rates and in 
their ability to assist low-income customers most affected by increased rates. AMWA represents 
publicly owned drinking water utilities, which are often governed by boards or other elected 
officials that may restrict the degree to which utilities can increase rates or whether they may 
establish lower rates for low-income customers. In other cases, publicly owned utilities may 
require voter permission to authorize funding for major infrastructure projects. The LCRI must 
recognize the unique challenges faced by water utilities in acquiring and distributing funds to 
replace lead service lines and recognize potential increased water rates as an intended consequence 
of funding lead service line replacement. 
 
34 Sapone, P. and Craley, R. of Raftelis. (January 25, 2024). What AMWA’s INSIGHT Survey tells us about 
inflation’s impact on water utilities. https://www.raftelis.com/insight/what-amwas-insight-survey-tells-us-about-
inflations-impact-on-water-utilities/.   

 
53 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Section 12: Conclusion 
 
AMWA thanks EPA for the opportunity to provide input on these long-awaited revisions to the 
Lead and Copper Rule. AMWA’s members are public health leaders in their communities, and the 
protection of their customers is their highest priority. While AMWA supports many of the 
ambitious requirements under this proposal, the concerns outlined in these comments highlight the 
multitude of complications which could hinder the implementation of this rule. EPA must work to 
resolve the components of this rule that have placed unrealistic expectations on water systems, 
particularly those which hold water systems accountable for achieving benchmarks which may be 
outside of their control. Requiring water systems to meet standards that rely significantly on the 
cooperation of schools, licensed child care centers, and homeowners may set up water systems to 
fail through no fault of their own, despite making their best effort to comply. 
 
The association believes that our comments will help the agency ensure the final rule is achievable, 
practical, and enforceable. AMWA is appreciative of EPA’s efforts to bring this proposal to 
fruition and looks forward to working with EPA to best protect the health of the millions of people 
that depend on their local water systems for safe and reliable drinking water. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Appendix A 
 
 
 
 
 
AMWA Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESIDENT 
Steve Schneider 
Saint Paul Regional Water 
Services 
 
Mike Armstrong 
WaterOne 
 
Kevin Gertig 
Fort Collins Utilities 
 
Ron Lovan 
Northern Kentucky Water 
District 
 
VICE PRESIDENT 
Angela Licata 
New York City Department of 
Environmental Protection 
 
Shane Chapman 
Metropolitan Water District of 
Southern California 
 
Richard Harasick 
Los Angeles Department of 
Water and Power 
 
Sue McCormick 
Great Lakes Water Authority 
 
 
 
TREASURER 
John Entsminger 
Las Vegas Valley Water 
District 
 
Robert L. Davis 
Cleveland Department of Public 
Utilities 
 
Robert Hunter 
Municipal Water District of 
Orange County 
 
Jeffrey Szabo 
Suffolk County Water Authority 
 
 
SECRETARY 
Kathryn Sorensen 
Phoenix Water Services 
 
 
Scott Dewhirst 
Tacoma Water  
 
Ghassan Korban 
New Orleans Water and Sewer 
Board 
 
John P. Sullivan, Jr. 
Boston Water and Sewer 
Commission 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER 
Diane VanDe Hei 
 
 
Steve Edgemon 
Fairfax Water 
 
Carrie Lewis 
Portland Water District 
 
Douglas Yoder 
Miami-Dade Water and Sewer 
Department 
 
 
 
 
 
Yvonne Forrest 
Houston Public Utilities 
Division  
 
James S. Lochhead 
Denver Water  
 
 
 
 
 
February 12, 2020 
 
The Honorable David P. Ross 
Assistant Administrator  
Office of Water  
Environmental Protection Agency 
 
Re: Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead 
and Copper Rule Revisions 
 
Dear Assistant Administrator Ross, 
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) is an organization representing CEOs and 
general managers of the largest publicly owned drinking water systems in the United States. Any changes 
to national primary drinking water regulations will significantly impact our members. AMWA appreciates 
the opportunity to comment on the Environmental Protection Agency’s proposed rule, National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300).  
 
The association has been involved with the Lead and Copper Rule since its inception and values all the 
work that EPA has done to decrease the risk of lead and copper to public health. The proposed revisions are 
an important next step and AMWA appreciates EPA’s efforts to update the rule. Due to the importance of 
this rulemaking, AMWA is pleased to submit the attached comments for EPA’s consideration. If you have 
any questions, please contact me at 202-331-2820 or Stephanie Hayes Schlea (schlea@amwa.net), 
AMWA’s Director of Regulatory and Scientific Affairs. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Diane VanDe Hei 
Chief Executive Officer 
 
Attachment 
 
cc: Jennifer McLain, Director, Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water;  
      Eric Burneson, Standards and Risk Management Division Director, OGWDW  

1 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Introduction 
2 
Lead service line definition (Section 141.2) 
4 
24-hour notification following a 90th percentile lead action level exceedance (Section 
141.80(h)(3)) 
7 
Find-and-Fix (Section 141.82(j)) 
12 
Lead service line inventory and replacement requirements (Section 141.84) 
18 
Lead service line inventories 
19 
Lead service line replacement 
23 
Customer-initiated lead service line replacement 
26 
Filter requirements (Sections 141.84 and 141.86) 
30 
Public education and supplemental monitoring requirements (Section 141.85) 
33 
Monitoring for lead in schools and licensed child care facilities (Section 141.92) 
35 
Economic Analysis 
43 
Conclusion 
45 
 
 

2 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) is pleased to offer these comments 
on EPA’s National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Revisions. AMWA acknowledges the thought and hard work that EPA has put into the proposed 
revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule and supports EPA’s efforts to address this complicated 
issue. AMWA has been involved with the Lead and Copper Rule since its inception and values 
all the work that EPA has done to decrease the public’s exposure to lead through drinking water. 
We were pleased to identify a number of strengths in the proposed rule, but we also encourage 
EPA to make a number of changes to improve its clarity and the ability of water systems to 
implement and comply with the rule’s requirements. 
 
Among the strengths of the rule is the new requirement for water systems to complete an 
inventory that specifies the composition, if known, of public and privately owned service lines 
connected to the distribution system. While many water systems will face challenges in 
accurately determining the makeup of some service lines – particularly those on private property 
– on balance it is important and worthwhile for water systems to document what materials are in 
the service lines that deliver water to their customers. Once an inventory is completed, we agree 
that all water systems serving more than 100,000 people should make their inventories available 
to the public online. Our comments include several constructive suggestions to improve the 
inventory requirements, but overall we welcome its addition to the Lead and Copper Rule.   
 
AMWA appreciates that the proposal avoids setting unattainable mandates such as a deadline for 
the replacement of all lead service lines nationwide. Compliance with such a mandate would take 
decades, cost billions of dollars, and would prevent water systems from allocating their limited 
budgets to other projects and initiatives that may deliver greater public health benefits. However, 
the rule also empowers individual homeowners to compel their water system to replace the 
publicly owned portion of a lead service line when the homeowner simultaneously replaces their 
privately owned lead line. AMWA has a number of suggestions to make this process as seamless 
as possible, but giving homeowners a pathway to have their water system replace a lead service 
line connected to their property is one of the most important new features in the proposed rule. 
 
AMWA also agrees with steps the proposal takes to discourage partial lead service line 
replacements – such replacements carry few public health benefits and allow lead pipes to 
remain in the ground. But a total ban on partial replacements, as some would advocate, is ill-
advised and not feasible. For example, emergency water main replacement work may offer an 
opportunity for a water system to simultaneously replace the publicly owned portion of a 
household’s lead service line. Likewise, a planned water main replacement project may result in 
a new alignment or spacing of the main, necessitating replacement of at least part of a lead 
service line. Ideally the privately owned portion of the lead line would be replaced at the same 
time, but a water system’s ability to do so is often contingent upon that customer’s willingness to 
allow work on his or her property (and, in many cases, for the customer to pay the costs 
associated with replacing the privately owned portion). The proposal recognizes that there will 
be situations where customer consent cannot be quickly obtained, and in those limited cases 

3 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
permits a water system to at least remove the publicly owned portion of a lead service line when 
the emergency main repair projects or other scheduled infrastructure work has provided an 
opportunity to do so. 
 
AMWA further appreciates that the proposed rule would not require water systems to cover costs 
associated with the replacement of privately owned service lines, though they would retain the 
option to do so. While some water systems are able to subsidize private-side replacement, the 
ability of many others to do so is legally questionable or banned outright. In fact, a 2017 
University of North Carolina Environmental Finance Center report commissioned by AMWA 
and other water sector organizations found that the laws of three states expressly prohibit water 
systems from using ratepayer funds on initiatives that benefit specific customers, and laws in at 
least 19 others make the practice highly questionable.1 A mandate in the Lead and Copper Rule 
for a water system to pay the cost of replacing a privately owned portion of a lead service line 
would therefore leave many water systems in the position of either violating the rule, or violating 
state or local laws barring the use of ratepayer dollars for infrastructure projects that benefit 
individual residents. The proposed rule wisely avoids this scenario. 
 
However, other parts of the proposed rule fall short of recognizing that any successful effort to 
address lead in drinking water must be the result of collaboration and cooperation between water 
systems and their customers. AMWA has strong concerns with aspects of the proposed rule that 
would penalize water systems for failing to achieve full service line replacement targets that can 
only be met with the cooperation of individual property owners.  
 
We have also identified a number of shortcomings with portions of the proposed rule related to 
testing water in school and child care facilities. These deficiencies include the failure to 
recognize that significant numbers of school administrators and licensed child care center 
employees may very well not respond at all to water system outreach regarding water testing 
opportunities – in which case AMWA believes a water system should not be penalized for failing 
to meet an arbitrary testing target proposed by the rule. As a signatory on EPA’s Memorandum 
of Understanding on Reducing Lead Levels in Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care 
Facilities, AMWA agrees with EPA’s prioritization of protecting our children from lead 
exposure and applaud EPA for taking further steps to accomplish this goal. However, EPA has 
not considered crucial aspects and restrictions related to the proposed rule and risks holding 
water systems out of compliance for reasons outside of their control. 
 
AMWA’s comments offer suggestions on these and several other areas of the proposed rule 
which we believe should be improved. These include: 
 
• The definition of “lead service line” (Section 141.2) 
• 24-hour notification following a 90th percentile lead action level exceedance (Section 
141.80(h)(3)) 
 
1 Navigating Legal Pathways to Rate-Funded Customer Assistance Programs: A Guide for Water and Wastewater 
Utilities. https://efc.sog.unc.edu/sites/default/files/2018/FINAL_Pathways%20to%20Rate-Funded%20CAPs.pdf.  

4 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
• Find-and-Fix (Section 141.82(j)) 
• Lead service line inventory and replacement requirements (Section 141.84) 
• Customer-initiated lead service line replacement (Section 141.84(d)(3)-(5)) 
• Provision of filters to customers (Sections 141.84 and 141.86) 
• Public education and monitoring requirements (Section 141.85) 
• Monitoring for lead in schools and licensed child care facilities (Section 141.92) 
 
Finally, our comments offer several suggestions on portions of EPA’s economic analysis 
accompanying the proposal that we believe require additional consideration. 
 
Beyond these components, we believe further explanation and clarification is necessary for 
Sections 141.81 and 141.82 of the proposed rule, which govern when a water system would have 
to install or re-optimize corrosion control treatment based upon the 90th percentile results of tap 
water monitoring. Based on our reading of the proposal, a water system with corrosion control 
treatment that exceeds the lead trigger level of 0.010 mg/L at the 90th percentile – but not the 
action level of 0.015mg/L – would have to study and re-optimize its corrosion control. This 
would effectively make the trigger level the new standard at which a water system would have to 
take further action related to corrosion control – leaving the action level somewhat less relevant. 
We therefore request that EPA more fully explain its reasoning for having corrosion control 
changes contingent upon a trigger level exceedance rather than an action level exceedance. 
 
Overall, AMWA believes our comments will provide EPA with valuable suggestions which, if 
adopted, will ensure the proposed rule is achievable, practical, and enforceable. We thank you in 
advance for your consideration. 
 
 
 
Lead service line definition (Section 141.2) 
 
Summary: 
 
• EPA’s proposed definition for “lead service line” is imprecise and should be modified to 
ensure that the agency’s intention is clear, and the definition can be implemented 
throughout the rule. 
 
• AMWA is concerned with the inclusion of “ever was” within the determination of 
galvanized pipe which is downstream of a lead service line or a pipe of unknown 
material. This distinction is problematic as water systems may not have specific records 
for service lines that go back to the initial installation, and may be unable to definitively 
prove or disprove what material may have been upstream of the galvanized line 
throughout the life of the service line.  
 

5 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
• AMWA suggests a revised definition of “lead service line” that provides clarity that a 
galvanized service line that is not otherwise considered a lead service line, and that is 
downstream of a lead gooseneck, pigtail, or connector, will not be considered a lead 
service line. AMWA also suggests allowing a water system to use tools such as water 
system records, city codes, and building records to draw a reasonable conclusion about 
whether a galvanized service line is likely to have been connected to a lead line at some 
point in the past, and use this information to determine whether that galvanized line is to 
be treated as lead. 
 
• EPA should include more information within the preamble, including visual 
representations, to better inform the public, regulating entities, and water systems as to 
the classification of the different real-world scenarios these entities might find when 
working with service lines.  
 
 
Comments: 
 
AMWA appreciates EPA’s attempt to better clarify what constitutes a lead service line under this 
rule. The proposed language improves upon the definition used in the current Lead and Copper 
Rule, as seen below. AMWA also supports the addition of galvanized lines downstream of lead 
pipe to the definition of lead service line due to the fact that galvanized pipe can absorb lead 
particles, as this designation is the most protective of public health.  
 
However, as currently written, the circumstances when a service line is considered a lead service 
line is still not entirely clear. As this definition informs all other parts of this rule, it is critical 
that the definition be as clear and detailed as possible. 
 
Present Lead and Copper Rule definition: 
 
Lead service line means a service line made of lead which connects the water main to the 
building inlet and any lead pigtail, gooseneck or other fitting which is connected to such 
lead line. 
 
Definition in proposed rule: 
 
Lead service line means a service line made of lead, which connects the water main to the 
building inlet. A lead service line may be owned by the water system, owned by the 
property owner, or both. For the purposes of this subpart, a galvanized service line is 
considered a lead service line if it ever was or is currently downstream of any lead service 
line or service line of unknown material. If the only lead piping serving the home or 
building is a lead gooseneck, pigtail, or connector, and it is not a galvanized service line 
that is considered an LSL the service line is not a lead service line. 
 
 

6 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
 
AMWA suggests the following language as a substitute: 
 
Lead service line means a service line, which connects the water main to the building 
inlet, comprised in any part of lead, excluding a service line where the sole component of 
lead is either a lead gooseneck, pigtail, or connector. A lead service line may be owned 
by the water system, owned by the property owner, or both. 
 
For the purposes of this subpart, a galvanized service line is considered a lead service line 
if it is currently, or is known or likely to have been in the past, downstream of a lead 
service line or service line of currently unknown material. If the only lead known, 
presently or in the past, to be upstream of a galvanized service line is either a lead 
gooseneck, pigtail, or connector, then the galvanized line is not considered a lead service 
line. If a galvanized line is downstream of a service line of unknown material, the 
galvanized line shall no longer be considered a lead service line if the upstream unknown 
material is subsequently determined to be nonlead, unless the galvanized line is otherwise 
determined likely to have been downstream of a lead service line in the past. 
 
The above language maintains the majority of EPA’s intent while providing a clearer and more 
defensible definition. The language is also consistent with the language used to categorize 
service lines for purposes of an inventory in Section 141.84. 
 
The most significant change within the suggested language involves the replacement of text 
regarding if the portion of the service line upstream of a galvanized line “ever was” lead, or an 
unknown material. The “ever was” standard is problematic because if a water system does not 
have a complete record for a service line that dates back to the initial installation, it would not be 
able to definitively prove or disprove what material may have been upstream of the galvanized 
line throughout the life of the service line – even if the galvanized line is known to currently not 
be downstream of a lead line. AMWA therefore suggests allowing a water system to use other 
tools such as other related water system records, city codes, and building records to draw a 
reasonable inference about whether a galvanized service line was or was not likely to have been 
connected to a lead line at some point in the past. If this review leads to a conclusion that the 
galvanized line was likely to have been downstream of a lead line at some point in the past, the 
galvanized line should presently be considered lead. Conversely, if the review concludes that the 
galvanized line was unlikely to have been downstream of lead in the past, it should not count as 
lead in the system’s present-day inventory. We will discuss this process further in our comments 
on lead service line inventory and replacement requirements. 
 
AMWA’s revised definition also provides clarity that if a galvanized service line is not otherwise 
considered a lead service line, and is downstream from a lead gooseneck, pigtail, or connector, 
that galvanized line will continue to not be considered a lead service line. 
 
Finally, AMWA also believes that it would be beneficial to have additional information included 
in the preamble so as to better describe the different scenarios that water systems may experience 

7 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
in their own distribution systems. As seen in the table below, under the proposed definition it 
appears there are, at minimum, sixteen different configurations that a service line could have. 
This configuration determines whether the service line is considered lead under the inventory, if 
it may be included in a water system’s sampling pool, and if the line would count towards a 
water system’s replacement goal or three percent mandated replacement rate. AMWA suggests 
EPA include the table below within the preamble. This table will also help with the language 
used to categorize service lines for purposes of an inventory in Section 141.84.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
24-hour notification following a 90th percentile lead action level 
exceedance (Section 141.80(h)(3)) 
 
Summary: 
 
• AMWA recognizes that the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation (WIIN) 
Act of 2016 amended the Safe Drinking Water Act to add a “lead action level 
exceedance” to the list of events after which a water system must give notice to persons 
PUBLIC
PRIVATE
INVENTORY 
STATUS
COMPONENTS NEEDING 
REPLACEMENT
INCLUDED IN TIER 1 
SAMPLING POOL
COUNTS TOWARD 
REPLACEMENT 
GOAL/RATE
L
L
L
B
Y
Y
L
NL
L 
P
Y
Y
L
U
L 
PR
Y
Y
L
G
L 
B
Y
Y
G
L
L 
R
Y
Y
G 
NL
NL
NR
N
N
G
U
L 
DN
N
D
G
G
NL
NR
N
N
U
L
L 
PR
Y
Y
U
NL
L 
DN
N
D
U
U
L 
DN
N
D
U
G
L 
DN
N
D
NL
L
L 
R
Y
Y
NL
NL
NL
NR
N
N
NL
U
L
DN
N
D
NL
G
NL
NR
N
N
L = lead
G = galvanized
U = unknown
NL = nonlead/galvanized
Y = yes
P = public
R = private
B = both sides
NR = no replacement needed
N = no
DN = determination of unknown(s) needed before decision to do replacement
D = depends on status of identified unknowns
PR = determination needed to decide if one or both components need replacing 

8 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
served by the system. In the case of a lead action level exceedance “that has the potential 
to have serious adverse effects on human health as a result of short-term exposure,” the 
Safe Drinking Water Act, as amended by the WIIN Act, requires EPA to issue 
regulations to require a notice to “be distributed as soon as practicable, but not later than 
24 hours, after the public water system learns of the … exceedance.” 
 
• AMWA does not believe that every 90th percentile lead action level exceedance 
necessarily poses serious adverse human health effects as a result of short-term exposure 
but acknowledges EPA’s finding that it would be difficult for the agency to delineate 
between lead action level exceedances that meet this threshold, and those that do not. 
 
• AMWA also believes that EPA should take all steps practicable to avoid mandating 
expedited public notifications about exceedances that may unnecessarily alarm the public 
or undermine their confidence in the quality of their drinking water. 
 
• AMWA is confident that EPA could fulfill the congressional mandate of the WIIN Act 
and appropriately focus expedited exceedance alerts by targeting those alerts to 
households that, based upon information uncovered through a water system’s lead service 
line inventory, are known to receive their water through lead service lines or service lines 
of unknown material. 
 
 
Comments: 
 
Section 141.80(h)(3) of the proposed rule would require any water system that exceeds the lead 
action level at the 90th percentile to “notify the public in accordance with the public notification 
requirements in Subpart Q” of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations. In practice, 
this would require a Tier 1 public notification under the Public Notification Rule for any 90th 
percentile lead action level exceedance, meaning that water systems would have to notify all 
customers within 24 hours of learning of the exceedance. While we agree that the public should 
be promptly notified of water quality conditions that may pose severe and acute human health 
risks, the rule should avoid unnecessarily alarming members of the public (such as those whose 
homes are not served by lead service lines) who are not expected to be significantly impacted by 
an exceedance. AMWA believes this is an achievable objective. 
 
AMWA understands that EPA’s proposal for public notification following a lead action level 
exceedance must abide by the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation (WIIN) Act of 
2016 (P.L. 114-322). That law amended the Safe Drinking Water Act to require a notice to “be 
distributed as soon as practicable, but not later than 24 hours, after the public water system learns 
of the … exceedance,” provided that the exceedance “has the potential to have serious adverse 
effects on human health as a result of short-term exposure.” 
 
No statutory notice distribution timeframe applies in the case of a lead action level exceedance 
that does not have the potential to have serious adverse effects on human health as a result of 

9 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
short-term exposure. In that case, the Safe Drinking Water Act directs EPA to issue a regulation 
to prescribe the “manner, frequency, form, and content” of such notice after taking “into account 
the seriousness of any potential adverse health effects that may be involved” (See SDWA Sec. 
300g-3(c)(2)(A)). 
 
EPA contends in the preamble to the proposed rule (page 61710) that it “cannot define the subset 
of [action level] exceedances that could result in serious adverse health effects due to short-term 
exposure.” As a result, the proposed rule “would require Tier 1, 24 hour notification” through 
methods outlined in the Public Notification Rule anytime a water system exceeds the lead action 
level at the 90th percentile. These methods include notices through broadcast media, posting at 
conspicuous locations throughout the service area, hand delivery to persons served, or other 
methods approved by the state. 
 
While AMWA acknowledges that EPA would face a difficult task in separating those 90th 
percentile action level exceedances that present serious adverse health effects from those that do 
not, requiring a 24-hour notification of all customers following a 90th percentile lead action level 
exceedance goes far beyond the congressional directive and would not be ideal in several 
respects. First, unlike an MCL violation with the potential to carry serious human health effects 
in the short term, all users of the water system would not necessarily be equally vulnerable to 
health effects related to a lead action level exceedance. Instead, sampling results indicating an 
action level exceedance by the water system would have the most relevance to the health of 
customers who are served by lead service lines. It is then reasonable to prioritize this universe of 
customers for the fastest notification following an action level exceedance. 
 
A community-wide 24-hour notification following a 90th percentile action level exceedance, 
utilizing mechanisms such as broadcast media or hand-delivery, would certainly capture all 
households that are served by lead service lines. But in the case of metropolitan water systems 
this broad notification would also capture perhaps tens or hundreds of thousands of households 
without lead service lines that are less likely to experience elevated lead levels regardless of the 
results of the community’s tap sampling. Notifying these customers with an urgent 
communication within 24 hours of obtaining the lead sampling results could lead them to avoid 
their drinking water unnecessarily, or otherwise cause alarm even though their own water quality 
is unlikely to be affected. This would likely undermine the public’s confidence in their drinking 
water and runs counter to the Safe Drinking Water Act’s direction for EPA to “take into account 
the seriousness of any potential adverse health effects that may be involved” when setting the 
form, frequency, and manner of the required notice. 
 
 
AMWA’s recommended alternative approach to customer notification following a lead action 
level exceedance: 
 
AMWA envisions a modified notification approach that maintains compliance with the 
requirements of the Safe Drinking Water Act as amended by P.L. 114-322. In short, AMWA 
recommends that the rule’s requirement to distribute notification to customers within 24 hours of 

10 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
learning of a lead action level exceedance at the 90th percentile be limited to those households 
served by a lead service line (including a galvanized line downstream of a lead service line), or a 
service line of unknown material. 
 
This approach would be made possible by the lead service line inventory that would be required 
under Section 141.84 of the proposed rule. That provision would require water systems to 
“develop and maintain a publicly accessible inventory of lead service lines and service lines of 
unknown materials in its distribution system.” With that inventory in hand, a water system would 
have a readily accessible list of customers to promptly notify in the event of a lead action level 
exceedance. 
 
The proposed rule also includes several other scenarios where a water system would be required 
to deliver a targeted communication specifically to customers served by lead service lines, or 
service lines of unknown material. For example: 
 
• Section 141.85(e) would require water systems to annually “provide notification to all 
customers with a lead service line or a service line of unknown material informing them 
they have a lead service line or a service line of unknown material.” This annual notice 
would have to be delivered to these customers by mail or another method approved by 
the state, indicating that water systems would need to maintain a database of contact 
information for this subset of households. 
 
• Section 141.85(f) would further require that all water systems that exceed the lead trigger 
level of 0.010 mg/L at the 90th percentile “must provide customers that have a lead 
service line information regarding the water system’s goal-based lead service line 
replacement program and opportunities for replacement of the lead service line.” This 
required notice, which would have to be delivered via mail (or another method approved 
by the state) within 30 days of the end of the monitoring period within which the trigger 
level was surpassed reiterates the necessity of water systems to maintain a database of 
contact information for households served by lead service lines. 
 
• Section 141.85(g) would require water systems that fail to meet their annual lead service 
line replacement goals to conduct outreach to the public utilizing at least two methods 
from a prescribed list of options. One such option (found in clause (1)(iii)) is to “send 
certified mail to customers with lead service lines to inform them about the water 
system’s goal-based lead service line replacement program and opportunities for 
replacement of the lead service line.” 
 
Based on these requirements, it is clear that to ensure compliance with the proposed rule water 
systems would need to maintain a database that includes contact information for households with 
lead service lines, or service lines of unknown material. With this database available, a water 
system would have the ability to initiate a targeted notification to these customers within 24 
hours of learning of a lead action level exceedance at the 90th percentile. AMWA therefore 
recommends that EPA give water systems the option of distributing the required notification 

11 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
within 24 hours of learning of a lead action level exceedance to only those households that are 
served by lead service lines, or service lines of unknown material. 
 
Even with the ability to target distribution of this notice to customers most likely to be affected, 
AMWA believes the WIIN Act mandate will impose a substantial burden on water systems. To 
use the example of a water system that learns of its 90th percentile exceedance on a Friday 
afternoon, the system would be in violation if it distributed the required notice to customers the 
following Monday. However, unlike EPA’s proposed notice to residents of individual 
households where tap samples were collected, AMWA recognizes that the WIIN Act does not 
give EPA flexibility to alter the timeline of when a notice following an exceedance must be 
distributed. 
 
However, EPA does have a degree of flexibility on how to interpret the WIIN Act mandate. 
Section 300g-3(c)(2)(C)(i) of the Safe Drinking Water Act, as amended by the WIIN Act, 
provides that the notice about exceedances with the potential to have serious adverse effects on 
human health as a result of short terms exposure must “be distributed as soon as practicable, but 
not later than 24 hours, after the public water systems learns of the … exceedance.” The law 
does not necessarily require that this notice be in the hands of customers within 24 hours. 
Therefore, in the case of a water system that aims to meet its WIIN Act notification obligation by 
issuing a targeted communication to customers served by lead service lines or service lines of 
unknown material, EPA should consider a water system to be in compliance with this 
requirement if it begins the process of distributing the notice to relevant customers within 24 
hours of learning of the exceedance. Steps that may fulfill this requirement could include 
initiating printing of a letter to be mailed to customers, or (in the case of customers for whom the 
water system has electronic contact information) sending them the notice electronically. After 
initiating the process of printing letters for mail distribution, the water system would be expected 
to complete distribution as soon as practicable in order to remain in compliance with the 
statutory deadline. 
 
In this scenario, it is important to remember that the samples themselves would have been 
collected at least several weeks prior to the moment at which the water system learned of its 
action level exceedance at the 90th percentile. After such an amount of time, there would be a 
minimal difference from a public health perspective of whether a customer actually received the 
notice within 24 hours of the water system learning the result, or a few days later. 
 
 
AMWA’s recommendation and compliance with the WIIN Act: 
 
AMWA’s recommendation to target lead action level exceedance notices to customers who are 
served by lead service lines would be consistent with the congressional mandate of the WIIN 
Act. Under Section 300g-3(c)(2)(C) of the Safe Drinking Water Act, as amended by the WIIN 
Act, EPA’s regulations must “specify notification procedures for [each MCL violation or lead 
action level exceedance] that has the potential to have serious adverse effects on human health as 
a result of short-term exposure.” While the proposed rule aims to achieve compliance with this 

12 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
mandate by treating all lead action level exceedances as Tier 1 public notification events that 
“reach all persons served” by the system, the statutory language allows greater flexibility – as 
long as water systems provide distribution to those individuals with the potential to suffer serious 
adverse health effects as a result of short-term exposure “as soon as practicable, but not later than 
24 hours” after learning of the exceedance. 
 
AMWA believes that the portion of a water system’s customer base most likely to be at risk of 
incurring serious adverse health effects as a result of short-term exposure following a lead action 
level exceedance at the 90th percentile are those customers who receive their water through a lead 
service line. Customers who are found (via the water system’s service line inventory) to not be 
served by lead service lines have a much lower potential to experience adverse health effects as a 
result of levels of lead measured in water that spur an action level exceedance. The WIIN Act 
therefore does not require water systems to expedite a notice about an action level exceedance to 
these customers. While AMWA believes that the water system’s entire service population should 
be made aware of a 90th percentile exceedance following the conclusion of the monitoring period 
(or another time period EPA identifies after taking into account the seriousness of any potential 
adverse health effects to the general population), neither statutory nor public health objectives 
necessitate all customers to receive a notice about a 90th percentile lead action level exceedance 
at the same time as customers who do in fact receive their water through a lead service line. 
 
AMWA understands that there may be hesitation on the part of some water systems to divide 
their post-exceedance public notification in this manner, so the final rule should allow the option 
for a water system to distribute its notice to the entire service population, as the rule currently 
proposes. In fact, some water systems may find it preferable to simply utilize broadcast media to 
broadly deliver this notice to the public, and the final rule should not restrict them from doing so. 
But because ensuring compliance with other aspects of the proposed rule will require water 
systems to maintain databases of contact information for households with service lines made of 
lead and/or unknown materials, these databases could also be utilized to begin distribution of a 
required notification within 24 hours of a water system learning of a lead action level 
exceedance. This would quickly and directly get the information to the households where it is 
most needed, without alarming other customers with an expedited notice that may not be 
relevant. 
 
 
 
Find-and-Fix (Section 141.82(j)) 
 
Summary: 
 
• AMWA agrees with the proposed rule’s intent to encourage water systems to identify the 
cause when high levels of lead are detected at an individual tap sampled as part of 
required monitoring activities. 

13 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
• AMWA also agrees with the proposal’s limitation of Find-and-Fix requirements to only 
those samples taken pursuant to the monitoring program under Section 141.86 and not to 
other samples that may be voluntarily collected by water systems through customer-
requested drinking water lead testing programs. 
 
• AMWA objects to EPA’s requirement that all new water quality parameter testing sites 
identified under these provisions be permanently added to a water system’s catalog of 
sites. This is unnecessary and is not a constructive use of limited resources.  
 
• AMWA strongly objects to EPA’s suggestion that adjustments to a water system’s 
corrosion control treatment should be carried out based on a single sample that is above 
the action level. In some cases, an elevated level of lead discovered in an individual 
sample may often relate to lead coatings or other factors that are unique to the specific 
sampling site, and beyond the control of the water system. 
 
• Requiring a water system to make corrosion control changes due to only one or a small 
number of individual samples exceeding the action level could actually expose the public 
to elevated lead levels and corresponding public health risks and provide limited benefits. 
 
• Should EPA proceed with requiring corrosion control adjustments following a single 
sample exceedance, AMWA makes the following suggestions: 
 
o The final rule must include greater clarity about EPA’s vision for adjustments to 
“localized” corrosion control, as neither the rule nor the preamble define this term 
or explain how a water system would implement it. 
 
o AMWA questions whether “six months after the end of the monitoring period in 
which the site exceeded the action level” is enough time for a water system to 
make an informed and scientifically justified decision on changes to corrosion 
control treatment without the possibility of jeopardizing public health. 
 
o EPA should ensure that the proposed rule only requires a water system to make a 
single determination of whether adjustments to corrosion control treatment are 
necessary, following a round of required monitoring activities. EPA should 
further ensure that adequate time and resources are available to study and decide 
upon any adjustment to corrosion control treatment. As currently drafted, the 
proposed rule suggests that a water system would have to make a separate 
determination on potential corrosion control changes for each individual sample 
that detects lead in a home’s water above the action level. 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Comments: 
 
AMWA understands that the “Find-and-Fix” provision in Section 141.82(j) would go beyond the 
Lead and Copper Rule’s current requirements, which direct water systems to notify individual 
customers of the sampling results from their taps within 30 days. The proposed rule, in addition 
to requiring water systems to deliver a notification within 24 hours to individual customers 
whose water was found to have lead exceeding the action level, would also require water systems 
to take steps to identify and rectify underlying issues that may have contributed to elevated lead 
levels measured in an individual customer’s tap, and to determine whether system-wide 
corrosion control changes are necessary. AMWA generally agrees with EPA’s intent to 
encourage water systems to assist in uncovering the cause of elevated lead levels in individual 
homes, but has significant concerns regarding the agency’s proposal for water systems to 
consider changes to their corrosion control based solely on a small number of individual tap 
samples that exceed the action level. 
 
We also note that Section 141.82(j) would only require steps outlined in the Find-and-Fix 
procedure “when a tap sample site exceeds the lead action level under monitoring conducted 
under Section 141.86” (emphasis added). We interpret this to mean that Find-and-Fix 
requirements would not apply to any tap samples voluntarily collected by a water system outside 
of monitoring required under Section 141.86, but urge EPA to confirm this interpretation. If the 
Find-and-Fix process were to apply to all samples collected by a water system – both voluntarily 
and pursuant to monitoring requirements – it would create a strong disincentive for community 
water systems to perform voluntary sampling for customers. In the case of large water systems 
that may voluntarily collect samples from thousands of locations (as opposed to 100 or less 
samples collected pursuant to required monitoring), directing the water system to attempt to 
identify the cause of each and every individual high sampling result encountered would pose a 
tremendous burden, and would likely cause many large water systems to cease offering voluntary 
sampling to customers at all. We therefore encourage EPA to clearly reiterate that the Find-and-
Fix process would only apply to samples conducted pursuant to Section 141.86 monitoring. 
 
While AMWA appreciates EPA’s effort to develop the Find-and-Fix process, we believe 
components of the proposed requirements could lead to redundant analysis and reporting 
exercises. Further, we harbor strong concerns about requiring the consideration of corrosion 
control changes when a water system has not exceeded a 90th percentile threshold. 
 
 
Requirements of the proposed rule: 
 
Section 141.82(j) would require water systems to take a number of steps “when a tap sample site 
exceeds the lead action level under monitoring” conducted pursuant to Section 141.86. These 
steps include: 
 
• Sampling at a new water quality parameter site on the same size water main in the same 
pressure zone and located within one half mile of the original sampling location, within 

15 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
five days of receiving the original sampling results; 
 
• Collecting a follow-up sample at the original sampling location, within 30 days of 
receiving the sampling results; and 
 
• Evaluating the results of monitoring “to determine if either localized or centralized 
adjustment of the optimal corrosion control treatment … is necessary.” If a water system 
determines that changes to corrosion control are necessary, it would have to make this 
recommendation to the state “within six months after the end of the monitoring period in 
which the site[s] exceeded the action level.” 
 
 
Concerns with the proposed rule: 
 
AMWA has several concerns with the proposal. First, as written this complete process appears to 
be required each time that “a [singular] tap sample exceeds the lead action level.” This means 
that water systems would have to make repeated, separate determinations on whether changes to 
corrosion control treatments are necessary. For example, consider a water system that had five 
sites exceed the action level in a given round of testing. Not only would that system have to 
conduct five additional samples at new or nearby water quality parameter sites within five days, 
and at the five original sampling locations within 30 days, but it would also have to make five 
separate determinations of whether adjustments to optimal corrosion control treatments are 
necessary to address each case. Each of these five determinations would have to be submitted to 
the state, and then the water system would have to separately act on any state requirements for 
each. These determinations would come in addition to evaluations of corrosion control treatment 
that the proposed rule would require all community water systems to carry out every three-to-
five years as part of their sanitary surveys. This process would be redundant and could lead to 
conflicting recommendations regarding a community’s corrosion control treatment. 
 
Even more importantly, we do not believe it is appropriate to require a water system to consider 
or implement changes to its systemwide corrosion control treatment when its sampling results do 
not exceed a 90th percentile level -- which possibly indicates a widespread shortcoming in 
corrosion control effectiveness. Although AMWA reiterates its earlier request for additional 
information regarding EPA’s proposal to use a 90th percentile exceedance of the new trigger 
level, rather than the action level, as the point at which a system must study and re-optimize 
corrosion control, the association strongly believes that consideration of corrosion control 
changes at either of these 90th percentile figures is far more appropriate than requiring such 
consideration in response to a Find-and-Fix investigation of a small number of individual tap 
samples that exceed either level. 
 
As proposed, even a single tap sample result that exceeds the action level could prompt a water 
system to consider or implement systemwide corrosion control changes. This could prompt 
adjustments that have unintended consequences elsewhere in the distribution system and expose 
the public to elevated lead levels and corresponding public health issues. Simply put, corrosion 

16 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
control adjustments should only be made in response to data demonstrating that current corrosion 
control is deficient throughout the distribution system, and not in response to a small number of 
samples where other, household-specific factors may have influenced the results. 
 
We question the feasibility of requiring sampling at a “new water quality parameter site that is on 
the same size water main in the same pressure zone and located within a half mile of the location 
with the action level exceedance within 5 days of receiving the sample results.” It will take time 
for a water system to identify such an appropriate testing site, make contact with the property 
owner, and carry out the test. In particular, it may take much more than five days for a property 
owner to respond to a water system’s initial outreach and make their property available for 
testing. The five-day timeframe – from the point of obtaining the initial results to carrying out 
another test at another nearby location – may therefore be unrealistic. 
 
Additionally, the proposal seems to direct a water system to establish a new permanent water 
quality parameter testing site nearby to each sampling site that was found to exceed the action 
level of 0.015mg/L. “Step 1” as explained in paragraph (1) following the discovery of an 
individual sample that exceeds the action level simply states that a water system “shall sample at 
a new water quality parameter site that is on the same size water main in the same pressure zone 
and located within a half mile of” where the high sample was taken (emphasis added). Section 
141.87(g) of the proposed rule later states that this “new” water quality parameter site must be 
permanently added to the system’s catalog of water quality parameter testing sites pursuant to 
Section 141.82(j). This is problematic as water systems could end up with an abundance of new 
permanent water quality parameter testing sites simply because they are near a monitoring 
location where a single sample above 0.015mg/L was collected at some point in the past. Over 
time this would lead to an irrational, unwieldy, and unnecessary number of water quality 
parameter testing sites. AMWA does not believe that this is a practical or beneficial use of a 
water system’s limited resources. 
 
In terms of making decisions about changes to corrosion control treatment, identifying new or 
optimized corrosion control treatment often requires a study involving pipe loops or jar tests that 
can take several months to prepare, carry out, and analyze. We therefore question whether “six 
months after the end of the monitoring period in which the site exceeded the action level” is 
enough time for a water system to make an informed and scientifically justified decision on 
changes to corrosion control treatment.  
 
Finally, AMWA seeks greater clarity on what EPA means when it refers to “localized corrosion 
control treatment.” This term is not defined in the proposed rule or the preamble, yet water 
systems would be directed to explore it as an option in response to individual samples collected 
that test above the action level. While in theory a water system could potentially add small 
chemical feed stations in various locations throughout its distribution system to supplement 
phosphate levels in certain neighborhoods, in practice this would be extremely challenging to 
plan, implement, operate, and maintain. Failure to contain the “localized treatment” to its 
intended zone could result in variable water quality in surrounding areas that destabilizes lead 

17 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
coatings and results in lead releases. AMWA recommends that the proposed rule should focus on 
evaluations of possible system-wide corrosion control adjustments. 
AMWA’s suggested alternative approach: 
 
As an alternative, AMWA recommends that the Find-and-Fix portion of the final rule clearly 
articulate a process that follows these guidelines: 
 
• Each tap sample collected as part of monitoring conducted pursuant to Section 141.86 
that exceeds the lead action level should trigger one-time follow-up testing from the same 
sample site, and at a nearby site in the same water pressure zone. 
 
• For each individual tap sample collected as part of monitoring conducted pursuant to 
Section 141.86 that exceeds the lead action level, the water system should determine 
whether there is a remedy unique to that site, such as an aggressive flushing routine for 
the service line, replacement of premise plumbing or service lines, or flushing nearby 
portions of the distribution system. A water system should not be required to carry out 
any remedy that is beyond its control (such as the replacement of premise plumbing or 
the privately owned portion of a lead service line), the water system’s responsibilities 
under Find-and-Fix should end once any site-specific remedies are identified and shared 
with the property owners. 
 
Again, AMWA reiterates its objection to EPA’s proposal that could lead to adjustments to a 
water system’s corrosion control treatment based on a single sample that is above the action 
level. Instead, we believe that either an exceedance of the 90th percentile trigger level or 90th 
percentile action level should be the point at which a water system must consider adjustments to 
its corrosion control treatment. But if EPA nevertheless proceeds with the proposed requirement 
to consider corrosion control adjustments when the water system has not exceeded one of these 
90th percentile levels, AMWA has the following suggestions to make the requirement as 
workable as possible: 
 
• When a round of monitoring conducted pursuant to Section 141.86 discovers one or more 
individual tap samples that exceed the lead action level for which a remedy unique to the 
site is not identified, a water system should be required to conduct an analysis of the 
sampling results to identify any patterns that could indicate a deficiency in the system’s 
corrosion control treatment. 
 
• This analysis should include data points that reflect voluntary lead sampling conducted 
by the water system, in addition to data collected through required monitoring. 
 
• Based on this analysis, the water system should be given adequate time – at least one year 
after the conclusion of the monitoring period – to make a single determination of whether 
there is a deficiency in the system’s corrosion control treatment that requires adjustment. 
 

18 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
• If a corrosion control adjustment is determined to be necessary, the system shall submit 
the recommendation to the state. If a state approves the water system’s recommendation – 
or specifies an alternative approach – it should be implemented on a timeline mutually 
agreed to by the state and the water system. 
 
AMWA believes the above-stated approach is consistent with the framework of the proposed 
rule, but streamlines the process by having a water system first attempt to identify property-
specific factors that could cause elevated lead levels, before considering adjustments to corrosion 
control treatment. Only if property-specific fixes cannot be identified would a water system have 
to dialogue with the state about potential broader corrosion control changes. Just as importantly, 
AMWA’s suggestion eliminates the uncertainty in the current proposal that could force water 
systems to repeatedly consider an overlapping series of changes to corrosion control practices for 
each sampling site found to have an elevated lead level, but recognizes that all proposed 
corrosion control adjustments should be carefully studied, vetted, and communicated to 
customers prior to implementation.  
 
 
 
Lead service line inventory and replacement requirements (Section 
141.84) 
 
Summary: 
 
• Lead Service Line Inventories: 
 
o AMWA supports EPA’s goal for lead service line inventories and appreciates the 
flexibility the agency has included by allowing for a wide variety of informational 
resources to create the inventories. 
 
o AMWA urges EPA to recognize that some water systems are very likely to have 
no lead service lines in their distribution networks, even if they have a number of 
lines of unknown composition. The rule should attempt to reduce burdens for 
these systems where possible. 
 
o AMWA supports EPA’s alternative for including specific addresses with lead 
service lines rather than location identifiers and supports the requirement for 
water systems serving greater than 100,000 persons to make their inventories 
available online. 
 
• Lead Service Line Replacement: 
 
o AMWA supports EPA’s objectives for full lead service line replacement (not 
partial) and agree that the end goal should be for the entire lead service line to be 

19 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
removed. We also appreciate EPA’s understanding that partial lead service line 
replacements will, at times, be necessary when doing emergency repairs, routine 
maintenance, and capital improvement projects if the customer is unable or 
unwilling to replace their portion of the service line. 
 
o AMWA is supportive of water systems developing lead service line replacement 
plans. 
 
o AMWA has concerns that the provisions within the proposed rule regarding lead 
service line replacement are not realistic and fail to recognize the significant 
limitations created by the most common scenario of a shared ownership of the 
service lines. 
 
o AMWA appreciates and supports EPA’s decision that water systems will not be 
expected to cover the costs of replacing the customer’s portion of a lead service 
line. 
 
o EPA should consider using a “rolling average” over multiple years to determine a 
water system’s compliance with the mandated three percent target or replacement 
goal, rather than determining compliance on an annual basis. 
 
• Customer-initiated lead service line replacement: 
 
o AMWA supports empowering homeowners to initiate full lead service line 
replacements. 
 
o The proposed 45-day timeline for a water system to replace the public portion of a 
lead service line following a customer’s notification of intent to replace the 
privately owned portion of a lead service line may not be achievable for water 
systems because of factors such as work crew availability, seasonal work 
limitations, and long-term infrastructure planning. 
 
o The final rule should promote a collaborative process through which customers 
and water systems can work together to replace lead service lines on a mutually 
agreeable schedule that is unencumbered by artificial deadlines. 
 
 
Lead service line inventories 
 
AMWA supports EPA’s goal for lead service line inventories and agree that this is a crucial step 
for informing the public as to the extent and scope of the lead service lines within their 
community. Information on lead service lines is also important to water systems in order to target 
those areas for potential lead service line removal.   
 

20 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
AMWA applauds the flexibility EPA has included within this proposal regarding inventories. 
AMWA agrees with the agency’s understanding that many systems do not have complete records 
and would struggle to quickly obtain this data. With this in mind, the proposed rule would 
provide water systems with three years, after the final rule date, to complete these inventories, 
and would allow water systems to initially meet this requirement by completing a records search.  
 
Within this section of the rule, EPA requires water systems to review sources of information 
including:  
 
• Plumbing codes, permits, and records in the files of the building department(s) which 
indicate the service line materials used to connect water system- and customer-owned 
structures to the distribution system; 
• Water system records, including distribution system maps and drawings, historical 
records on each service connection, meter installation records, historical capital 
improvement or master plans, and standard operating procedures;  
• Inspections and records of the distribution system that indicate the material composition 
of the service connections that connect a structure to the distribution system; and  
• Any resource required by the State to assess service line materials for structures built 
prior to 1989.  
AMWA supports and appreciates EPA’s allowance of the above examples of records for 
determining the identity of the material used for service lines. This is especially important for 
lines listed as “unknown” as it allows water systems to reasonably infer the material of a given 
service line based on reliable data about similar homes and/or structures built around the same 
time. In particular, we applaud the proposed rule’s flexibility in allowing states to identify (in the 
case of structures built prior to 1989) additional resources that water systems may draw upon to 
identify the composition of service lines. Some water systems, for example, have reported 
success in identifying service line materials through water quality tests conducted at particular 
properties. While such methods may not be practical in every situation, we appreciate that the 
proposed rule would give states the ability to allow them when appropriate. 
 
AMWA understands EPA's decision to classify unknown service lines as lead until determined to 
be otherwise so that a water system may have a “complete” inventory even if it lacks sufficient 
records for every service line within its distribution system. AMWA appreciates that EPA is not 
proposing to require water systems to identify service lines outside of their normal operations 
and agrees with EPA’s assessment in the preamble that “excavating test pits can be expensive 
and may disturb lines, resulting in lead release” (page 61696). AMWA supports water systems 
that take the initiative to go beyond these parameters in order to more quickly identify the 
unknown lines within their distribution system but is appreciative of EPA’s understanding that 
this will not be feasible for every water system.  
 
 
 
 

21 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Consideration of systems unlikely to have lead service lines: 
 
We believe the rule should go further to recognize that some systems very likely do not have any 
lead service lines in their distribution networks, even if their inventory includes a number of lines 
of unknown composition. For example, one AMWA member in North Carolina has never found 
a lead service line in its distribution system and has no evidence to indicate that lead service lines 
were ever present in the past. However, under the proposal, if the system’s inventory was not 
able to positively identify the composition of every individual line, those remaining unknown 
lines would all be classified as lead, and would be the basis of calculations to develop this 
system’s replacement rate. Using these unknown lines to calculate a lead service line 
replacement rate, in the absence of any present or historical evidence suggesting lead in the 
system, is illogical. 
 
In such limited circumstances, AMWA believes the rule should allow water systems to certify to 
the state that they do not currently have, and are never believed to have had, lead service lines 
anywhere in the distribution system. Upon approval by the state, these water systems should be 
allowed to draw a reasonable conclusion that lead is not currently present among their service 
lines of unknown composition, and the system’s replacement rate should be calculated as if there 
is no lead currently present. However, if subsequent evidence demonstrates the presence of lead 
currently or in the past, all of the water system's unknown service lines should be treated as lead 
for the purposes of calculating the system’s replacement rate. 
 
 
Identification of privately owned service lines: 
 
AMWA believes that the final rule must also recognize that water systems will be significantly 
limited in their ability to identify the composition of privately owned portions of service lines. In 
some cases, the water system will be completely dependent upon individual property owners’ 
willingness to cooperate with requests to inspect the line or otherwise document what it is made 
of. Should any individual property owner not agree to this review, the water system would have 
to classify the privately owned portion of the line as an “unknown” material and include it within 
the system’s lead service line inventory and replacement calculations. This would subsequently 
trigger additional reporting requirements for water systems under other sections of the rule. 
 
AMWA agrees that a privately owned portion of a service line whose composition is unable to 
be determined due to lack of cooperation or response by the property owner, should be 
considered “unknown” in the water system’s inventory. However, AMWA believes this line 
should be excluded from calculations used to develop system’s lead service line replacement 
goals. This scenario recognizes that, if the lack of property owner cooperation is the only 
impediment to identifying the composition of the line, no reasonable assumption can be made 
about what the line is made of, and so including the line in the system’s replacement calculations 
could artificially inflate the system’s required three percent replacement rate, in the event of an 
action level exceedance.  
 

22 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
AMWA appreciates and agrees with EPA’s decision to allow a service line of unknown material 
to be removed from the number of lead service lines required to be replaced each year should the 
water system exceed the action level, if the service line is determined or reasonably inferred to 
be non-lead.  
 
 
Treatment of galvanized lines: 
 
As stated in our discussion of the proposed definition of a “lead service line,” AMWA has 
concerns with EPA’s inclusion of galvanized lines that ever were downstream of a lead service 
line. This would seemingly mandate that water systems without records dating back to the 
original installation of a galvanized line would be required to treat the line as lead and include 
the service line within the water system’s replacement schedule and goals. AMWA requests that 
EPA allow water systems to utilize data such as building records and plumbing permits 
pertaining to the neighborhood surrounding the line in question to draw a reasonable conclusion 
about the history of a given service line upstream of a galvanized line. For example, if a 
neighborhood was constructed at a date after a community or water system is known to have 
ceased installation of lead service lines, but the water system does not have specific records 
detailing the material that was upstream of galvanized lines in the neighborhood at the time of 
installation, the water system should be allowed to draw a reasonable conclusion that those 
upstream lines are not likely to be lead. In cases where a water system makes such a good faith 
determination, AMWA suggests allowing the water system to remove this galvanized line from 
its lead service line inventory. If the water system subsequently obtains new information 
indicating that the galvanized line had in fact previously been downstream of a lead service line, 
then the line shall be restored to the system's lead service line inventory. 
 
 
Public identification of homes with lead service lines: 
 
EPA’s proposal seeks comment on whether publicly accessible lead service line inventories 
pertaining to customer-owned portions should include only a “location identifier” such as a street 
or intersection, as opposed to an exact street address. In most cases, AMWA supports including 
exact street addresses for customer-owned portions of lead service lines within publicly 
accessible inventories. It is important to consider that the rule proposes to include both the public 
and privately owned side of a lead service line within the definition of the term, and individuals 
will incur the same health effects whether lead that enters their drinking water does so via the 
public or privately owned portion of the service line connecting their home to the water main. A 
primary purpose of the publicly available inventory is to inform both current and potential 
homeowners and tenants about the risks associated with having a lead service line, and omitting 
specific addresses from this dataset would leave potential homeowners and tenants unable to 
make fully informed decisions about whether to reside in that property. Conversely, including 
the specific address data in the publicly available information would encourage homeowners and 
landlords to take action to address their privately owned lead service line, particularly before 

23 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
putting their home up for rent or sale. Over time, this will prod progress toward the larger 
objective of replacing lead service lines nationwide. 
 
When considering the publication of individual addresses within lead service line inventories, it 
is important to note that a service line of unknown material will be classified as “unknown” in 
the inventory, even though the water system would be required to count that unknown line as 
lead for the purposes of calculating its service line replacement rate. So, there is little risk that a 
property served by a service line of unknown material – which in reality is not lead – would be 
publicly misidentified in the inventory as being served by lead. 
 
AMWA understands that including this information about privately owned portions of lead 
service lines in the publicly available inventory may raise privacy concerns. However, public 
real estate databases presently include a wealth of information about the characteristics of private 
homes, such as the square footage, number of bedrooms and bathrooms, whether a basement is 
finished, and roofing and siding materials. Moreover, federal law requires home sellers to 
disclose the known presence of lead paint in the home prior to the sale. If a water system has 
information about the presence of lead in the privately owned portion of a property’s service line, 
making it available alongside information about the materials on the publicly owned side of the 
service line is consistent with this other publicly available information. 
 
AMWA does recognize that a public disclosure of a lead service line may make it more difficult 
to sell or rent certain properties. But we do not believe that the sale or rental of a home – 
particularly to a new owner or tenant who may have small children – should be facilitated 
through the suppression of information that could affect the health of the new owner or tenant. 
Other sections of the proposed rule provide new mechanisms to enable individual homeowners 
to work with water systems to replace lead service lines, so AMWA would encourage 
homeowners concerned about the public disclosure of their lead service line to pursue this 
replacement opportunity. AMWA also supports EPA’s requirement for water systems serving 
greater than 100,000 persons making their inventories available online. Making this information 
easily accessible helps educate the public and increase transparency. 
 
We are aware that some states have laws that may prohibit water systems and other 
governmental entities from publicly disclosing the addresses of their customers. For example, a 
water system in Colorado that publishes an inventory that allows individuals to look up customer 
addresses could potentially be in violation of the Colorado Open Records Act. In situations 
where the disclosure of specific street addresses could violate similar state or local laws, the rule 
should give the state agency the option to waive the street address publication requirement and 
allow water systems to use location identifiers as an alternative. 
 
 
Lead service line replacement 
 
AMWA supports EPA’s objectives for full lead service line replacement (not partial) and agree 
that the end goal should be for the entire lead service line to be removed. AMWA appreciates 

24 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
EPA’s acknowledgement of situations where a partial lead service line replacement would be 
unavoidable. In general, AMWA supports avoiding partial replacements and agrees with the 
Science Advisory Board’s assertation that partial replacements “have not been shown to reliably 
reduce drinking water lead levels and may even increase lead exposure in the short-term” (page 
61697). However, emergency repairs, routine maintenance, and normal capital improvement 
work should not be impeded due to customers being unwilling or unable to replace their portions 
of the service line.   
 
 
Replacement plan guidelines: 
 
AMWA is supportive of water systems developing lead service line replacement plans.  
However, AMWA is concerned that the proposal could allow states to impose a goal 
replacement rate in the event of a trigger level exceedance that is greater than the three percent 
annual replacement rate that would apply in the event of an action level exceedance. Some 
individual water systems may wish to develop lead service line replacement plans that set targets 
above the three percent threshold, but the final rule should specify that a state may not require a 
replacement plan to include a goal replacement rate that exceeds the three percent target of the 
action level replacement rate. 
 
 
Paying for private lead service line replacement: 
 
AMWA supports the component of the proposed rule specifying that water systems will not be 
expected to cover the costs of replacing the customer’s portion of a lead service line. As 
previously discussed, many water systems are prohibited by state law or local ordinance from 
using ratepayer dollars to carry out an infrastructure project that benefits a particular private 
party, so these systems would be unable to comply with a federal mandate requiring them to fund 
the replacement of privately owned portions of lead service lines. However, water systems 
generally may offer to arrange for the replacement of privately owned lead service lines, as long 
as the customer ultimately covers the cost. In these cases, the water system may offer customers 
extended repayment plans or other financing aids to reduce the customer’s burden. Additionally, 
through Section 2105 of the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation (WIIN) Act of 
2016 (P.L. 114-322) Congress authorized grant funding that may be used by water systems for 
“providing assistance to low-income homeowners to replace lead service lines.” Through fiscal 
year 2020 Congress has appropriated nearly $45 million for these grants, so AMWA hopes that 
EPA will soon begin seeking applications for these funds so communities can begin to offer this 
important assistance to their low-income ratepayers. 
 
 
Inability to achieve replacement rate or goals: 
 
AMWA has concerns with water systems being able to meet both the replacement goals for 
passing the trigger level and the three percent mandated by triggering the action level. AMWA 

25 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
requests that EPA include language stating that there may be scenarios in which a water system 
may not be able to meet the goal or mandated replacement level for reasons completely beyond 
the system’s control. For example, because the entire – public and private – lead service line 
must be replaced to count toward the replacement mandate following an action level exceedance, 
in some circumstances a water system would be completely reliant on a customer to act to 
replace their private side in order for the replacement to count. In particular, customers who may 
be unable to afford replacing their portion of the service line or who may choose to not have their 
side replaced regardless of cost would prevent water systems from achieving their replacement 
goals or mandates. AMWA would also like to highlight that even water systems which may be 
able to cover the cost of replacement may still struggle getting buy-in from all customers as some 
will still choose to forgo replacement.  
 
 
Use of rolling average when determining replacement compliance: 
 
AMWA recommends that EPA consider using a “rolling average” for determining a water 
system’s compliance with the mandated three percent target or replacement goal. It is likely that 
a water system will have more success finding customers who will agree to pay for the 
replacement of their portion of the service line during the water system’s initial outreach efforts. 
As the water system’s replacement program continues, the pool of willing customers will likely 
diminish as the water system goes through subsequent rounds of outreach to customers who have 
previously chosen to forgo replacement. A scenario which may occur could see a water system 
replacing five percent of their lines the first few years followed by a significant drop to one or 
two percent in its final years as the system struggles to find participants.  
 
Allowing for a rolling average will ensure that water systems are given credit for their previous 
accomplishments and are provided flexibility for the difficulties which may arise through no 
fault of the system. Allowing for this flexibility could lead to the replacement of lead service 
lines at a faster rate, because a water system would know that any additional lines beyond three 
percent replaced in one year would still count toward its replacement mandate in future years 
(when various circumstances could cause a system to fall short of the three percent target). In 
other words, if a rolling average were not taken into account, a water system would have no 
incentive, from a regulatory compliance standpoint, to keep replacing lines in a single year after 
reaching the three percent figure. The rolling average would allow the system to focus on 
removing the greatest number of lines feasible, regardless of how many lead service lines have 
already been replaced in a given year. 
 
AMWA also suggests that EPA include criteria for determining when a water system has made a 
good faith effort to replace the required percentage of lead service lines but was unable to do so 
due to factors outside of the water system’s control. In these circumstances, water systems 
should not be considered to have violated their replacement mandate, particularly if the mandate 
would have been achieved had each customer who declined to replace a private lead service line 
actually done so. As part of this provision, EPA should define what type of outreach to a 

26 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
customer is sufficient to demonstrate that the water system made a good faith effort to encourage 
replacement of the private lead service line.  
 
As an example to highlight the complexities of these mandates, one AMWA member reports that 
it no longer has any lead service lines on the public side and therefore is entirely dependent on 
customers agreeing to pay for and schedule the replacement of their portion of the service line. 
This could make achieving a three percent replacement rate, or similar replacement goal, each 
year increasingly difficult as a water system’s replacement program progresses. Because the 
water system would be limited to working with a shrinking pool of customers – many of whom 
that have declined earlier offers to coordinate the replacement of their lead service line – it will 
become progressively challenging for a water system to convince enough of these remaining 
customers to agree to private side replacement in a given year. Allowing for flexibility, a rolling 
average, and a well-defined threshold for when a water system has made a good faith effort will 
ensure that water systems are not considered out of compliance for circumstances beyond their 
control.   
 
 
Customer-initiated lead service line replacement 
 
AMWA applauds provisions in the proposed rule that would allow individual homeowners to 
request a water system to replace the publicly owned portion of a lead service line connecting to 
their property following, or in conjunction with, the customer-initiated replacement of the private 
portion of that same service line. This process will empower individual customers to compel 
replacement of the entire service line serving their home – provided they are willing to finance 
the cost of replacing the privately owned portion of the line (though in some circumstances the 
water system may be able to assist with covering this cost as well). 
 
 
Notification of a customer’s intent to replace private lead service line: 
 
AMWA has serious reservations about the proposal’s stated process for steps that a water system 
must follow when notified of a customer’s intent to replace his or her portion of a lead service 
line. According to Section 141.84(d)(3) of the proposal (emphasis added): 
 
When a water system is notified by the customer that he or she intends to replace the 
customer portion of the lead service line the water system has 45 days from the day of 
their notification to conduct the replacement of the system-owned portion. 
 
AMWA believes it is misguided to set a timetable for replacement of a publicly owned portion of 
a lead service line based upon the date that a customer notifies the water system of his or her 
plans to replace their privately owned portion. A customer’s mere statement of intent has no 
bearing upon the date on which the privately owned portion of the service line might actually be 
replaced, and does not necessarily indicate that such work may be imminent or ever carried out. 
Conceivably, a customer could notify a water system of a vague intent to replace the private 

27 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
portion of the service line at an undetermined date in the future. Or a customer could submit this 
notification to the water system and subsequently not follow through with the private-side 
replacement. In either case, the clock for the public-side replacement would begin ticking on the 
day that the customer provided the initial notification, thus requiring the water system to 
complete replacement of the public-side portion within 45 days. This could lead to situations 
where a water system is required to carry out a partial lead service line replacement, either 
because the customer did not follow through with the private-side replacement, or failed to 
schedule it within the inflexible 45 day window offered to the water system. Such an outcome 
would clearly run counter to the intent of the rule. 
 
Should any deadline for public-side lead service line replacement be included in the final rule, at 
minimum it should specify that the window within which the public line must be replaced shall 
not begin until the customer demonstrates to the water system that he or she has obtained a 
plumbing permit to allow replacement of the private side of the lead service line to proceed. 
 
But even with such a requirement, forcing the public-side replacement to be completed on an 
arbitrary timeline would not be ideal for a number of reasons. AMWA does agree, as is proposed 
in the rule, that water systems should make a good faith effort to coordinate simultaneous 
replacement of both the public and privately owned portions of a service line following a 
notification of intent by the customer. AMWA therefore recommends that the final rule promote 
a collaborative process for customer-initiated service line replacements that is based upon this 
concept. We suggest the following: 
 
1. When a customer notifies a water system of his or her intent to replace the privately 
owned portion of a lead service line, the water system should offer to arrange 
replacement of both the public and privately owned portions of the lead service line 
(though the customer may be required to pay for costs associated with the private-side 
replacement). If the customer agrees to coordinated replacement arranged by the water 
system, the water system shall work with the customer to identify a mutually agreeable 
work date that is as early as practicable based upon factors such as seasonal 
considerations, work crew availability, and long-term infrastructure planning. 
 
2. When a customer notifies a water system of his or her intent to replace the privately 
owned portion of a lead service line, but rejects the water system’s offer to coordinate 
work to replace both the public and privately owned portions of the lead service line, the 
water system shall attempt to ascertain the date on which the customer plans to replace 
the privately owned portion. 
 
a. If the customer fails or refuses to provide such date, the customer shall not be 
considered to have provided a valid notification that triggers action by the water 
system under the rule. No further action should be required by the water system. 
 
b. If the customer does provide an estimated private-side replacement date that is in 
the future, the water system shall subsequently contact the customer on or about 

28 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
that date to verify that the planned private-side replacement has in fact occurred. 
 
i. If the customer fails or refuses, in response to this query from the water 
system, to confirm replacement of the private-side line, then the customer 
shall not be considered to have provided a valid notification that triggers 
action by the water system under the rule. No further action should be 
required by the water system. 
 
ii. If the customer confirms replacement of the private-side line to the water 
system, then the water system should proceed to plan replacement of the 
publicly owned portion of the service line as if the customer had notified 
the water system of his or her replacement of the private-side line on the 
date of such replacement. 
 
The final rule should require a water system to maintain records that log its interactions with 
customers related to the coordinated replacement of lead service lines, and these records should 
be made available upon request to the state. Water systems should not be required to separately 
report on each interaction with a customer to the state. 
 
 
Notification that a customer has already replaced the private lead service line: 
 
AMWA has similar concerns about language in the proposed rule governing the process a water 
system would follow when notified by a customer that he or she had previously (within the past 
three months) replaced the privately owned portion of their lead service line. Section 
141.84(d)(4) of the proposed rule states: 
 
When a water system is notified by the customer that he or she has replaced the 
customer-owned portion and that replacement has occurred within the previous three 
months, the water system must replace its portion within 45 days of the date of their 
notification. 
 
AMWA recommends replacing the proposed rule’s 45-day deadline for public-side replacement 
by the water system with a more flexible timeline that recognizes the many variables that could 
come into play to affect the feasibility of replacement projects. For example, consider a customer 
that independently replaces the private-side portion of his or her lead service line on October 1. 
The customer could then notify the water system of this replacement on December 31 – just 
within the three-month window that triggers mandatory public-side replacement under the 
proposed rule. Then, under the proposed rule, the water system would be required to complete 
the public-side replacement of that lead service line within 45 days of receiving that notification, 
which would put the deadline in mid-February. This would cause the disturbance of lead within 
the public side of the service line four-and-a-half months after the customer originally replaced 
his or her portion of the service line, and would require the water system to carry out the 
replacement in the middle of winter when such work may not be feasible in some climates. 

29 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Rhode Island’s Providence Water, for example, is under a city mandated moratorium on routine 
service line work between December and March each winter due to the lack of availability of 
paving materials during these months. The hard timelines in the proposed rule fail to account for 
these practical considerations. 
 
AMWA suggests a simpler and more workable alternative. If a customer notifies a water system 
that he or she replaced the privately owned portion of a lead service line within the previous 
three months, then the water system shall determine whether, based upon factors such as 
seasonal considerations, work crew availability, and long-term infrastructure planning, it would 
be feasible to replace the publicly owned portion of that lead service line within three months of 
the date on which the customer replaced their privately owned side (This three-month timeframe 
is based upon the reasoning explained on page 61698 of the preamble to the proposed rule, 
which suggests that public-side service line replacements that occur more than three months after 
a private-side replacement should not be prioritized “because the elevated lead levels associated 
with partial LSLR would be expected to have subdued”). 
 
1. If the water system determines that replacement of the publicly owned portion within 
three months of such date is feasible, then the replacement shall be carried out as early as 
practicable. 
 
2. If the water system determines that replacement of the publicly owned portion within 
three months of such date is not feasible, then the water system shall still replace the 
publicly owned portion if requested to do so by the customer. But the water system may 
assign this replacement a lower priority than other replacement projects that have been or 
may be scheduled to occur: 
 
a. In conjunction with a customer’s notification of intent to replace his or her 
privately owned lead service line, or 
 
b. Within three months following a customer’s independent replacement of a 
privately owned lead service line. 
 
AMWA proposes to assign a lower priority to these replacement projects because it is preferable 
for customers and water systems to work together to replace entire service lines concurrently, or 
at minimum replace the public side within three months of replacement of the private side so as 
not to re-disturb lead in the line. Projects that cannot be completed within this three-month 
timeframe should not take precedence over other replacement projects on which the water 
system may be coordinating other customers elsewhere in the community. 
 
As was recommended above, AMWA believes that the final rule should require a water system 
to maintain records that log its interactions with customers who have reported that they have 
replaced their privately owned portion of their lead service line, and these records should be 
made available upon request to the state. 
 

30 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
In summary, AMWA believes it is important for customers and water systems to work 
cooperatively to replace lead service lines, and customers should have the ability to initiate the 
complete replacement of lead service lines supplying water to their homes – provided they are 
willing to cover any necessary costs associated with the private-side replacement. Our 
recommendations are intended to build on the framework in EPA’s proposed rule to ensure a 
system of customer-initiated replacements is workable for all parties involved. 
 
 
 
Filter requirements (Sections 141.84 and 141.86) 
 
Summary: 
 
• AMWA has significant concerns with EPA’s proposed mandates for water systems to 
provide pitcher filters and three months’ worth of filter cartridges to customers whenever 
work is carried out on the public or private portion of a lead service line. 
 
• The proposed rule’s definition of “pitcher filter” in Section 141.2 explains that a 
qualifying filter must be “certified to remove lead in accordance with applicable 
standards established by the American National Standards Institute [ANSI].” However, 
ANSI itself does not “establish” standards, so this could lead to confusion about which 
filters do in fact comply with the definition. 
 
• AMWA has concerns about the availability of sufficient supplies of certified filters to 
meet EPA’s many mandates within the proposed rule.  
 
• AMWA asks that EPA grant state agencies the ability to allow water systems to offer 
customers other options, in addition to pitcher filters, to address lead issues in the near 
term. Because of the limited supply and limited capacity of pitcher filters, they may not 
be the best option for some households, and some water systems may therefore wish to 
provide customers with other alternatives. 
 
• AMWA requests that EPA expand on the agency’s reasoning for requiring water systems 
to provide pitcher filters and cartridges when “disturbing” lead service lines through 
normal maintenance and operational activities such as meter replacement and requests 
that the agency provide data showing the cause for concern for lead exposure via these 
activities and why an aggressive flushing regime is insufficient to address these concerns. 
 
• AMWA asks EPA to clearly articulate what it envisions as an acceptable “pitcher filter 
tracking and maintenance system.” 
 
 
 

31 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Comments: 
 
AMWA understands and is appreciative of the public health protection goals that EPA is 
attempting to achieve through providing pitcher filters to customers in conjunction with lead 
service line replacement work or disturbances. However, we have significant concerns about the 
efficacy of mandates for water systems to provide these filters under other varying 
circumstances. When considering these scenarios, EPA should be cognizant of the fact that it is 
extremely challenging for a water system to persuade customers to use pitcher filters correctly, 
even when provided with the appropriate instructions and resources. In many cases, it may be 
preferable for water systems to direct customers to carry out an aggressive flushing regime, both 
because those directions may be easier for many customers to follow, and because flushing could 
achieve similar results to filter usage. 
 
 
Uncertainty about the definition of “pitcher filter”: 
 
Secondly, we believe the proposed rule’s Section 141.2 definition of “pitcher filter” is unclear, 
specifically in reference to which filters are properly “certified” to remove lead from drinking 
water. The proposed rule’s definition of “pitcher filter” is as follows: 
 
Pitcher filter means the filtration insert for water pitchers that removes lead in drinking 
water, and that is certified to remove lead in accordance with applicable standards 
established by the American National Standards Institute. 
 
We question the meaning of the proposed definition’s reference to applicable standards 
“established” by ANSI. According to its website, ANSI “facilitates the development of American 
National Standards (ANS) by accrediting the procedures of standards developing 
organizations.”2 In turn, those accredited organizations (such as NSF International and the Water 
Quality Association) “work cooperatively to develop voluntary national consensus standards.”  
 
Another section of ANSI’s website states plainly that the organization “itself does not develop 
standards.”3 The proposed rule’s reference to “applicable standards established by” ANSI is 
therefore unclear at best and inaccurate at worst, and invites questions about the universe of 
filters that are covered by the definition. AMWA recommends that the definition be amended to 
read as follows: 
 
Pitcher filter means the filtration insert for water pitchers that removes lead in drinking 
water, and that is certified to remove lead in accordance with applicable standards 
established by an organization accredited for that purpose by the American National 
Standards Institute or any other accrediting body deemed appropriate by the 
Administrator. 
 
 
2 https://www.ansi.org/standards_activities/domestic_programs/overview?menuid=3 
3 https://www.ansi.org/about_ansi/faqs/faqs 

32 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
AMWA’s proposed definition would make clear that a qualifying pitcher filter could be certified 
to any relevant standard established by a standard-setting body accredited by ANSI, rather than 
ANSI itself, thus eliminating a potential source of confusion. Moreover, AMWA’s definition 
would give EPA the authority to recognize lead removal standards developed by a body whose 
accreditation comes from an appropriate organization other than ANSI. This would instill 
flexibility within the definition, should ANSI ever be renamed or cease to exist, and is consistent 
with the administrative requirements of the National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act 
of 1995, as discussed in Section VIII(J) of the preamble (page 61740). Here, EPA notes that the 
agency’s “approved monitoring and sampling protocols generally include voluntary consensus 
standards developed by agencies such as [ANSI] and other such bodies wherever EPA deems 
these methodologies appropriate for compliance monitoring” (emphasis added). 
 
 
Availability of sufficient quantities of filters: 
 
Even under a “pitcher filter” definition that clarifies the scope of organizations that may certify 
drinking water filters appropriate for the removal of lead, AMWA has serious questions about 
whether water systems will be able to procure sufficient quantities of certified filters when 
necessary – particularly on short notice. For example, in April of 2016 an AMWA member in 
Kentucky determined that approximately 500 lead-removing pitcher filters were needed based on 
the number of water main projects that were planned and which could be anticipated to 
potentially involve the replacement of a lead service line. The water system ordered the pitchers 
along with two replacement cartridges for each, but could only find one supplier able to meet this 
volume. Ultimately, it took two months for the water system to receive the order. 
 
EPA should provide flexibility within the rule to account for these possible difficulties in 
obtaining sufficient quantities of certified filters and refrain from declaring water systems out of 
compliance for factors outside of their control. One way to do this would be to grant state 
agencies the authority to allow water systems to make alternative arrangements if ample 
quantities of such certified pitcher filters are not readily available when needed. Alternative 
arrangements could include providing customers with other types of filters that are certified to be 
effective at removing lead from drinking water or instructing customers to complete an 
aggressive flushing regime when undertaking activities other than lead service line replacement. 
In seeking an alternative arrangement, a water system could be required to demonstrate to the 
state agency that it is unable to procure the number of certified filters that are needed, and to 
suggest an alternative approach. 
 
AMWA has further concerns with the capacity of pitcher filters to meet the drinking water needs 
of a customer’s household. Currently, the largest pitcher filter certified by NSF International is 
11-cups. EPA should allow for variations in acceptable alternatives that would mitigate lead 
issues, such as large “blue bottle” dispensers or other bottled water, for homes that have needs 
beyond what is capable using a pitcher filter. AMWA suggests that EPA allow state agencies to 
determine these acceptable alternatives.   
 

33 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Provision of filters following the disturbance of lead service lines: 
 
AMWA has significant concerns with the subsection (e)(5)(ii) of Section 141.85, which would 
require water systems to provide pitcher filters and three months of replacement cartridges to 
customers served by a lead service line following “the replacement of the water meter or 
gooseneck, pigtail, or connector.” As stated above, there are already concerns with availability of 
sufficient inventories of certified filters. Expanding the mandates for water systems to provide 
filters for these normal operational and maintenance activities would exacerbate this issue 
further. Water meter replacement, for example, typically consists only of shutting off water for a 
short time and replacing the meter without any cutting of the pipe itself. That same AMWA 
member in Kentucky referenced above changes approximately 10,000 meters, around 12 percent 
of the total number of meters in its system, every year. A requirement to provide pitcher filters 
and three months of replacement cartridges after every meter replacement would amount to a 
significant cost burden on this water system even if it were able to procure a sufficient number of 
filters and cartridges. 
 
AMWA requests that EPA provide data on the exposure of dissolved or particulate lead when 
“disturbing” lead service lines through these normal operational and maintenance activities and 
further expand on the agency’s reasoning for requiring water systems to provide pitcher filters to 
their customers under these circumstances. As these activities do not involve any cutting of the 
pipe, AMWA is not aware of a cause for concern for a significant increase in lead exposure that 
could not be alleviated by providing homeowners with clear instructions to properly execute the 
flushing of their pipes. If water systems are required to provide filters under these circumstances 
it would significantly increase their resource needs. 
 
Finally, AMWA believes that EPA must define a “pitcher filter tracking and maintenance 
system” under the proposed rule. Each lead service line replacement plan completed pursuant to 
Section 141.84(b) of the proposed rule would have to include such a system, but neither the 
proposed rule nor the preamble offers any insight as to what precisely constitutes an acceptable 
system. AMWA therefore requests that EPA provide guidance which clearly states what the 
agency envisions to be a proper pitcher filter tracking and maintenance system, and articulate a 
system that is minimally burdensome on water systems. 
 
 
 
Public education and supplemental monitoring requirements (Section 
141.85) 
 
Summary: 
 
• AMWA agrees that individual household tap sample results that exceed the lead action 
level should be shared with the home’s occupants in an expedited manner but believes 

34 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
that 24 hours after learning of the results is unnecessarily restrictive. Two business days 
is more workable for several reasons. 
 
• When an individual home’s tap sampling results do not exceed the lead action level, we 
agree with EPA that an urgent delivery of the results is not necessary. The proposed 
requirement to notify the customer within 30 days of receiving results that do not indicate 
an exceedance – consistent with the timeframe required in the current rule – is 
appropriate.   
 
 
Comments: 
 
AMWA appreciates that the proposed rule makes great strides in ensuring timely public 
notification of testing results that indicate elevated levels of lead in the system, but we would 
like to share our feedback and recommendations on several aspects of the proposal.  
 
 
Section 141.85(d)(2)(ii): 24-hour notification of an individual household when a sample 
collected from the household exceeds the action level: 
 
AMWA agrees that water systems should notify the occupants of a household whose tap sample 
results exceed the lead action level of 0.015 mg/L in an expedited manner. Furthermore, it is 
appropriate for subsection (d)(4)(ii) to require this targeted notice be delivered to an individual 
household by phone, electronic means, or another method approved by the state. Because the 
water system will have had to coordinate with the occupants of that household to arrange for the 
tap monitoring to take place, it should not pose a challenge for a water system to obtain 
electronic or phone contact information for that household to use in the event that the building’s 
sample results exceed the action level. 
 
However, the proposed mandate for this notice to be delivered within 24 hours of when a water 
system learns of the tap monitoring results leaves unreasonably little flexibility for the varying 
circumstances that a water system might face. For example, if a water system learned of a 
home’s tap monitoring results on a Friday afternoon, but did not notify that home’s residents 
until the following Monday morning, that system would be in violation of the rule. Especially 
considering that individual tap samples would have been collected at least several weeks prior to 
when a water system learned of the results, an inflexible 24-hour notification deadline is not 
necessary.  
 
AMWA recommends that the final rule direct water systems to notify the residents of individual 
households whose sample exceeded the action level as soon as practicable, but not later than two 
business days, after the system learns of the individual household results. This will still deliver 
the notice to households in an expedited manner but avoid an unreasonably strict timeframe on 
the notice’s distribution. 
 

35 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Section 141.85(d)(2)(i): 30-day notification of an individual household when a sample collected 
from the household does not exceed the action level: 
 
We also agree with EPA’s stance that a less urgent notification timeline is appropriate when an 
individual home’s tap sample results do not exceed the action level. We believe that notification 
of these results within 30 days, by mail or another method approved by the state, as proposed in 
the rule, is appropriate. We further anticipate that a homeowner would be told to expect a notice 
from the water system within 24 hours (or two business days, as we recommend) of the system 
receiving the results should they indicate a level of lead above the action level. Therefore, a 
homeowner who does not hear from the water system within a few days of the expected results 
should be able to infer that their home’s water tested below the action level – well ahead of the 
30-day notification deadline that applies in that circumstance. 
 
 
 
Monitoring for lead in schools and licensed child care facilities (Section 
141.92) 
 
Summary: 
 
• AMWA believes that school and licensed child care facility administrators should pursue 
the testing of drinking water within their facilities. Local water systems should be willing 
to assist in carrying out this testing when requested. 
 
• The Safe Drinking Water Act provides EPA with no authority to broadly regulate the 
water testing practices of schools or licensed child care facilities, and local water systems 
have no ability to demand access to such facilities for the purpose of carrying out water 
quality testing. The proposal therefore errs in attempting to hold water systems 
responsible for achieving school and child care facility testing targets. 
 
• AMWA supports the proposed rule’s alternative option of requiring water systems to aid 
the testing of the water in local school and licensed child care facilities upon request, and 
we oppose the proposed requirement for water systems to meet a target of testing 20 
percent of schools and 20 percent of licensed child care facilities in the service area each 
year. 
 
• School and licensed child care center testing procedures should match EPA’s 
recommended testing procedures in its 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water in 
Schools and Child Care Facilities manual, and must recognize that any testing carried out 
by water systems in school or child care facilities will be the result of a collaborative 
process. 
 

36 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
• Should EPA proceed with requiring water systems to meet a 20 percent target for testing 
schools and licensed child care facilities each year, we recommend clarifying how water 
systems may achieve compliance with this target, describing what actions are required 
when schools do not respond to outreach about testing, giving water systems the option to 
utilize local educational departments to serve as liaisons between water systems and 
individual school facilities, and ensuring that testing is a fully collaborative effort 
between water systems and facility officials. If a school or child care center already 
operates its own water testing program that is at least as stringent as the proposed rule, a 
water system should not be required to pursue duplicative testing. 
 
 
Comments: 
 
AMWA recognizes that the presence of lead in the drinking water of schools and licensed child 
care facilities is an issue of concern to the public. While virtually all lead that is present in the 
drinking water of these facilities comes from premise plumbing, we understand that school 
officials and parents may look to their local water systems for guidance in identifying the scope 
of lead contamination in the water of a given school or licensed child care facility building. 
AMWA believes that water systems should be willing to help school officials carry out desired 
water quality testing, upon request. 
 
However, the proposed rule makes the mistake of designating water systems as the appropriate 
entity to attempt to compel schools and licensed child care facilities to carry out testing to detect 
lead in the water of their buildings. In attempting to encourage schools and child care facilities to 
test their water for lead, the proposal charges water systems with the task, while also holding 
water systems accountable for a school or child care facility’s compliance. In reality, because the 
Safe Drinking Water Act includes no authority for EPA to require schools and child care 
facilities to test their water for lead - unless that school or child care facility is itself a non-
transient non-community water system - it is patently unfair for the proposed rule to create a 
school and child care facility testing regime that is only enforceable against community water 
systems. 
 
AMWA therefore believes that the final rule should eliminate all annual school and child care 
facility testing benchmarks, and only require water systems to assist in the testing of a school or 
child care facility’s water when requested to do so by that facility. Those who wish for EPA to 
go further in requiring water quality testing in schools and child care facilities should encourage 
Congress to give the agency that authority directly. 
 
 
Previous efforts to promote school testing: 
 
In 2019 AMWA was a signatory along with EPA and other federal agencies and water sector 
stakeholders to a memorandum of understanding on “Reducing Lead Levels in Drinking Water 
in Schools and Child Care Facilities.” As part of this MOU, AMWA and EPA agreed “to 

37 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
facilitate actions that reduce children’s exposure to lead from drinking water at schools and child 
care facilities.” Agreed-upon actioned included “encourag[ing] schools and child care facilities 
to” test their drinking water for lead, and “encourag[ing] the drinking water community to assist 
schools and child care facilities in their efforts to understand and reduce lead exposure from 
drinking water.”  
 
Additionally, in 2018 EPA published a revised manual entitled 3Ts for Reducing Lead in 
Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities: A Training, Testing, and Taking Action 
Approach. According to EPA, this 3Ts manual “is intended to serve as a resource to help schools 
and child care facilities implement a voluntary program for reducing lead in drinking water.” The 
manual recommends that schools and child care facilities follow a prescribed “2-step sampling 
procedure” when testing individual outlets. 
 
Both the MOU and 3Ts manual recognize that local school officials are primarily responsible for 
testing the quality of their buildings’ drinking water, but AMWA appreciates that public drinking 
water systems are in a unique position within their communities to provide guidance and 
facilitate effective testing. However, while local water systems should be available to help 
individual schools and licensed child care centers carry out water testing and understand the 
results, AMWA has concerns that the proposed rule promotes unrealistic expectations and goes 
too far in transferring the responsibility for school testing onto individual water systems. 
 
 
Details of the proposed rule: 
 
Section 141.92 of the proposed rule directs each water system to: 
 
1. “[C]ompile a list of schools or licensed child care facilities served by the system”; 
 
2. Contact such schools or licensed child care facilities; and 
 
3. Deliver “notification that the water system will be conducting sampling for lead at the 
facility” (emphasis added). 
 
The process as described is challenging for several reasons. Especially in the case of large 
metropolitan water systems, a comprehensive and accurate list of all schools and licensed child 
care facilities in the system’s service area will number in the thousands. For example, Greater 
Cincinnati Water Works, a water system serving more than 240,000 residential and commercial 
accounts, provides water to roughly 400 schools and an estimated 4,000 licensed child care 
centers. While that system currently carries out a program to assist these facilities with lead 
testing, it reports that identifying licensed child care facilities in particular for testing is a 
significant challenge, in part because the precise number of such facilities is always in flux as 
new licensed child care centers open within the city, and others close. Similarly, most water 
systems would have no existing inventory of such schools and facilities, so it would be a 
tremendous exercise to initially develop such a list. Under the proposed rule, this exercise would 

38 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
have to be repeated every five years as water systems would be required to “submit a revised 
list” of school and licensed child care facilities to the state. 
 
We are also concerned that the proposed rule includes an unnecessarily adversarial requirement 
that water systems “notify” a public school or licensed child care facility that the water system 
“will be conducting sampling for lead at the facility.” A water system has no legal basis upon 
which to demand entrance to a school or licensed child care facility, including for the purpose of 
conducting testing pursuant to the Lead and Copper Rule. Any water system that conducts 
testing of school or licensed child care facility water as proposed by the rule would have to do so 
with the cooperation of the facility’s ownership or management, so a water system’s initial 
communication with the facility about the opportunity for testing should not come in the form of 
a notice that the testing “will” take place. 
 
 
AMWA’s suggested alternative approach: 
 
AMWA proposes another approach to identifying and interacting with schools and licensed child 
care facilities that should be more comfortable for all parties involved, and more in line with the 
school-led testing process highlighted in the MOU and the 3Ts manual. Primarily, AWMA 
believes that rather than requiring water systems to attempt to conduct testing in 20 percent of 
schools and 20 percent of licensed child care facilities in the system’s service area each year, the 
final rule should adopt EPA’s proposed alternative of requiring water systems to conduct 
outreach to local schools and licensed child care facilities to make them aware of the water 
system’s availability to carry out water testing in a school or licensed child care facility upon 
request. 
 
This approach is justified based on EPA’s own data. In the preamble to the proposed rule (page 
61732), EPA states that the amount of testing conducted under the “upon request” option “is 
highly dependent on the percentage of facilities that request to participate in the sampling 
program.” EPA goes on to estimate that only five percent of schools and licensed child care 
facilities would volunteer for a sampling program offered by a community water system. 
However, the mandatory 20 percent testing program would be equally dependent on schools 
positively responding to outreach from the water system, and there is no reason to think that the 
response rate under one scenario would dramatically differ from the other. In each case, the 
water system would have to alert schools and licensed child care facilities to the opportunity for 
testing, and school or facility administrators would have to agree to allow the testing to occur. 
 
It is therefore unclear how the agency expects that water systems would achieve a mandate to 
conduct testing at 20 percent of schools and 20 percent of licensed child care facilities in a given 
year. A higher level of participation on the part of schools and licensed child care facilities 
cannot be expected simply because of a target imposed upon water systems, so following EPA’s 
own assumptions even if a water system was required to attempt to test 20 percent of schools in a 
year, only a small subset of those schools will agree to the testing. 
 

39 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
An “upon request” school and licensed child care facility testing program should be consistent 
with the MOU and the 3Ts manual, while also establishing a recurring pattern of communication 
between local school and water system officials. Under this system, water systems should be 
required to periodically conduct outreach to schools and licensed child care facilities, 
encouraging them to take advantage of the option to have water system officials test their 
facility’s water for lead. With time, schools and licensed child care facilities will come to know 
that they have an opportunity for their local water system to assist with the testing of their water, 
while water systems will be relieved from (as the rule currently proposes) spending significant 
resources attempting to attain participation from 20 percent of schools and 20 percent of licensed 
child care centers on an annual basis. AMWA strongly believes that this is the most practicable 
and beneficial approach and encourages EPA to incorporate the “upon request” school testing 
structure into the final rule. 
 
Additionally, AMWA appreciates that the school and licensed child care facility testing 
procedures outlined in subsection (b) of Section 141.92 reflect those recommended in the 3Ts 
manual, in so far as requiring a 250 ml first-draw sample following a stagnation period of 
between 8 and 18 hours. It is less clear why the proposed rule would require samples to be 
collected from five different locations in schools and two different locations in licensed child 
care facilities, as the 3Ts manual does not recommend that schools conduct any particular 
number of samples in a building. Furthermore, the 3Ts manual recommends that a school collect 
a subsequent 250 ml “30-second flush sample” if the initial test results indicate elevated levels of 
lead. This second test is recommended “to determine if the lead contamination results are from 
the fixture or from interior plumbing components,” but this step is absent from the testing 
requirements of the proposed rule. To help ensure that schools nationwide are receiving 
consistent testing advice and assistance from EPA and their local water systems, AMWA 
suggests amending the school testing procedures in the proposed to conform with the 
recommendations in the 3Ts manual. 
 
In sum, the “upon request” option should ensure that school and licensed child care center 
administrators are made aware of opportunities to receive assistance with water testing consistent 
with EPA’s 3Ts manual. It will relieve water systems of attempting to meet an arbitrary target of 
completing tests in 20 percent of such facilities each year when the actual participation rate 
among these facilities is projected to be much lower. However, the final rule should also specify 
that if more schools and licensed child care centers request testing assistance in a given year than 
a water system can accommodate, the system should prioritize carrying out tests in elementary 
schools and licensed child care centers that serve young children. This prioritization would be 
appropriate because younger children would be most at risk of experiencing negative health 
effects as a result of exposure to lead in drinking water.  
 
 
AMWA’s second alternative: 
 
While we believe that the above recommendations are preferable, AMWA has additional 
suggestions should EPA proceed with its proposed framework of requiring water systems to 

40 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
pursue testing in 20 percent of schools, and 20 percent of licensed child care facilities, in the 
service area each year. While we oppose this option, AMWA has a number of suggestions to 
make it as workable as possible. 
 
Rather than requiring every water system to identify and individually contact 20 percent of all 
schools and 20 percent of all licensed child care facilities within its service area each year, 
AMWA recommends that the rule should allow water systems the option to instead communicate 
with the local educational or regulatory agencies charged with operation or oversight of the 
community’s schools and licensed child care facilities. Even if the final rule does not include the 
requirement to test a certain percentage of facilities each year, AMWA believes that outreach to 
schools and licensed child care facilities about opportunities for testing could be more successful 
– particularly in metropolitan communities that may host hundreds of different schools – if 
coordinated through local educational or regulatory oversight agencies. 
 
Under AMWA’s alternative approach, a water system would have the option to provide the 
appropriate regulatory agencies with a notice about the opportunity to have individual school and 
licensed child care facilities tested for lead in drinking water by the water system. A water 
system utilizing this option should further request the agency to share this information with each 
school or licensed child care facility, or compile a representative list of such facilities that should 
be tested in a given year (making up at least 20 percent of such facilities in the water system’s 
service area). 
 
There are several benefits to this approach. First, local educational or regulatory agencies would 
be expected to have up-to-date lists of schools and licensed child care facilities that fall under 
their oversight readily available – or at least more easily available than a water system could 
produce through its own research. AMWA expects that these regulatory agencies will have open 
and ongoing lines of communication with individual school facilities, so a notice or directive 
about water quality testing may be more well received from the school or licensed child care 
facility’s oversight agency, as opposed to if it was received in the form of a “cold call” from the 
water system. The local educational agency would essentially act as a liaison between the water 
system and individual facilities, likely doing more to increase participation by facilities than the 
water system could achieve alone. 
 
Additionally, as is suggested above, if a water system chooses to contact individual schools and 
licensed child care facilities directly, the rule should require notification that the facility has an 
opportunity to have its drinking water voluntarily tested by the water system, not that the water 
system “will be conducting sampling” at the facility. This approach respects the right of the 
facility to decline participation, but lays the groundwork for a collaborative testing effort. 
 
Aside from the mechanics of how schools and licensed child care facilities are identified and 
contacted, AMWA believes a rule that requires water systems to test in at least 20 percent of 
such facilities must be clear about how achievement of that standard will be calculated. The 
proposed rule is lacking in several respects. Subsection (c)(1) states that each year a water 
system will be required to annually collect samples until 20 percent of such facilities “have been 

41 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
sampled or have declined to participate.” AMWA understands this to mean that a water system 
has met its school testing obligation in a given year once the sum of the number of schools tested 
by the water system, and the number of schools declining testing, reaches 20 percent of the 
number of schools in the service area. However, we urge EPA to make this explicitly clear to 
give water systems full confidence that they do not need to pursue additional “replacement” 
schools to test in a given year following a decline from a school that was originally invited to 
receive testing. 
 
Also concerning is the lack of recognition in the proposed rule of circumstances where a school 
or licensed child care facility offers no response to a water system’s outreach about the 
opportunity for lead testing. Given the thousands of individual schools and licensed child care 
facilities that water systems may have to contact to achieve compliance with the rule, it is 
reasonable to expect that a substantial number of these will not respond to a communication from 
the water system. However, a nonresponse is not the same as an explicit decline, which is 
addressed in the proposed rule and which AMWA believes would count toward the water 
system’s 20 percent target. If a water system does not receive a response from a facility to its 
initial communication and a follow-up within a reasonable amount of time, AMWA believes the 
rule should specify that this nonresponse should be treated as a decline, and also count toward 
the water system’s 20 percent target in a given year. The rule should direct a water system to 
document when it has not received a response to outreach to particular identified facilities, and to 
make such records available to state regulators when requested to do so.  
 
If testing at a particular school or licensed child care facility demonstrates a low or nondetectable 
level of lead during one round of testing, the final rule should include a mechanism for that 
facility to either:  
 
• Receive a lower priority for testing in subsequent rounds, compared with facilities that 
demonstrate higher levels of lead in their initial testing; or 
• Be removed from future testing rounds, if that facility has removed all lead bearing 
plumbing components from the premises.  
 
In other words, after the first five-year cycle of testing of all school and licensed child care 
facilities is completed, later cycles should prioritize testing in schools and licensed child care 
facilities that were previously found to have elevated lead, before additional rounds of testing are 
carried out in schools that were found to not have elevated lead levels initially. Similarly, schools 
that are found to have very low or no detectable levels of lead in their initial tests, and which 
have removed all lead bearing plumbing components from their building, should be removed 
from the pool of locations for future rounds of water system testing. Just as the proposal 
recognizes that non-transient non-community water systems may wish to achieve compliance 
with the rule by removing all of their lead bearing plumbing components, it is reasonable to 
conclude that an individual school that has taken this action does not require assistance from a 
community water system to conduct future screenings for lead in its water supply. 
 

42 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Finally, the rule should better address procedures to follow when a state or community already 
has in place an equivalent law or regulation that requires testing of water in schools and licensed 
child care facilities. Subsection (d) addresses “Alternative School Sampling Programs” this way 
(emphasis added): 
 
If a Local or State law or regulations require schools and licensed child care facilities to 
be tested, by either the school or the water system, in a way that is at least as stringent [as 
the proposed rule], the water system may execute that program to comply with the 
requirements of this section. 
 
In this construct, the proposed rule suggests that a water system should take over execution of an 
already existing school and licensed child care center testing regime that is currently carried out 
by school or facility officials, in order for the water system to maintain compliance with the rule. 
But if state or local regulations require a school to conduct its own testing, these regulations 
would not be superseded by the proposed rule. Regardless of whether a water system stepped in 
to “execute” the testing program, state or local regulations may still require school officials to 
directly carry out tests as well. This scenario would lead to duplicative water testing conducted 
by both the school and by the water system. 
 
To avoid these complications, we agree with the proposed rule’s specification that compliance 
with the rule may be achieved through an existing water-system-administered testing regime in 
schools and licensed child care centers that it is at least as stringent as the rule. However, if a 
qualifying school or licensed child care center testing regime is already required to be carried out 
by schools or local educational agencies, the rule should give the local water system the option to 
certify this fact to the state agency. 
 
Again, AMWA appreciates that the proposed rule strives to promote water testing at schools and 
licensed child care facilities, and we maintain our support for the MOU and 3Ts manual outlining 
how to best accomplish this goal. We further believe that water systems can and should actively 
engage with local schools, licensed child care facilities, and the local regulatory agencies that 
oversee them to make certain that the owners and administrators of these facilities are informed 
of opportunities for assistance in screening their water for lead. 
 
But we also must recognize the limits of the Lead and Copper Rule, particularly that both EPA 
and local drinking water systems lack the authority to compel any school or licensed child care 
facility to submit to testing of the water on their property. The rule must therefore encourage a 
collaborative approach between water systems, individual facilities, and educational agencies, 
and AMWA believes this can best be accomplished through water system testing in schools and 
licensed child care facilities that occurs “upon request” by a facility administrator, following 
outreach from the water system. However, we believe that our above suggestions would make 
the rule as workable as possible should EPA choose to proceed with its proposed requirement 
that water systems attempt to meet a minimum testing threshold each year. 
 
 

43 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Economic Analysis 
 
AMWA has comments on two of EPA’s assumptions and conclusions within the “Economic 
Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions” included in the docket: the 
estimated average number of schools and child care facilities served by each community water 
system, and the frequency of corrosion control changes made as a result of the Find-and-Fix 
policy. 
 
Estimated number of school and child care facilities: 
 
AMWA believes that EPA’s estimated average number of K-8 (public and private), secondary 
schools (public and private), and child care facilities per water system may be too low to 
accurately capture the true cost of implementing the proposal’s school and child care facility 
testing requirements. We have already expressed concerns about the efficacy of mandating water 
systems to meet prescribed school and child care center testing targets, but our concerns are 
exacerbated because the economic analysis appears to offer little help in identifying precisely 
what it would cost for a water system to meet such a mandate. To better illustrate this problem, 
AMWA has developed the following table which includes both the estimated numbers provided 
by EPA within the economic analysis and multiple examples provided by AMWA’s 
membership.  
 
Table 1. Comparison of EPA’s estimated average number of schools K-8 (public and private), 
secondary schools (public and private), and child care facilities per water system and actual 
estimated figures from five AMWA members. EPA data was collected from exhibits 5-53, 5-
54, and 5-55 from section 5.3.1.5.2 of EPA’s Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Revisions – Number of Schools and Child Cares. For the purposes of 
comparison, EPA’s numbers for K-8 and secondary schools (both public and private) were 
combined in order to better align with the figures given by AMWA’s members.  
 
Water System 
Population Served 
Estimated Number 
of K-12 Public and 
Private Schools 
Estimated 
Number of Child 
Cares Facilities 
EPA Estimate 
100,000 – 1 million 
100.6 
610 
EPA Estimate 
1 million + 
831.8 
5,044.5 
AMWA Member A 
255,750 
104 
121 
AMWA Member B 
324,238 
62 
Unknown 
AMWA Member C 
975,400 
400 
4,000 
AMWA Member D 
~ 1 million 
300-400* 
800-900 
AMWA Member E 
~ 8.3 million 
1,866 
2,227 
* Private schools not included in this figure. 
 
Table 1 demonstrates that these values have a large amount of variation, making it difficult to 
make an informed generalization about a typical number of schools and child care facilities in a 
community of a given size. However, AMWA believes these figures show that EPA’s 

44 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
methodology for determining the cost of implementing this requirement of the proposed Lead 
and Copper Rule is consistently lower than figures provided by AMWA members. In particular, 
the estimates of the number of schools for a population served of 100,000 – 1 million appears to 
be problematic.  
 
With EPA’s use of ranges, it can be inferred that if a water system’s service population falls 
within the middle of that range, say 550,000, it would be expected to serve approximately 100 
schools. AMWA Member A’s population served falls far below the middle of this range at 
255,750 but is still above EPA’s derived number at 104 schools. Similarly, although AMWA 
Member C is at the top of the 100,000 – 1 million range, a total number of schools which is four 
times greater than EPA’s estimate seems far out of range for this analysis to be accurate and 
useful in determining the costs of implementing testing in schools.  
 
Although EPA’s estimate for water systems serving 1 million or more would be expected to be 
skewed due to the large variation in population served above this level, at 8.3 million served 
AMWA Member E’s number of 1,866 schools is more than double EPA’s estimate and 
therefore, again, raises questions about the reliability of EPA’s figures. Given our other concerns 
about holding water systems responsible testing water quality in schools and child care facilities, 
our lack of confidence in the data purported to demonstrate the cost of such a mandate 
strengthens our belief that any school and child care testing program should only be carried out 
at the request of individual facilities. 
 
Another factor to consider is the enormous variation within the numbers of child care facilities 
between systems, regardless of size. AMWA Member E’s service population of 8.3 million 
would appear to be on the higher end of water system size but their estimated number of child 
care facilities at 2,227 is far below EPA’s estimate of 5,044. AMWA believes this showcases not 
only the difficulty water systems might have in developing inventories of licensed child care 
facilities within their communities, but also the difficulty in EPA’s ability to determine the true 
cost of implementing this provision.  
 
 
Corrosion control changes resulting from Find-and-Fix: 
 
We also have questions about another portion of EPA’s economic analysis. In section 5.3.2.3 
Find-and-Fix (page 5-139), EPA appears to assume that water systems will adjust the pH levels, 
at one or more entry points, in response to a single sample result that falls above the action level. 
EPA has previously indicated that it viewed corrosion control treatment adjustments based on 
Find-and-Fix to be a rare occurrence, but this section of the economic analysis suggests 
otherwise. As has been previously stated, EPA’s suggestion that adjustments to a water system’s 
corrosion control treatment should be carried out based on a single sample that is above the 
action level risks disrupting water quality, destabilizing lead coatings, and threatening public 
health as a result of lead releases. Any adjustments to corrosion control should be carefully 
vetted in order to avoid unintended consequences.  
 

45 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
As we previously recommended, AMWA urges EPA to remove this requirement from the Find-
and-Fix language to avoid these consequences. If EPA maintains this requirement within the 
rule, AMWA reiterates our previous suggestion that water systems should first attempt to 
identify property-specific factors that could be the cause of a single action level exceedance 
before considering adjustments to corrosion control treatment. Only if a property-specific fix 
cannot be found should a water system have to dialogue with the state agency about potential 
broader corrosion control changes.  
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
AMWA thanks EPA for the opportunity to provide input on these critical and long-awaited 
revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule. AMWA’s members are public health leaders in their 
communities and the protection of their customers is their highest priority. We reiterate our 
support for lead service line inventories and the ability of individual customers to compel a water 
system to replace a publicly owned lead service line connected to their property. We also express 
our appreciation that the proposal avoids setting unattainable mandates such as a deadline for the 
replacement of all lead service lines nationwide, a total ban on partial lead service line 
replacements, and a requirement for water systems to cover the cost of replacement for the 
private side of the service line. 
 
While AMWA supports many of the ambitious and vital requirements under this proposal, the 
concerns outlined in these comments highlight the multitude of complications which could 
hinder the implementation of this rule. EPA must work to resolve the components of this rule 
that have placed unrealistic expectations on water systems, particularly those which hold water 
systems accountable for achieving benchmarks which may be outside of their control. Requiring 
water systems to meet standards that rely significantly on the cooperation of schools, licensed 
child care centers, and homeowners may set up water systems to fail through no fault of their 
own, and despite making their best effort to comply. 
 
The association believes that our comments will help the agency ensure the final rule is 
achievable, practical, and enforceable. AMWA is appreciative of all the work EPA has done to 
bring this proposal to fruition and looks forward to working with EPA to best protect the health 
of the millions of people that depend on their local water systems for safe and reliable drinking 
water. 
 

 
 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Appendix B  
 
 
 
 
AMWA Comments Lead and Copper Rule: Virtual Engagements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESIDENT 
Angela Licata 
New York City Department of 
Environmental Protection 
 
Mike Armstrong 
WaterOne 
 
 
Richard Harasick 
Los Angeles Department of 
Water and Power 
 
Sue McCormick 
Great Lakes Water Authority 
 
VICE PRESIDENT 
John Entsminger 
Las Vegas Valley Water 
District 
 
Tad Bohannon 
Central Arkansas Water 
 
 
Robert Hunter 
Municipal Water District of 
Orange County 
 
John P. Sullivan, Jr. 
Boston Water and Sewer 
Commission 
 
 
 
TREASURER 
Yvonne Forrest 
Houston Water 
 
 
Shane Chapman 
Metropolitan Water District of 
Southern California 
 
Ghassan Korban 
Sewerage and Water Board of 
New Orleans 
 
Timothy Thomure 
Tucson Water 
 
SECRETARY 
Jeffrey Szabo 
Suffolk County Water Authority 
 
 
Scott Dewhirst 
Tacoma Water  
 
 
Carrie Lewis 
Portland Water District 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Steve Edgemon 
Fairfax Water 
 
 
James S. Lochhead 
Denver Water  
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER 
Diane VanDe Hei 
 
 
David Gadis 
DC Water 
 
 
Ron Lovan 
Northern Kentucky Water 
District 
 
 
 
 
July 30, 2021  
 
The Honorable Radhika Fox 
Assistant Administrator 
Office of Water  
U. S. Environmental Protection Agency 
 
Via regulations.gov  
 
Re: Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0255, Lead and Copper Rule: Virtual Engagements 
 
Dear Assistant Administrator Fox, 
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) is an organization representing the 
largest publicly owned drinking water utilities in the United States. AMWA appreciates the 
opportunity to comment on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) continued work to 
address the public health risks of lead in drinking water. The association has been involved with the 
Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) since its inception and values all the work that EPA has done to 
decrease the risk posed by lead and copper to public health. All along, we have sought a rule that is 
achievable, practical, and enforceable. AMWA was generally supportive of the revised LCR that 
was finalized in January, but we agree that it is imperative to ensure that any federal regulations 
consider affordability and equity, and provide specific consideration for at-risk communities. 
 
We recognize that the Biden administration’s American Jobs Plan has proposed spending $45 
billion in federal dollars to “replace 100% of the nation’s lead pipes and service lines,”i and we 
appreciate efforts to direct additional federal resources toward this worthy goal. However, any 
further revisions to the LCR must only be made in the context of current statutory and spending 
realities – where EPA has only relatively modest resources to direct toward offsetting the cost of 
lead service line (LSL) replacement. 
 
Since EPA has made the determination to reconsider aspects of the revised LCR promulgated on 
January 15, 2021, AMWA has a number of suggestions for how this rule could be improved upon, 
as well as thoughts on the components the association believes should be retained.  
 
During recent public discussions about the LCR, much attention has been paid to the fact that the 
rule would not mandate the replacement of every public and privately-owned LSL nationwide. 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 2 
 
 
EPA’s June 16, 2021 final rule that delayed the effective date of the revised LCR until December 
noted that the rule “fails to require … public water systems to replace all of their lead service lines.” 
However, we continue to believe that any further revisions to the rule must take into account the 
practical challenges faced by water systems seeking to replace all publicly and privately-owned 
LSLs. Aside from the considerable cost factors and accompanying implications for water 
affordability for low-income ratepayers, a binding mandate on water systems to replace “all” public 
and privately-owned LSLs would encounter the obstacle of individual homeowners who may refuse 
to allow access to their property to replace their privately-owned LSL. If even a single homeowner 
among thousands does not consent to the replacement of their LSL, then the utility would not have 
abided by a mandate for full LSL replacement. And the experience of AMWA members is that a 
significant portion of customers typically decline the chance to have their privately-owned LSL 
replaced, even when the cost is partially or fully subsidized.  
 
Local water systems and their communities also face differing circumstances and competing 
priorities. If EPA were to require water systems to replace all LSLs by a defined deadline, the 
agency would effectively be deciding, for each and every water system in the nation, that the 
removal of lead lines is the most important water infrastructure investment above all others to 
protect public health in a community. But water systems and communities must actually balance a 
variety of competing priorities such as addressing per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), the 
need to strengthen infrastructure to withstand the effects of climate change and extreme weather, 
cybersecurity risks, and the development of new drinking water sources in the face of long-term 
drought. As these communities often have limited resources, a revised LCR with an inflexible LSL 
removal mandate would require water systems to put these competing priorities aside – even if they 
pose the most pressing threats to public health and utility sustainability.  
 
In addition, equity concerns would arise if EPA were to require water systems to cover the cost of 
replacing the private, customer-owned portion of every LSL, possibly including not only residential 
homes but also schools, daycares and businesses where children might be present. This would cause 
a disproportionate impact on low-income communities because the rate-paying base would be 
funding the replacement of all the LSLs and local water systems would have to broadly increase 
water rates to compensate this need. Although the increase in water bills would be equal across 
ratepayers within the community, it would not be equitable as low-income households would be 
paying a larger portion of their income to fund replacements across the water system’s entire service 
area, which will include higher income households that are impacted less by the subsequent increase 
in water bills.  
 
With these considerations in mind, AMWA has multiple suggestions for any LSL replacement 
program that EPA may put into place via additional revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule: 
 
1. As EPA and public water systems work together to lower exposures to lead in drinking 
water, we must keep other public health considerations in mind. For example, a common 
corrosion control method for lead is to add orthophosphate to a system’s drinking water. 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 3 
 
 
Adding additional orthophosphate can have unintentional consequences such as increased 
disinfection byproducts and environmental impacts from increased phosphorus loads.  
 
 
2. AMWA strongly supports individual utility efforts to remove their LSLs as quickly as 
possible and agrees that the complete removal of LSLs is a worthy goal. However, as 
outlined above, AMWA would harbor deep reservations about any proposal that would 
require public water systems to eliminate all LSLs by a firm deadline. Any federal 
replacement mandate must reflect the reality that a community’s LSLs are often jointly 
owned by the water system and thousands of individual homeowners. Convincing all 
customers to agree to replace their LSLs can be a significant challenge. Without this 
customer consent, full replacement of LSLs is impossible.  
 
We understand that some stakeholders have pointed to communities like Newark, New 
Jersey and Madison, Wisconsin, as examples of cities that have made great progress toward 
the near-total replacement of LSLs. AMWA also applauds the efforts of these communities 
and their residents, but we must be clear about what has enabled their success: local city 
ordinances that require individual homeowners to replace, or allow replacement of, their 
privately-owned LSLs or else face fines or even jail time. 
 
For example, Chapter 16:23 of Newark’s city code required private property owners to 
either replace their private LSL at their own expense within 90 days of passage of the 
ordinance, or sign up for the city’s LSL replacement program. Individual property owners 
were also required to allow the city to access their property to carry out a LSL replacement, 
and homeowners who are in violation could be fined up to $1,000 or sentenced to jail time 
or community service of up to 90 days.ii  
 
Similarly, Chapter 13.18 of Madison’s code of ordinances required city homeowners to 
immediately replace all previously known “lead customer-side water service lines,” and to 
replace any newly-discovered such lines within one year. City residents who fail to comply 
with this mandate face fines of up to $1,000 per day.iii  
 
The fact that two of the communities that have had the most success in fully replacing LSLs 
have only done so by compelling residents to cooperate with this effort under threat of fine 
or imprisonment is telling. It not only shows that full LSL replacement cannot be achieved 
by local water systems alone, but also demonstrates that any full LSL replacement mandate 
included in a revised LCR would be likely to fail unless each city and town nationwide 
implemented a similar ordinance to enforce compliance on the part of homeowners. And 
given evidence presented by stakeholders that LSLs are primarily concentrated in minority 
and low-income communities, the widespread implementation of penalty-based LSL 
replacement ordinances could carry national implications for equity and social justice. The 
goal of 100% LSL replacement must be considered in the context of these factors, so 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 4 
 
 
AMWA urges EPA to thoughtfully consider the ramifications of a revised LCR that 
prioritizes full replacement above all else. 
 
 
3. While many water systems across the country can and do offer incentives to encourage 
homeowners to cooperate on LSL replacement projects, water systems themselves are 
extremely limited in their ability to force a homeowner to consent to the replacement of a 
privately-owned LSL. Any revised rule therefore should not hold water systems responsible 
for falling short of prescribed replacement targets due to lack of customer cooperation on 
private-side replacement. EPA must understand that LSL replacement is a community-wide 
effort that will require cooperation and buy-in from community groups and the citizens 
themselves.  
 
 
4. In this same vein, EPA should use this additional time for public input to survey the 
willingness of homeowners to replace the privately owned portions of the service lines. 
Many water systems report that the homeowner resistance they experience is typically 
related to a homeowner’s reluctance to pay for the private-side replacement, and we have 
demonstrated that the most successful local LSL replacement initiatives were backed by city 
ordinances requiring individual customers to comply. However, the motivations of 
customers who decline to replace or allow replacement of LSLs often go beyond just 
concerns about cost to also include reasons such as the customer not seeing the need to 
replace the line. This may be because the customer has no children, or the customer’s 
reluctance to have their gardens torn up. EPA should therefore use this opportunity to 
quantify the scope of this problem of reticent homeowners. 
 
The agency should look to engage both homeowner associations and individuals directly and 
utilize public polling to obtain a clear picture of how willing typical homeowners are to 
spend thousands of dollars on replacing their portion of a LSL, absent a binding mandate to 
do so.  
 
 
5. After further consideration of the revised LCR, AMWA members voiced concerns regarding 
how the LCR would impact renters. The occupants of rented homes generally lack the 
authority to initiate or approve private-side LSL replacement work, and therefore could 
continue to be served by a LSL if the landlord is unresponsive to water system outreach on 
this topic. This highlights another equity issue that must be addressed as Black and Hispanic 
Americans account for a lower percentage of homeowners compared to non-Hispanic White 
Americansiv. AMWA applauds EPA’s work under the revised LCR to address this by 
expanding notifications to occupants, rather than just homeowners. The association 
recommends that EPA consider renters in any new revisions and look to providing 
additional guidance to help with targeted outreach to landlords, public officials, and 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 5 
 
 
community groups in neighborhoods with high proportions of rental housing served by 
LSLs.  
 
 
6. AMWA continues to support the requirement for water systems to develop LSL replacement 
plans. Assuming any final LCR would maintain the requirement to replace LSLs once a 
water system has exceeded the action level or trigger level, it is good practice to have a plan 
already in place to allow for expediency when launching the program after the requirement 
is triggered.  
 
  
7. AMWA continues to agree that EPA should discourage partial LSL replacements as such 
replacements carry few public health benefits and allow lead pipes to remain in the ground. 
However, AMWA urges EPA to maintain a water system’s ability to conduct partial 
replacements in specific circumstances such as an emergency water main replacement or a 
planned water main replacement project which results in a new alignment or spacing of the 
main, necessitating replacement of at least part of a LSL.  
 
Ideally, the privately-owned portion of the lead line would be replaced at the same time, but 
as noted above, a water system’s ability to do so is often contingent upon that customer’s 
willingness to allow work on their property (and, in many cases, for the customer to pay the 
costs associated with replacing the privately-owned portion). The final LCR revisions 
recognized that there will be situations where customer consent cannot be quickly obtained, 
and in those limited cases permits a water system to at least remove the publicly owned 
portion of a LSL when emergency main repair projects or other scheduled infrastructure 
work has provided an opportunity to do so. 
 
  
8. AMWA urges EPA to maintain the final rule’s decision to not require water systems to 
cover costs associated with the replacement of privately-owned service lines, but still retain 
the option to do so. As mentioned above, while some water systems are able to subsidize 
private-side replacement, the use of ratepayer funds and/or capital funds for private 
replacements may be legally questionable or banned outright by state and/or local law. 
 
  
9. AMWA implores EPA to consider using a “cumulative average” to determine a water 
system’s compliance with a mandated percentage target or replacement goal, rather than 
determining compliance on an annual basis. While the final rule attempted to incorporate 
this suggestion by moving to a two-year rolling average, this does not fully relieve the issue 
at hand.  
 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 6 
 
 
Allowing for a cumulative average will ensure that water systems are given credit for their 
previous accomplishments and are provided flexibility for the difficulties which may arise 
through no fault of the system. It is likely that a water system will have more success finding 
customers who will agree to pay for the replacement of their portion of the service line 
during the water system’s initial outreach efforts. As the water system’s replacement 
program continues, the pool of willing customers will likely diminish as the water system 
goes through subsequent rounds of outreach to customers who have previously chosen to 
forgo replacement.  
 
An example of how this cumulative average might be implemented with a 3% mandated 
replacement target is shown in the table below. Note that the ten-year timeframe chosen for 
this example is arbitrary and not meant to suggest a preferred timeline in which LSLs should 
be replaced but is only meant to help visualize the concept of a cumulative average total 
throughout the life of the LSL replacement program. 
 
Year 
Percentage of LSLs 
Replaced 
Cumulative Average 
Percentage of LSLR 
Two-Year Rolling 
Average 
2025 
5% 
5% 
5% 
2026 
6% 
5.5% 
5.5% 
2027 
4% 
5% 
5% 
2028 
3% 
4.5% 
3.5% 
2029 
2% 
4% 
2.5% 
2030 
1% 
3.5% 
1.5% 
2031 
7% 
4% 
4% 
2032 
2% 
3.75% 
4.5% 
2033 
6% 
4% 
4% 
2034 
1% 
3.7% 
3.5% 
 
This hypothetical scenario would have the water system out of compliance with a mandated 
3% yearly mandate, as well as a two-year rolling average. However, after ten years, this 
system would have replaced 45% of their LSLs versus 30% under the 3% yearly mandate.  
 
As seen above, allowing for flexibility could lead to the replacement of LSLs at a faster rate, 
because a water system would know that any additional lines beyond the mandated 
percentage replaced in one year would still count toward its replacement mandate in future 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 7 
 
 
years (when various circumstances could cause a system to fall short of the three percent 
target). In other words, if a cumulative average were not taken into account, a water system 
would have no incentive, from a regulatory compliance standpoint, to keep replacing lines in 
a single year after reaching the three percent figure. The cumulative average would allow the 
system to focus on removing the greatest number of lines feasible, regardless of how many 
LSLs have already been replaced in a given year. 
 
 
10. AMWA requests that any LSL replacement mandate recognize the unique situation posed by 
long-term vacant housing. Some cities are home to tens of thousands of vacant housing 
units, some of which may be connected to the water main through LSLs even though the 
water has been shut off for many years. For example, there are approximately 103,000 
vacant housing properties in Detroitv, and 16,000 in Baltimorevi. A broad LSL replacement 
mandate that does not take vacant housing into account could require these communities to 
spend millions of dollars on LSL replacement work on properties that are unlikely to be 
occupied in the foreseeable future, and which therefore pose no risk of human exposure to 
lead in drinking water. AMWA recommends that abandoned housing units be included in a 
water system’s LSL inventory, but that they be left out of replacement calculations and work 
efforts until the point at which water service is restored to any such property. 
 
 
11. AMWA continues to support the components of the final LCR revisions that empower 
individual members of the public to direct their community water system to work with them 
on a timely replacement of the public and privately-owned portions of a LSL serving their 
property. This way, any individual homeowner could ensure that their water system work 
with them to fully remove their home’s LSL, regardless of any replacement schedule or plan 
otherwise being followed by the utility. 
 
 
Beyond LSL replacement, AMWA has numerous suggestions for how the agency may improve 
upon the rule as was finalized on January 15, 2021.  
 
1. Lead Service Line Definition and Inventories: 
 
AMWA continues to believe that one of the strengths of the revised LCR was the new 
requirement for water systems to complete an inventory that specifies the composition, if 
known, of public and privately-owned service lines connected to the distribution system. 
While many water systems will face challenges in accurately determining the makeup of 
some service lines – particularly those on private property – AMWA agrees that is important 
and worthwhile for water systems to document the composition of the service lines that 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 8 
 
 
deliver water to their customers. Once an inventory is completed, we also continue to agree 
that all water systems serving more than 100,000 people should make their inventories 
available to the public online. However, it is not practical for utilities to visually confirm the 
composition of potentially hundreds of thousands of individual service lines in the near 
term, so it is appropriate for initial inventories to rely on utility records and other similar 
sources. AMWA agrees that after this initial records search utilities should generally work to 
improve upon these inventories in order to positively identify service lines of unknown 
composition.   
 
AMWA encourages EPA to retain water systems’ ability to use tools such as water system 
records, city codes, and building records to draw a reasonable conclusion about whether a 
service line is likely to be lead. However, EPA should more clearly define what will be 
considered a good faith effort on the part of the water system to determine that a service line 
is lead or non-lead. AMWA feels this concern is most prevalent when discussing EPA’s 
direction to consider whether a galvanized pipe “ever was” downstream of a LSL or a pipe 
of unknown material.  
 
AMWA continues to believe this “ever was” standard is problematic as water systems may 
not have specific, uninterrupted records for service lines that date back to the initial 
installation. The water system may therefore be unable to definitively prove or disprove 
what material may have been upstream of the galvanized line throughout the life of the 
service line.  
 
If a water system uses the tools mentioned above and concludes that the galvanized line was 
likely to have been downstream of a lead line at some point in the past, the galvanized line 
should presently be considered lead. Conversely, if the review concludes that the galvanized 
line was unlikely to have been downstream of lead in the past, it should not count as lead in 
the system’s present-day inventory. 
 
In cases where a water system makes such a good faith determination, AMWA suggests 
allowing the water system to remove this galvanized line from its LSL inventory. If the 
water system subsequently obtains new information indicating that the galvanized line had 
in fact previously been downstream of a LSL, then the line should be restored to the system's 
LSL inventory. 
 
AMWA would also like to highlight an additional example that the association believes has 
not been addressed in the previous LCRs. AMWA members have reported that, while their 
water system has never encountered a LSL within their service area, they do not have 
definitive records dating back to the installation of their lines to prove that there are no LSLs 
at all. As stated above, water systems have tight budgets and must use their resources in 
ways that best benefit their communities. EPA should better explain how far a utility should 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 9 
 
 
have to go to determine whether a line is lead. Under the current rule, a utility that lacks 
records suggesting the presence of a lead line, and which have never encountered a lead line 
in their maintenance or capital construction work, is unable to definitively “prove a 
negative” that they have no LSLs.  
 
This may be even more apparent after water systems have consolidated, such as by a larger 
system incorporating a smaller one into its service area. If those smaller systems do not have 
detailed records in place, it now falls onto the larger water system to correct this issue, 
particularly in regards to LSLs. In instances where property records are incomplete, to 
definitively prove that a given pipe is not lead, water systems could be forced to expend 
large amounts of resources attempting to identify service line materials using disruptive and 
labor-intensive methods such as potholing, digging test pits, or otherwise inspecting 
individual homes. Funds expended on these exercises could be better used to replace LSLs 
that are already known to exist or other necessary public health projects. EPA must weigh 
the costs and the benefits of each action towards the overall public health of the community.  
 
AMWA believes there should be flexibility in such situations and a standard at which a 
water system can reliably say a service line is or is not lead without necessarily requiring 
water system staff to set eyes on the line. In these circumstances, where LSLs are not 
documented or discovered in a water system, additional physical exploration for LSLs 
should not be required.   
 
 
2. Testing in schools and child care facilities  
 
AMWA appreciates that the rule finalized by EPA recognized that water systems may only 
conduct testing in schools and child care centers after consent has been obtained from 
facility administrators. We believe that any revised rule should continue to avoid penalties 
for water systems that make good faith efforts to offer testing to schools and child care 
centers, but do not receive sufficient positive responses. However, AMWA still has concerns 
regarding EPA’s requirement to test all schools and child care centers within five years of 
the rule’s compliance date.  
 
AMWA appreciates EPA’s recognition that water systems will likely not get responses from 
all facilities and that this should not be counted against the system’s goals under any final 
rule. AMWA members have reported immense difficulties in obtaining sufficient 
engagement from schools and child care centers. Having flexibility in this area will ensure 
utilities are not held responsible for things outside of their control.  
 
Additionally, multiple AMWA members have voiced concerns over the ability to collect 
samples after a sufficient stagnation period, as it can be difficult to time when schools have 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 10 
 
 
before and after-hours activities. For example, a water system may have to carry out the 
testing in a school early on a Monday morning before classes begin – a schedule that may 
not be accommodating for staff of either the water system or the school. EPA should include 
workable best practices for obtaining these samples as part of any guidance documents 
created to help water systems implement this provision.   
 
3. Find-and-fix 
 
AMWA continues to agree with the agency’s intent to encourage water systems to identify 
the cause when high levels of lead are detected at an individual tap sampled as part of 
required monitoring activities. If implemented appropriately, this requirement can help 
prevent continued exposures from identified materials such as LSLs and interior plumbing 
or fixtures. However, any rule should make it clear that water systems are not responsible 
for any premise plumbing or fixtures located inside the home as this is outside of a water 
system’s control.   
 
AMWA encourages EPA to retain the rule’s provision which limits Find-and-Fix 
requirements to only those samples taken pursuant to the monitoring program under Section 
141.86 and not to other samples that may be voluntarily collected by water systems through 
customer-requested drinking water lead testing programs. Large water systems may 
voluntarily collect samples from thousands of locations (as opposed to 100 or less samples 
collected pursuant to required monitoring), and any provision that would direct water 
systems to attempt to identify the cause of each and every individual high sampling result 
encountered would pose a tremendous burden and could possibly cause many large water 
systems to cease offering voluntary sampling to customers at all. 
 
We appreciate EPA’s acknowledgement that the LCR revisions’ requirement for adding 
water quality parameter (WQP) sites for every find-and-fix follow-up was excessive and 
instead laid out a maximum number of WQP sites for systems so to prevent a never-ending 
growing list. AMWA believes WQP sites should only be added when the water quality at 
that location is significantly different from that found throughout the rest of the system. The 
association encourages EPA to maintain a provision limiting the amount of WQP sites that 
can be added, as well as consider clarifying situations in which it would be appropriate to 
add an additional site.  
 
AMWA continues to strongly object to EPA’s suggestion that water systems should 
consider adjustments to their corrosion control treatment based on a single sample that is 
above the action level. In some cases, an elevated level of lead discovered in an individual 
sample may often relate to lead coatings or other factors that are unique to the specific 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 11 
 
 
sampling site, and beyond the control of the water system. Requiring a water system to make 
corrosion control changes due to only one or a small number of individual samples 
exceeding the action level could provide limited benefits and actually expose the public to 
other public health risks such as elevated disinfection byproducts and microbial issues due to 
disruption of the pipe biofilms. 
 
Finally, AMWA implores the agency to focus resources on developing guidance documents in a 
timely manner as the implementation of this rule will be a large undertaking. EPA should work with 
stakeholders, such as public drinking water systems, to help inform the development of these 
documents. The agency has highlighted in previous discussions with AMWA that guidance for LSL 
inventories will be one of the first documents that EPA will work to develop. The association 
supports this prioritization, and AMWA would again like to emphasize our members’ hopes to help 
inform this critical guidance. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to expand upon the comments we provided last year after EPA 
formally proposed revisions to the LCR. We continue to believe each of these comments and 
suggestions should be addressed in the interest of ensuring a revised rule remains achievable, 
practical, and enforceable, and equitable. If you have any questions about these comments, please 
contact Stephanie Hayes Schlea, AMWA’s Director of Regulatory and Scientific Affairs, at 
schlea@amwa.net. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Diane VanDe Hei 
Chief Executive Officer 
 
cc: Jennifer McLain, Director, Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
 
 
i https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/.  
ii City of Newark, NJ, Title XVI Health, Sanitation, and Air Pollution, Chapter 16:23 Mandatory Replacement of Lead 
Service Line, https://ecode360.com/36709585. 
iii Madison, Wisconsin Code of Ordinances, Chapter 13.18 Lead Water Service Line Replacement, 
https://library.municode.com/wi/madison/codes/code_of_ordinances?nodeId=COORMAWIVOIICH11--
19_CH13PUWASUSY_13.18LEWASELIRE. 
iv U.S. Department of Commerce. (April 27, 2021). Quarterly Residential Vacancies and Homeownership, First Quarter 
2021. https://www.census.gov/housing/hvs/files/currenthvspress.pdf  
v Blanco, E. C. (2020, September 1). As Michigan Makes Progress on Vacant Homes, Detroit’s Vacancies Have 
Skyrocketed. Next City. https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/michigan-makes-progress-on-vacant-homes-detroits-vacancies-
have-skyrocketed 
vi Scott, A. (2020, July 8). Why can’t Baltimore solve its vacant housing problem? Marketplace. 
https://www.marketplace.org/2020/07/08/why-cant-baltimore-solve-vacant-housing-problem/ 

 
 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Appendix C 
 
 
 
 
 
AMWA Comments on Environmental Justice Considerations for the 
Development of the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESIDENT 
John Entsminger 
Las Vegas Valley Water Dist. 
 
Mike Armstrong 
WaterOne 
 
Calvin Farr 
Prince William County 
Service Authority 
 
Joe Mantua 
Beaufort Jasper Water & 
Sewer Authority 
 
Paul Vojtek 
Erie Water Works 
VICE PRESIDENT 
Yvonne Forrest 
Houston Water 
 
Tad Bohannon 
Central Arkansas Water 
 
Randy E. Hayman 
Philadelphia Water Department 
 
 
Lindsey Rechtin 
Northern Kentucky Water 
District 
 
 
TREASURER 
Jeffrey Szabo 
Suffolk County Water Authority 
 
Edward Campbell 
Portland Water Bureau 
 
Robert Hunter 
Municipal Water District of 
Orange County 
 
Holly Rosenthal 
Phoenix Water Services 
Department 
SECRETARY 
James S. Lochhead 
Denver Water  
 
Shane Chapman 
Metropolitan Water District of 
Southern California 
 
Ghassan Korban 
Sewerage and Water Board of 
New Orleans 
 
John P. Sullivan, Jr. 
Boston Water and Sewer 
Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andrea Cheng 
Chicago Department of Water 
Management 
 
Yann Le Gouellec 
Newport News Waterworks 
 
Todd Swingle 
Toho Water 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER 
Tom Dobbins 
 
Scott Dewhirst 
Tacoma Water  
 
Angela Licata 
New York City Department of 
Environmental Protection 
 
Timothy Thomure 
Tucson Water 
 
 
 
 
November 15, 2022  
 
Dr. Jennifer L. McLain  
Director, Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Ave NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
 
Re: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 Environmental Justice Considerations for the Development of the 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI)  
 
Dear Dr. McLain,  
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) welcomes the opportunity to provide 
feedback on environmental justice considerations related to the development of EPA’s 
anticipated Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). AMWA is an organization 
representing the largest publicly owned drinking water utilities in the United States, and 
collectively its membership serves more than 160 million people. Our members represent diverse 
metropolitan areas and have long been working to identify and replace lead service lines in their 
service areas. The association has been involved with the Lead and Copper Rule since its 
inception and offered substantive comments during development of the Lead and Copper Rule 
Revisions (LCRR) that were published on January 15, 2021.1 We value the work that EPA has 
done to decrease the risk of lead and copper to public health while prioritizing environmental 
justice.  
 
Approximately 10 million publicly and privately owned lead pipes and service lines presently 
deliver drinking water to American households. Last year, the Biden Administration announced 
its intention to “use every tool at its disposal to eliminate all lead service lines” in the next 10 
years, including by “encouraging full lead service line replacement and strongly discouraging 
 
1 Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies. National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions. February 12, 2020. 
https://www.amwa.net/testimonycomments/comments-regarding-epas-proposed-lead-and-copper-rule-revisions-epa-
hq-ow-2017 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
November 15, 2022 
Page 2 of 6 
partial replacement.”2 EPA subsequently concluded an ongoing review of the LCRR and 
announced its intention to “immediately begin development” of further revisions that would be 
known as the LCRI. Among the revisions that EPA intends to propose as part of the LCRI are 
requirements that “would result in the replacement of all LSLs as quickly as is feasible.”3 
 
In light of these objectives, AMWA reiterates its support for advancing public health and 
environmental justice. Additionally, AMWA asks the EPA to recognize, consider, and address 
the potential hurdles associated with full lead service line replacements should they be mandated 
as part of a proposed LCRI rule, and to provide support for community water systems to address 
these challenges. We summarize these potential complications below. 
 
Service line ownership 
 
To understand the difficulties associated with full lead service line replacement, it is important to 
understand the ownership of service lines that connect water mains with the premise plumbing in 
each home served by a water system. Typically, service lines are partially owned by a 
community water system and partially owned by the customer. The water utility usually owns 
the portion of the service line from the water main to the curb stop or meter, and the private 
property owner usually owns the portion of the service line from the property line to the building 
inlet. The water system is generally unable to access the customer-owned portion of the service 
line without the customer’s permission, nor is the utility under any obligation to replace, or pay 
for replacement of, the customer portion of a service line that fails. 
 
This does not mean that community water systems are wholly unable to aid in the replacement of 
privately owned lead service lines. Many utilities often offer to replace the customer-owned 
portion of a service line at cost to the customer, in conjunction with the water system’s 
replacement of the publicly owned portion. Additionally, some utilities and localities have 
developed plans to fully replace lead service lines without charging customers individually. 
Some opportunities and challenges of these approaches will be discussed further in this letter. 
 
Impacts on drinking water affordability 
 
EPA estimates that full lead service line replacement has an average cost of $4,700, ranging from 
$1,200 to $12,300 per line replaced.4 Using EPA’s estimate of an average replacement cost per 
 
2 FACT SHEET: The Biden-⁠Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan, December 16, 2021. 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-lead-pipe-
and-paint-action-plan/ 
3 Environmental Protection Agency. Review of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR). 86 FR 71574. December 17, 2021. 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/12/17/2021-27457/review-of-the-national-primary-drinking-water-
regulation-lead-and-copper-rule-revisions-lcrr 
4 Chapter 5: Economic Analysis. Lead and Copper Rule Revisions. Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-210-0300. 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-0001  

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
November 15, 2022 
Page 3 of 6 
line of $4,700 and an assumption of 10 million lead service lines in the United States, fully 
replacing all lead service lines in the country could cost roughly $47 billion. This $47 billion 
sum far exceeds the $15 billion worth of lead service line replacement funds included in the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) of 2021, thus requiring community water systems to turn to 
other sources of funding to cover the costs of full lead service line replacement.  
 
Therefore, AMWA is concerned that an EPA requirement for water systems to carry out full lead 
service line replacements would represent a massive unfunded mandate for communities that do 
not receive BIL funding. These communities would likely have to turn to increased customer 
water rates to cover these replacement costs, which could be expected to disproportionately 
impact low-income customers. Water utilities are limited to grants, loans, and user rates to cover 
the costs of providing drinking water service, and federal funds to date alone will not cover the 
full costs. 
 
Since utilities must cover the costs of a litany of other challenges, including aging infrastructure, 
changing state and federal regulations, climate change, and supply chain disruptions, they must 
turn to a limited pool of federal grants and loans and increased customer rates to fund major 
infrastructure projects. Utility customer rate setting authority ranges significantly by locality and 
states, but when necessary to increase rates, many utilities must increase customer rates for all 
customers. Increased customer rates disproportionately impact low-income customers, who must 
spend a larger portion of their income on their water bill than higher income customers.  
 
Community water systems face additional challenges in their authority to increase rates and in 
their ability to assist low-income customers most affected by increased rates. AMWA represents 
publicly owned drinking water utilities, which are often governed by boards or other elected 
officials that may restrict the degree to which utilities can increase rates or whether they may 
establish lower rates for low-income customers. In other cases, publicly owned utilities may 
require voter permission to authorize funding for major infrastructure projects. The LCRI must 
recognize the unique challenges faced by water utilities in acquiring and distributing funds to 
replace lead service lines and recognize potential increased water rates as an intended 
consequence of funding lead service line replacement.   
 
Legal constraints on authority to replace lead service lines 
 
Further considerations regarding the LCRI are the legal and logistical complications of replacing 
lead service lines held by property-owners. As described above, the task of fully replacing lead 
service lines is often complicated because ownership of each household’s service line is split 
between the community water system (which generally owns the portion from the water main to 
the property line) and the private homeowner (who typically owns the portion from the property 
line to the building inlet). Community water systems are generally unable to access or replace a 
privately owned lead service line without the permission of the property owner.  
 
The challenge of obtaining property owner permission to fully replace a lead service line should 
not be downplayed, and EPA’s announcement to pursue the LCRI acknowledged that 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
November 15, 2022 
Page 4 of 6 
communities like Newark, New Jersey “have shown that full LSLR can be equitably achieved 
when there is both a regulatory requirement and a commitment to prioritize funding” (emphasis 
added).5 
 
It is worth exploring Newark’s regulatory requirement in more detail. In 2019, the city’s code 
was amended to require private property owners to either replace their privately owned lead 
service lines at their own expense within 90 days of passage of the ordinance, or sign up for the 
city’s lead service line replacement program. Individual property owners were also required to 
allow the city to access their property to carry out a lead service line replacement. A property 
owner who violated this ordinance could be fined up to $1,000 or sentenced to jail time or 
community service of up to 90 days.6 
 
The fact that Newark could only achieve so much success in fully replacing lead service lines by 
compelling residents to cooperate with this effort under threat of fine or imprisonment is telling. 
It not only shows that full lead service line replacement cannot be achieved by local water 
systems alone, but also demonstrates that any full lead service line replacement mandate 
included in the LCRI would be likely to fail unless each city and town nationwide implemented 
and enforced a similar ordinance to compel the cooperation of property owners. Given 
stakeholder comments cited by EPA that “low-income people and communities of color are 
disproportionately served by” lead service lines, the widespread implementation of penalty-based 
lead service line replacement ordinances could similarly disproportionately threaten these 
communities with fines or jail time. The goal of fully replacing all lead service lines nationwide 
must be considered in the context of these factors, so AMWA urges EPA to thoughtfully 
consider the ramifications of an LCRI that prioritizes full replacement above all else. 
 
Other legal obstacles at the state and federal level can further complicate full lead service line 
replacement efforts. For example, as of 2017 the laws of three states expressly prohibited water 
systems from using ratepayer funds on initiatives that benefit specific customers, and laws in at 
least 19 others made the practice highly questionable.7 This would pose significant challenges to 
any federal mandate that would require community water systems to fully replace, and pay for 
the replacement of, the publicly and privately owned portions of lead service lines. 
 
Other obstacles to full lead service line replacement can be found in the federal tax code. If a 
water system attempts to finance the replacement of both the public and private portions of a lead 
service line with tax-exempt bonds, which are a common and cost-effective infrastructure 
financing mechanism, it must first navigate the IRS’ “private business use test” to certify that a 
 
5 Environmental Protection Agency, December 17, 2021. 
6 City of Newark, NJ, Title XVI Health, Sanitation, and Air Pollution, Chapter 16:23 Mandatory Replacement of 
Lead Service Line, https://ecode360.com/36709585 
7 University of North Carolina Environmental Finance Center. Navigating Legal Pathways to Rate-Funded 
Customer Assistance Programs: A Guide for Water and Wastewater Utilities. 
https://www.amwa.net/publication/navigating-legal-pathways-rate-funded-customer-assistance-programs-2017 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
November 15, 2022 
Page 5 of 6 
disproportionate portion of the bond issuance would not benefit a private, home-based business.8 
This process adds months of work and expense to the process, as utilities must document 
whether there is a home-based business at each property with a private lead service line to be 
replaced. Any draft LCRI rule must be created with the knowledge that the US tax code currently 
imposes difficulties on utilities using tax-exempt bonds to pay for private-side lead service line 
replacement. 
 
The LCRI must further consider the difficulty community water systems may face in acquiring 
permission to replace lead service lines on rental properties, where some of a utility’s most 
vulnerable customers may live. In nearly all cases, water utilities require the permission of the 
property owner to conduct a lead service line replacement on the customer property side. 
Without adequate support to connect with landlords, which can range from individuals managing 
a few properties to large organizations with multiple, multi-unit properties, many utilities may 
not be able fully replace lead service lines where rental residents would benefit. 
 
Community distrust in tap water 
 
Finally, AMWA asks that the forthcoming LCRI recognize the racial disparities in trust in tap 
water utilities and consider how that may inform the support needed for water utilities to replace 
lead service lines in private homes. A recent Value of Water Campaign poll, for example, found 
that respondents of color (i.e., people of all races and ethnicities other than non-Hispanic Whites) 
were less likely to say their pipes were safe (69%) compared to white respondents (87%).9 These 
statistics bring to light the fact that already existing community concerns about water 
infrastructure safety may hinder water utilities’ ability to access and replace service lines on 
private property. It is possible that communities with lower trust in their water infrastructure may 
also not fully trust a utility’s ability to properly replace a lead service line and in turn opt out of 
the replacement; therefore, it is important that the EPA consider and prepare for these potential 
concerns.  
 
An additional complicating factor of lead service line replacement is that residents may refuse a 
utility access to replace a service line for several reasons, including home water disruption, 
concerns about costs, or loss of landscaping. Alternatively, utilities may have to juggle how to 
cover costs of disruptions to properties caused by replacement, introducing the possibility that 
only homeowners who can afford to make aesthetic improvements after service line replacement 
agree to replacement. Regardless of homeowner decisions, to ensure order and community trust, 
utilities will have to invest administrative time and effort to oversee respecting private 
homeowners’ decisions, further driving costs of lead service line replacement.  
 
 
 
8 Kildee Introduces Bill to Help Communities Replace Lead Pipes. March 8, 2022. 
https://dankildee.house.gov/media/press-releases/kildee-introduces-bill-help-communities-replace-lead-pipes 
9 Value of Water Campaign. American Support for Investments in Water Infrastructure. 
http://thevalueofwater.org/sites/default/files/Value%20of%20Water%20Poll%202022%E2%80%94Key%20Poll%2
0Findings.pdf 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
November 15, 2022 
Page 6 of 6 
Conclusion 
 
AMWA supports the EPA in its mission to advance environmental justice and public health. We 
similarly support individual utility efforts to remove their lead service lines as quickly as 
possible, and agree that the complete removal of lead service lines is a worthy goal. However, 
achieving this critical milestone will be a complex process. The agency must recognize the 
various affordability, legal, and community trust challenges as it considers environmental justice 
in the development of the LCRI. We appreciate the opportunity to comment and ask that the 
agency fully consider and address the challenges associated with lead service line replacement. If 
you have any questions about this letter, please contact Brian Redder, AMWA’s Manager of 
Regulatory and Scientific Affairs at redder@amwa.net or Jessica Evans, AMWA’s Government 
Affairs Associate at evans@amwa.net.   
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Thomas Dobbins  
Chief Executive Officer  
 
cc: Radhika Fox, Assistant Administrator, EPA Office of Water 
Eric Burneson, EPA Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 

 
 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Appendix D 
 
 
 
 
 
AMWA Comments on the Federalism Consultation for Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements 
 
  

 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESIDENT 
John Entsminger 
Las Vegas Valley Water Dist. 
 
Mike Armstrong 
WaterOne 
 
Calvin Farr 
Prince William County Service 
Authority 
 
Joe Mantua 
Beaufort Jasper Water & 
Sewer Authority 
 
Paul Vojtek 
Erie Water Works 
VICE PRESIDENT 
Yvonne Forrest 
Houston Water 
 
Tad Bohannon 
Central Arkansas Water 
 
Randy E. Hayman 
Philadelphia Water Department 
 
 
Lindsey Rechtin 
Northern Kentucky Water 
District 
 
 
TREASURER 
Jeffrey Szabo 
Suffolk County Water Authority 
 
Edward Campbell 
Portland Water Bureau 
 
Robert Hunter 
Municipal Water District of 
Orange County 
 
Holly Rosenthal 
Phoenix Water Services 
Department 
SECRETARY 
James S. Lochhead 
Denver Water  
 
Shane Chapman 
Metropolitan Water District of 
Southern California 
 
Ghassan Korban 
Sewerage and Water Board of 
New Orleans 
 
John P. Sullivan, Jr. 
Boston Water and Sewer 
Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andrea Cheng 
Chicago Department of Water 
Management 
 
Yann Le Gouellec 
Newport News Waterworks 
 
Todd Swingle 
Toho Water 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER 
Tom Dobbins 
 
Scott Dewhirst 
Tacoma Water  
 
Angela Licata 
New York City Department of 
Environmental Protection 
 
Timothy Thomure 
Tucson Water 
 
 
 
December 13, 2022 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
Director, Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
 
Re: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0813, Federalism Consultation on Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements  
 
Dear Dr. McLain, 
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) welcomes the opportunity to provide 
input on EPA’s forthcoming proposed rulemaking, the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
(LCRI). AMWA is an organization representing the largest publicly owned drinking water 
utilities in the US, and collectively its membership serves more than 160 million people. AMWA 
was generally supportive of the LCR Revisions (LCRR) but continues to urge EPA to consider 
the challenges associated with identifying and replacing lead service lines in future regulation.  
 
Last year, the Biden Administration announced its intention to “use every tool at its disposal to 
eliminate all lead service lines” in the next 10 years, including by “encouraging full lead service 
line (LSL) replacement and strongly discouraging partial replacement.”1 EPA subsequently 
concluded an ongoing review of the LCRR and announced its intention to “immediately begin 
development” of further revisions that would be known as the LCRI. Among the revisions that 
EPA intends to propose as part of the LCRI are requirements that “would result in the 
replacement of all LSLs as quickly as is feasible.”2 
 
AMWA reiterates its full support for advancing public health by reducing public exposure to 
lead. Additionally, AMWA asks the EPA to recognize, consider, and address the potential 
 
1 FACT SHEET: The Biden-⁠Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan, December 16, 2021. 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-lead-pipe- 
and-paint-action-plan/ 
2 Environmental Protection Agency. Review of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR). 86 FR 71574. December 17, 2021. 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/12/17/2021-27457/review-of-the-national-primary-drinking-water- 
regulation-lead-and-copper-rule-revisions-lcrr 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
December 13, 2022 
Page  2 
hurdles associated with full LSL replacements should they be mandated as part of a proposed 
LCRI rule, and to provide support for community water systems (CWS) to address these 
challenges. We summarize these potential complications in our comments below, split into 
sections matching EPA’s Federalism Consultation meeting slides.  
 
Identifying and Replacing Lead Service Lines 
 
AMWA continues to believe that any further revisions to the rule must consider the realities on 
the ground, namely, the practical challenges faced by water systems seeking to replace all 
publicly and privately-owned LSLs. These challenges are detailed in the attached comments 
previously submitted by AMWA on July 30, 2022 on the Lead and Copper Rule virtual 
engagements. Aside from the considerable cost factors and accompanying implications for water 
affordability for low-income ratepayers, a binding mandate on water systems to replace “all” 
public and privately-owned LSLs would meet the obstacle of individual homeowners who may 
refuse access to their property to replace their privately-owned LSL. The experience of AMWA 
members is that a significant portion of customers typically decline the chance to have their 
privately-owned LSL replaced, even when the cost is partially or fully subsidized, often due to 
distrust or apprehension in government. 
 
CWS and their communities also face differing circumstances and competing priorities. If EPA 
were to require water systems to replace all LSLs by a defined deadline, the agency would 
effectively be deciding, for each water system in the nation, that the removal of lead lines is the 
most important water infrastructure investment above all others to protect public health in a 
community. Realistically, water systems and communities must balance a variety of competing 
priorities such as addressing PFAS, the need to strengthen infrastructure to withstand the effects 
of climate change and extreme weather, cybersecurity risks, and the development of new 
drinking water sources in the face of long-term drought. As these communities often have 
limited resources, a revised LCR with an inflexible LSL removal mandate would require water 
systems to put these competing priorities aside – even if they pose the most pressing threats to 
public health and utility and community sustainability.  
 
AMWA also asks EPA to consider the following situation related to galvanized [pipe] requiring 
replacement service lines (GRRSL). Currently, GRRSL are defined as “a galvanized service line 
is or was at any time downstream of a lead service line or is currently downstream of a ‘Lead 
Status Unknown’ service line [emphasis added].”3 For utilities that identified LSLs many years 
ago and removed them, they will have to treat customer-side galvanized lines formerly connected 
to LSLs as though they are lead. EPA should consider, using the most up-to-date science, that 
these GRRSL are no longer a source of lead after a period of time as supported by the data.  
 
AMWA also urges EPA to consider the state of the workforce currently in the country. Many 
AMWA members struggle to find and secure individuals trained and capable of completing LSL 
 
3 40 CFR Part 141 Subpart I; https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-40/chapter-I/subchapter-D/part-141/subpart-I 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
December 13, 2022 
Page  3 
replacement and related work. Some states require specific qualifications, like being a licensed 
plumber, for those replacing LSL. This severely limits the ability of CWS to be proactive in 
quickly replacing LSLs. EPA should prioritize increased opportunities for training and workforce 
development to address this important issue. 
 
In addition, there are equity and environmental justice concerns associated with full LSL 
replacement that AMWA previously detailed in November 15, 2022 comments to EPA on 
environmental justice considerations in development of LCRI, also attached to this letter. Any 
increase in water rates due to LSL replacement would have a disproportionate impact on low-
income communities. Although the increase in water bills would be equal across ratepayers 
within the community, it would not be equitable as low-income households would be paying a 
larger portion of their income to fund replacements across the water system’s entire service area, 
which will include higher income households that are impacted less by the subsequent increase 
in water bills. EPA cannot expect that funds already appropriated will be enough to complete the 
entirety of LSL replacement, meaning the remainder of those costs will fall to the public.  
 
AMWA is also concerned that the varying definitions of disadvantaged communities in states 
and across the federal government will exclude larger utilities, with service areas including 
pockets of these communities, from being eligible for certain LSL replacement funds. AMWA 
urges EPA to maximize the opportunities for states and municipalities to use funds in a way that 
delivers the most benefit to low-income households and communities. Additionally, EPA should 
consider difficulties with communicating to customers who previously have replaced their own 
LSLs, at great cost to themselves, that others will now have access to full replacement costs.  
 
Tap Sampling and Compliance 
 
It’s critical that any revisions to the LCR do so with the mindset of minimizing burdens on CWS 
and their customers. Many CWS already struggle to get customers to participate in tap water 
sampling, some even offering incentives and discounts on water bills to conduct sampling. 
Increasing the amount of work associated with sampling will only deter more individuals from 
participating.  
 
EPA claims the first liter of water sampled from a tap represents issues from premise plumbing. 
While there are instances this may not be the case, any proposed rule should make it clear that 
water systems are not responsible for any premise plumbing or fixtures located inside the home, 
as this is outside of a water system’s control. By testing both these samples, it will only increase 
the number samples reaching the action/trigger levels, prompting public notifications that 
typically cause panic and worry among residents and cost CWS significant resources.  
 
Reducing Rule Complexity 
 
AMWA suggests EPA not take large actions in this rulemaking, and instead use the data 
acquired from LCRR implementation to make an informed decision during the next Six-Year 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
December 13, 2022 
Page  4 
Review. Many CWS are still preparing for elements of the LCRR, like the LSL inventory, and 
the notion of major changes happening right as the compliance date nears has led to much 
confusion over what needs to be done now and in the future. The LCR is not the only major 
rulemaking EPA is currently undergoing, and CWS must weigh changes associated with LCRI, 
PFAS regulation, and MDBP revisions, all coming together around the same time.  
 
AMWA strongly suggests EPA keep the action level at 15 ppb. Lowering the action level, in 
addition to potentially including both 1st and 5th liter draws for sampling, will only increase the 
number of samples that require action, including public notification which will be a substantial 
burden on states. Increasing the number of samples that require action will divert resources away 
from other issues that may have larger public health consequences. Instead of lowering the action 
levels, AMWA urges EPA to develop and promote guidance documents that help CWS and the 
public understand the importance of lead testing, how to properly conduct lead testing at home, 
and resources available to reduce lead exposure. 
 
Having two similar parameters, like the action and trigger levels, seems to have created some 
confusion as to how they differ and what is specifically required of each of them. If a sample 
exceeds both levels, triggering both actions, the costs and time associated would be substantial. 
Additionally, the action level requires replacement of the LSL, so CWS should not have to 
evaluate their corrosion control technique (CCT) if the source of lead was removed.  
 
The association continues to oppose actions that require changing a system’s CCT based on a 
single sample that is above the action level. In some cases, an elevated level of lead discovered 
in an individual sample may often relate to lead coatings or other factors that are unique to the 
specific sampling site, and beyond the control of the water system. Requiring a water system to 
make corrosion control changes due to only one or a small number of individual samples 
exceeding the action level could provide limited benefits and expose the public to other public 
health risks such as elevated disinfection byproducts and microbial issues due to disruption of the 
pipe biofilms. 
 
Conclusion 
AMWA strongly supports individual utility efforts to remove their LSLs as quickly as possible 
and agrees that the complete removal of LSLs should be the ultimate goal. However, as outlined 
above, AMWA harbors deep reservations about any proposal that would require public water 
systems to eliminate all LSLs by a firm deadline for the reasons detailed in this letter. Any 
federal replacement mandate must reflect the reality that a community’s LSLs are often jointly 
owned by the water system and thousands of individual homeowners. Convincing all customers 
to agree to replace their LSLs can be a significant challenge for reasons ranging from disinterest 
to disillusionment and distrust of government. Without this customer consent, or a change in 
local laws, full replacement of LSLs is impossible.  

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
December 13, 2022 
Page  5 
Overall, the LCRI should make minimal changes to the current rule. EPA should collect data 
over the next few years to do a comprehensive assessment during the next Six-Year Review to 
identify areas that will be most effective in reducing lead exposure to the public. AMWA 
appreciates the opportunity to comment and asks that the agency fully consider and address the 
challenges associated with LSL replacement. If you have any questions about this letter, please 
contact Brian Redder, AMWA’s Manager of Regulatory and Scientific Affairs at 
redder@amwa.net.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Thomas Dobbins 
Chief Executive Officer 
 
Attachments 
 
cc:  
Radhika Fox, OW 
 
Eric Burneson, OGWDW 
 
Anne Lausier, OGWDW 
 
Michael Goldberg, OGWDW 
Hannah Holsinger, OGWDW 
Andrew Hanson, OCIR

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1109 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1104 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0828 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
US EPA Lead and Copper Rule Testimony
Annalisa Rocca
Jan 16, 2024
Good afternoon, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today on the US
EPA’s proposed improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule. My name is Annalisa Rocca
and today I speak to you in my capacity as Drinking Water Manager at the Ohio
Environmental Council.
I want to start by commending the EPA and Biden-Harris administration for making
lead service line removal a priority.
Ohio is my home and is estimated to have the second largest collection of lead service
lines in the country, around 650,000 lines. The most critical element of this rule is
that it puts an end date on when lead service lines need to be removed and replaced,
for the first time. This has local advocates and impacted communities celebrating. We
also believe that the 10 year timeline is achievable for the vast majority of our cities
in Ohio.
The rule’s improvements also call for a comprehensive inventory of water service
lines, which must be updated regularly. This is critical because it will set utilities up
for the work ahead and give communities the information they have been asking for.
There are two areas of the updated rule that we would like to see strengthened to
better protect Americans. First, the rule as written, will allow utilities to forego
removing and replacing lead services in certain circumstances, such as when the
utility is not able to gain access to the property or when the property owner is unable
or unwilling to pay for the private-portion of the replacement. We urge the EPA to
work with states to address this potential loophole in the rule.
Secondly, we urge the EPA to strengthen the testing requirements for schools and
childcare centers. The proposed rule currently requires only one lead test to be
performed at five locations in each school and two locations in childcare centers. This
is problematic because lead can still be found in different faucets and fixtures,
especially in old buildings. The rule should require retesting, testing at more
locations, and that results be shared with parents and staff.

The $15 billion earmarked for lead service line replacement is an essential first step
at funding the requirements of the rule yet it is still not enough. The expected costs
associated with replacing just Cleveland, Ohio’s 185,000 lines is close to $1 billion. We
need more federal funding and a commitment from the EPA to continue to fight for
more dollars and to send them to the communities who need them most.
Every American, every Ohioan deserves clean, safe and affordable drinking water. We
thank the EPA and the Biden-Harris administration for developing an ambitious rule
that will chart the path forward to finally getting the lead out of our drinking water
delivery systems. This single rule will have measurable benefits for citizens in Ohio
and across the country.
Thank you.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0798 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Phone: (860) 509-7333 • Fax: (860) 509-7359  
Telecommunications Relay Service 7-1-1 
410 Capitol Avenue, P.O. Box 340308, MS#12DWS 
Hartford, Connecticut  06134-0308 
www.ct.gov/dph/publicdrinkingwater 
Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer 
 
Drinking Water Section 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
Office of Groundwater and Drinking Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave NW 
Washington, DC  20009 
 
Subject:  Comments on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
   (Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801) 
 
Dear Dr. McLain: 
 
The Connecticut Department of Public Health (CT DPH), as the State of Connecticut agency 
responsible for the Primacy of the SDWA public drinking water provisions, appreciates the time 
and resources the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) has spent on the Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR) and the current Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI), 
which are significant rulemaking to strengthen the current Lead and Copper Rule and improve 
public health protection.  CT DPH appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the 
EPA’s Proposed LCRI and has put together comments in the attached EPA requested comments 
table and the following comments and recommendations for consideration during the pending 
review of the Proposed LCRI. 
 
1. Lead Service Line Definitions 
It is recommended that EPA defines the following as lead service line (LSL) or galvanized 
requiring replacement (GRR): 
 
Lead gooseneck, pigtail, or connector - Any components within the drinking water system 
containing lead may leach lead into the tap.  Lead goosenecks, pigtails, or connectors 
(connectors) may leach lead and flow into the tap, as happened in Tacoma Water 
https://www.thenewstribune.com/news/politics-government/article73004612.html.  In addition, 
these lead connectors may be connected to another metal of dissimilar property, which may 
increase the corrosion rate of these materials.  CT DPH supports and appreciates that EPA has 
added in the Proposed LCRI the requirement to inventory connectors and to replace lead 
connectors when replacing the downstream lead or galvanized requiring replacement (GRR) 
service lines.  CT DPH acknowledges and supports that the Proposed LCRI requires connectors 
more than 2 feet in length to be regulated as a service line.  However, lead connectors 2 feet or 

CT DPH Comments for Proposed LCRI 
February 2, 2024 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
less that are not encountered during any work or not upstream of any lead or GRR service line 
that require replacement will remain connected to the service line and may continue to leach lead 
into the tap.  Thes lead connectors should be removed from the service lines since they are 
sources of lead to render the service lines lead free.  Therefore, CT DPH recommends that the 
lead gooseneck, pigtail, or connector be defined as LSL and subject to replacement to reduce the 
risk of lead contamination into the tap water. 
 
Galvanized service line - GRR is defined as any galvanized service line downstream of a lead 
service line currently or in the past or downstream of a lead status unknown service line, but not 
including downstream of the lead connectors, which may leach lead onto the galvanized pipe.  In 
addition, there are lead pipes encapsulated with galvanized pipe that were classified as 
galvanized pipe, not lead pipe, and studies have shown that zinc coating on galvanized pipe can 
be a significant source of lead in drinking water.  Therefore, CT DPH recommends that all 
galvanized service lines be defined as GRR subject to replacement to reduce the risk of lead 
contamination into the tap water. 
 
2. Timeline 
The regulatory changes in the Proposed LCRI lead to significant actions needed and increased 
significant regulatory compliance workloads on State agencies to implement the requirements.  The 
requirements to have all water systems submit all of the following at the same time by the 
compliance date of the final LCRI are not reasonable and prudent and will create delays for the 
review and approval of these submittals and for water systems to begin monitoring and replacement 
activities:   
 
1. Baseline service line inventories, 
 
2. LSL replacement (LSLR) plans,  
 
3. Lead and Copper compliance sampling site plans, and  
 
4. List of schools and childcare facilities.   
 
Timely approval of sampling site plans are needed for water systems to use when sampling begins in 
accordance with the final LCRI.  Sampling site plans are updated based on the most recent service 
line inventories (hence the baseline service line inventory) for the new compliance sampling 
requirements with new sampling tier criteria and sampling procedures.  Most systems initial service 
line inventory due on October 16, 2024 may have mostly unknown service lines; therefore, will need 
to continue verification to identify the material composition or validate those unknowns are not lead 
or GRR to include in the baseline service line inventory.  CT DPH strongly recommends the 
following staggering approach like the Stage 2 DBP Rule, but in a reverse order by water system 
size: 
 
I. 
Stagger submittal of the baseline service line inventories, compliance sampling site plans, 
and LSLR plans by water system size, to facilitate State review and approval before tap 
monitoring begins.  
 
a. Submit baseline service line inventories and sampling site plans: 
i. Very small water system (<500 people) - submit 1 years from the effective 
date of the final LCRI. 

CT DPH Comments for Proposed LCRI 
February 2, 2024 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
ii. Small and medium water system – submit 2 years from the effective date of 
the final LCRI. 
iii. Large water system – submit by the compliance date (3 years from the 
effective date) of the final LCRI. 
 
b. Submit LSLR plans, if applicable: 
i. Very small water system (<500 people) – submit 1 ½ years from the effective 
date of the final LCRI. 
ii. Small and medium water system – submit 2 ½ years from the effective date of 
the final LCRI. 
iii. Large water system – submit ½ year from the compliance date of the final 
LCRI and lead and GRR service line replacement commencing one year from 
the compliance date of the final LCRI.   
 
II. 
Lead and copper compliance sampling to start in phases by water system size with 
monitoring to start 6 months after submitting the compliance sampling site plan from 
each category of system size listed in item I above; therefore: 
 
a. Allowing state agencies time for review and approval of the submitted baseline 
service line inventories and compliance sampling site plans, process including manual 
entry of each sampling site without auto migration of data capability into the Safe 
Drinking Water Information System that CT DPH uses, and set up compliance 
schedules and data tracking systems.   
 
b. Reduce the sample analysis burden and backlogs on certified laboratories for 
analyzing multiple samples from almost 1000 public water systems in CT by 
spreading out the compliance monitoring requirements into phases based on water 
system size listed in item I above.   
 
3. Sampling Waiver  
CT DPH does not support the allowance of a lead and copper sampling waiver from triennial 
monitoring to once every 9 years.  Corrosion is complex and the acute health effects of lead is a 
significant concern. It is unknown when the level of lead or copper may increase, if any part of the 
system and any service connections within the system’s distribution system contains lead 
components, such as the lead connector that is not defined as a lead service line and galvanized 
service line that is not defined as a GRR or any lead solder or lead components within the premise 
plumbing and/or fixtures.  Allowing a sampling waiver for systems to reduce monitoring to once 
every 9 years is a high risk.  CT DPH strongly recommends EPA to remove the 9-year waiver.    
 
4. Corrosion Control Treatment  
Pipe Rig/Loop - The treatment technique requirement for corrosion control treatment (CCT) 
step has a mandatory requirement for systems to conduct a pipe rig/loop corrosion control 
study with a section of the lead pipe harvested from the distribution system.  CT DPH does 
not support the requirements for systems, particularly the small and medium size systems, 
with a lead action level exceedance (ALE) to conduct pipe rig/loop corrosion control 

CT DPH Comments for Proposed LCRI 
February 2, 2024 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
demonstration studies to identify their CCT approach.  The pipe rig/loop study is highly 
complex and challenging and a financial burden for the system to conduct.  In addition, there 
may not be many consultants/engineers nationwide who have experience or technical 
knowledge with pipe rig/loop corrosion control studies to provide services to the systems.  
Moreover, reviewing the results of the studies and determining the appropriate treatment is a 
challenging burden for State primacy agency staff who may not have the expertise on pipe 
rig/loop CCT studies to properly designate a CCT.  Systems in CT have been conducting 
desktop corrosion control studies and have been providing satisfactory results when the 
treatments are operated and maintained properly.  Desktop studies is less expensive and can 
be done in a fraction of the time needed for pipe rig/loop studies, therefore, systems can have 
the CCT installed within a year or two years using the desktop studies instead of over 5 years 
from the pipe rig/loop studies.  It is strongly recommended that EPA leave the option for pipe 
rig/loop studies to the system and the State primacy agency to determine.   
 
Re-Optimization - CT DPH disagrees with requiring systems to conduct only one re-
optimization of the optimal corrosion control treatment (OCCT) after an ALE.  Corrosion is 
very complex and changes in water quality from the source may also affect OCCT.  
Exceeding the action level with the system’s optimal water quality parameters (OWQP) 
meeting their designated values/ranges may indicate that the treatment was not truly 
optimized and the need to re-evaluate the treatment effectiveness and water quality 
parameters from the source and finished water.  CT DPH strongly recommends that EPA 
require systems to re-optimize OCCT, regardless of prior re-optimization and the system 
meeting their OWQP ranges.  In addition, the State primacy agency should have the authority 
to waive this requirement of only re-optimize once and the authority to require re-
optimization and the level of re-optimization efforts as deemed necessary. 
 
5. Deferment of Optimal Corrosion Control Treatment (OCCT) with Lead Action Level 
Exceedance (ALE) 
A water system with lead or GRR service lines exceeding the lead action level can defer the 
OCCT treatment technique requirements if the system can replace 100% of the lead or GRR 
service lines within 5 years.  The system will be required to conduct the OCCT treatment 
technique requirement if subsequent sampling period after the completion of the 100% 
service line replacement exceeded the lead action level.  CT DPH does not support delaying 
OCCT until after the system has replaced all its lead or GRR service lines with the 
accelerated 5-year replacement requirement.  With the 1st and 5th liter sampling requirements 
to represent water from the premise plumbing and the service line for systems with lead or 
GRR service lines, and with sampling from lower sampling tiers if the systems don’t have 
sufficient sampling locations from lead or GRR service line sites (tier 1 or 2 sites), the lead 
ALE may be from the premise plumbing and not from the lead or GRR service lines.  
Therefore, replacement of lead or GRR service lines will not address lead contamination 
from other sources of lead such as the premise plumbing or any portion of service line that 
contains some percentage of lead and not categorized as lead or GRR.  Consumers will be 
exposed to lead for a longer time if the systems are allowed to delay OCCT.  CT DPH 
supports the simultaneous OCCT and service line replacement requirement.   
 

CT DPH Comments for Proposed LCRI 
February 2, 2024 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
6. Data Management 
With the significant changes in the Proposed LCRI and the complexity of the rule, in order for 
the state agencies to appropriately and comprehensively enforce the LCRI requirements, EPA 
should provide the following: 
 
I. 
Develop an inventory management system for State primacy agencies to house the service 
line inventories from water system including the ability to house updated inventories.   
II. 
Upgrade to Safe Drinking Water Information System (SDWIS)/ Drinking Water State 
Federal Tribal Information Exchange Sytems (DWSFTIES).  Assure SDWIS or the new 
DWSFTIES is upgraded before the compliance date of the LCRI to track and calculate the 
necessary items and implement all aspects of the LCRI, which includes but is not limited to 
the following: 
a. Add a tool to track and report the # of connectors.   
b. Update sampling sites to include the new 5 tier levels and tier types.  
c. Develop a business logic engine to calculate the 90th percentile action level based 
on the new requirements of different matrixes in the LCRI, such as:  
 1st or 5th liter results for lead 
 1st liter results for copper 
 Mix of results from different tiers 
d. Develop a business logic engine to calculate the 90th percentile practical quantity 
level (PQL) based on the new requirements for various requirements with an 
exceedance. 
e. Upgrade compliance requirements on entry point and tap sampling WQP 
requirements including the following: 
 The ability to set 2 sets of samples per # of sites per monitoring period in 
sample schedule in SDWIS or DWSFTIES to make it clear for systems to 
know that they have to take 2 sets of sample from each site during the 
monitoring period.   
 The ability to set and track ranges (i.e. minimum value and maximum 
value) and run compliance to ensure that OCCT is operated and 
maintained properly to provide effective corrosion control.   
 The ability to duplicate analytes in sample schedule when setting the 
analyte in different water quality groups.  For example, pH in physical 
parameters group and pH in WQP group.   
f. Add functions in SDWIS or DWSFTIES to cross check # of WQP samples 
submitted per approved WQP sampling locations to verify compliance with the 
rule requirement of two samples per site per monitoring period.  For example, 
two WQP samples from site x every monitoring period. 
g. Add enforcement tools, i.e. service line inventory, service line replacement, service 
line replacement plan, distribution system site assessment, lead testing in schools and 
childcare facilities, various notifications tracking tools, and various compliance 
tracking tools, etc. 
h. Add auto migration of sampling site plan from an Excel spreadsheet directly into 
SDWIS or DWSFTIES to streamline and speed up the sampling site entry process; 
therefore, eliminating the need for manual entry, and reduce the burden for primacy 

CT DPH Comments for Proposed LCRI 
February 2, 2024 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
agencies staff to manually enter the required updated sampling sites into SDWIS or 
DWSFTIES.  The sampling site plan will be required to update for at least 10 years 
from the compliance date of the LCRI as the systems replaced the lead or GRR 
service lines or change the material composition of the unknown or non-lead service 
lines.  The addition of the auto migration function will be a significant assistance for 
State primacy agencies. 
 
7. Resources 
The regulatory changes in the Proposed LCRI lead to significant actions needed and 
increased significant regulatory compliance workloads on State agencies to implement the 
requirements.  The amount of inventories, replacement plans, service line replacements, 
sampling site plans, tap and WQP samplings, systems with action level exceedances, OCCT, 
distribution system site assessment, assessment of WQP during sanitary survey process, 
public notification/education requirements, school and childcare facilities lead testing, 
customer consent/refusal, etc. place a significant burden on CT to comprehensively and 
effectively implement the rule with the limited staff working on the Lead and Copper Rule.  
The significant workloads generated from the LCRR and the LCRI will need at least an 
additional 15 full-time employee to implement the rule.  CT DPH strongly requests that EPA 
increase the federal funding to CT to fund staff to successfully conduct the required 
workloads from the LCRR and LCRI and adequately implement the rules. 
 
8. EPA Technical Guidance and Tools 
In order for state agencies to appropriately and comprehensively enforce the LCRR 
requirements, CT DPH strongly recommends that EPA develop comprehensive decision-trees, 
flowcharts, or schematics clearly depicting the regulatory triggers, steps for CCT optimization, 
re-optimization, and OWQP designation, steps for distribution system site assessments, public 
notification/education requirements, public outreach activities, etc. as tools to assist State 
primacy agencies and water systems to understand the complexity of the rule.  With the 
complexity of the different matrixes for action level calculation and requirements, CT strongly 
recommends EPA to provide technical guidance on 90th percentile action level calculation to 
reduce confusion and ensure proper implementation, on customer consent and refusal to assist 
system staff with tracking and reporting customer engagement to the State primacy agencies.   
 
In addition, CT DPH strongly recommends EPA to provide technical guidance and frequent 
trainings on the following topics to help water systems, State primacy agencies, and consultants 
to understand corrosion control, corrosion control treatment (CCT), and proper operation and 
maintenance of an effective CCT to achieve optimal corrosion control: 
a. Incremental CCT training sessions from basic to advance level, with basic level 
training targeting for someone that has no or limited knowledge of corrosion control 
and corrosion chemistry.  
b. Technical guidances on different type of CCT studies and results interpretation. 
c. Technical guidances on selection of representative WQP montoring locations; 
designation of OWQP; maintain CCT or re-optimized CCT operation and 
effectiveness including potential adverse impacts from changes in source 

CT DPH Comments for Proposed LCRI 
February 2, 2024 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
water/interconnection, treatments, water quality from existing sources, and low 
flow/low water usage.   
 
These technical guidance, tools, and resources should be developed and shared with primacy 
agencies before the compliance date for the LCRI to aid in compliance determinations and 
training of staff and water systems.   
 
9. Additional comments  
Please see the attached “CT DPH Comments on the Proposed LCRI” for additional 
comments to specific sections of the Proposed LCRI.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on the Proposed LCRI.  If you have any 
questions, please contact us at (860) 509-7333 or at DPH.LeadandCopper@ct.gov.  
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Lori Mathieu 
Public Health Branch Chief 
Environmental Health & Drinking Water Branch 
CT Department of Public Health 
 
 
cc: 
Lisa Morrissey, Deputy Commissioner, CT DPH  
 

CT DPH Comments on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
     (Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
Rule Reference or Federal 
Register Page #/CFR 
citaƟon 
Comment/Concern/QuesƟon to be Addressed 
RecommendaƟon for EPA 
CFR 141.2 DeﬁniƟons  
The following deﬁniƟons are in the LCRI readable version, 
but not in the Federal Register:  Aerator; Combined 
distribuƟon system; Community water system; Compliance 
cycle; Compliance period; ConsecuƟve system; Corrosion 
inhibitor; EﬀecƟve corrosion inhibitor residual; FiŌh liter 
sample; Finished Water; First draw sample; Full lead service 
line replacement; IniƟal compliance period; Large water 
system; Maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG); Method 
detecƟon limit (MDL); Non-community water system, Non-
transient non-community water system; Performance 
evaluaƟon sample; Person; Point of entry treatment device 
(POE); Point-of-use treatment device (POU); PracƟcal 
quanƟtaƟon limit (PQL); Pre-stagnaƟon ﬂushing; Public 
water system; Repeat; School; Seasonal system; Service 
connecƟon; Single family structure; Small water system; 
State; Supplier of water; System with a single service 
connecƟon; Transient non-community water system; 
Wholesale system; Wide-mouth botles. 
These are important deﬁniƟons to include in the Federal 
Register. 
 
141.2 DeﬁniƟons 
Add deﬁniƟons for: 
Baseline service line inventory 
Consumer, Customer, never lead, low lead 
With the new baseline service line inventory requirement for 
LCRI, should have a deﬁniƟon for that to disƟnguish it from the 
iniƟal service line inventory.  Add deﬁniƟons for consumer, 
customer, never lead, and low lead. 
 
141.80(c)(4)(ii)(C), (D), and 
(E) 
The 2nd 141.80(c)(4)(ii)(C) is a duplicate aŌer adding an 
addiƟonal secƟon as 141.80(c)(4)(ii)(B) 
Should edit the secƟons to 141.80(c)(4)(ii)(D), (E), (F) 
§ 141.81(d)(7) Step 7. State 
sets OpƟmal Water Quality 
Parameters (OWQPs). The 
State must review the 
water system’s re-opƟmized 
OCCT and designate 
OWQPs (§ 141.82(f)) within 
Discussed in the ASDWA workgroup:  
 
Numerous states have reiterated the request for EPA to allow 
ﬂexibility in deadlines for designaƟng OCCT and OWQPs at a 
parƟcular water system. Because of system deadlines, states 
receive a wave of studies and recommendaƟons, making it 
diﬃcult to review all of them in a Ɵmely manner. 
This would be a good ﬂexibility for CTDPH DWS.     
   
   
   

CT DPH Comments on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
     (Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Rule Reference or Federal 
Register Page #/CFR 
citaƟon 
Comment/Concern/QuesƟon to be Addressed 
RecommendaƟon for EPA 
six months aŌer compleƟon 
of paragraph (d)(6) of this 
secƟon (Step 6). 
 
AddiƟonally, states are facing unprecedented workforce 
challenges due to congressionally directed spending, FTE 
caps at state agencies, and engineer shortages, all while 
regulatory requirements increase.    
  
ASDWA recommends that EPA remove the 6-month deadline 
to designate OWQPs or OCCT. Not only are states facing 
unprecedented staﬃng shortages, making it diﬃcult to 
comply with this deadline, the 6-month deadline also limits 
states’ ability to fully evaluate WQPs, require addiƟonal WQP 
monitoring periods, or even require re-opƟmizaƟon of 
treatment before moving forward with ﬁnal OWQP 
designaƟon. AddiƟonal ﬂexibility is needed to address these 
concerns.   
 
 
InvalidaƟon of lead and copper samples for exceeding the 
maximum stagnaƟon Ɵme.  EPA requested comments on 
whether the rule should include a max stagnaƟon Ɵme, 12 or 
18 hours.  Also came up in the Data group.  
CT DPH does not support allowing invalidaƟon because of 
stagnaƟon Ɵme.  With the requirement of the sampling 
procedures and customers cerƟfying the sampling, water system 
can review and not send samples for analysis if the samples 
were collected over the maximum stagnaƟon Ɵme. This 
invalidaƟon criteria will generate unforeseeable amount of 
invalidaƟon requests whenever sample results were over the 
acƟon level and defeats the purpose of the requirement of the 
sampling procedures and cerƟﬁcaƟon.   
 
 
CalculaƟon of AL – of not adequate sites for LSL (Ɵer 1 or 2) – 
how to calculate the mixed of diﬀerent Ɵers?  
Make the AL calculaƟon simpler. 
 
141.86(e)(2) If the 
minimum number of 
samples is met by Tier 1 
and 2 sites, systems must 
submit data from addiƟonal 
So, if there are enough Tier 1 and 2 sites to saƟsfy the 
minimum # of required samples, and a system takes 
addiƟonal samples from lower Ɵer sites, these sites cannot 
be used in the 90% calculaƟon? Even if a Tier 3 or 4 site 
came back higher than one of the Tier 1 or 2 results? 
This was discussed in the Compliance Monitoring ASDWA 
subgroup as well.  
 
Suggest a comment that the highest lead and copper results 
should be included in 90th % regardless of Ɵer level? I think it 

CT DPH Comments on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
     (Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Rule Reference or Federal 
Register Page #/CFR 
citaƟon 
Comment/Concern/QuesƟon to be Addressed 
RecommendaƟon for EPA 
Tier 3, 4, or 5 sites to the 
State, but cannot use these 
results in the 90th 
percenƟle calculaƟon. 
 
This seems too complicated. Also, how will SDWIS know 
which sites to include in the calculaƟon or not if they are all 
submited for compliance? 
makes sense to prioriƟze sampling the higher Ɵers where lead 
may be more likely. But if a high lead result is submited from a 
lower Ɵer it should be considered just the same – there's sƟll 
high lead geƫng to the customer only from a diﬀerent source 
 
Also in terms of logisƟcs, taking the samples with the highest 
results regardless of Ɵer level would probably be easier to 
calculate. 
 
Tracking lead gooseneck 
EPA needs to update the service line tracking so states can 
report to them on the lead gooseneck/connectors. 
141.86(a)(3) must sample 
from “every” site 
containing lead pipes or 
served by LSL 
What to do if customers are not willing to parƟcipate in 
sampling and the system is not meeƟng the minimum # of 
Ɵer 1 or 2 sites?   
Suggest changing language to “all available sites”. Maybe diﬃcult 
for systems to collect from every site due to low customer 
parƟcipaƟon.  Deﬁne available sites. Must reach out to 
customers for two good eﬀorts to parƟcipate in sampling. If no 
response, then site would be considered “unavailable”. 
 
 
EPA to provide PE/PN templates and translated materials.  EPA to 
provide translaƟon services. 
141.86(e)(1) Water systems 
& the State must consider 
customer-requested 
samples when calculaƟng 
90th percenƟle. 
We need to determine if the site meets the Ɵering criteria 
(Tier 1 or Tier 2), 1-liter botle, stagnaƟon period 
How will we know if this data was reported to us to calculate the 
90th percenƟle? What if we found out aŌer we calculated 
compliance? 
 
We need more clariﬁcaƟon on what it means that the State must 
“consider” customer-requested samples when calculaƟng the 
90th percenƟle. SecƟon 141.86(b)(1)(iv) states “Follow-up 
samples for distribuƟon system and site assessment under § 
141.82(j) and samples collected following customer requests 
under § 141.85(c) may use diﬀerent sample volumes or diﬀerent 
sample collecƟon procedures to assess the source of elevated 
lead. Systems must submit these sample results to the State.” 
This seems contradicƟng. How can we consider these results in 
the calculaƟon if they aren’t collected with proper botle size or 

CT DPH Comments on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
     (Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Rule Reference or Federal 
Register Page #/CFR 
citaƟon 
Comment/Concern/QuesƟon to be Addressed 
RecommendaƟon for EPA 
procedure. I think it would make sense to report customer 
requested samples as special samples and instruct systems to 
use diﬀerent botles (ex: 250 mL, 3 Ts) so they aren’t included in 
the calculaƟon, but they would sƟll be reported. 
 
141.86(e)(2) “Water systems must include customer-requested 
samples from known lead service line sites in the 90th percenƟle 
calculaƟon if the samples meet the requirements of this 
secƟon.” 
141.90(a)(4) The State may 
require any such water 
system to conduct 
addiƟonal monitoring to 
maintain corrosion control 
in its distribuƟon system. 
Systems may not 
implement the addiƟon of 
a new source or long-term 
treatment change without 
State approval. 
Examples of long-term treatment changes include but are 
not limited to, the addiƟon of a new treatment process or 
modiﬁcaƟon of an exisƟng treatment process. Long-term 
changes can also include dose changes to exisƟng inhibitor 
concentraƟon. 
They do not, however, include chemical dose ﬂuctuaƟons 
associated with daily raw water quality changes where a new 
source has not been added. Examples of modiﬁcaƟons 
include switching secondary disinfectants, switching 
coagulants (e.g., alum to ferric chloride), and switching 
corrosion inhibitor products (e.g., orthophosphate to 
blended phosphate). 
Please provide more guidance and list speciﬁc examples of what 
treatment changes will or will not require increased lead and 
copper monitoring. 
141.84(a)(2) 
CT supports the inclusion of connectors in the baseline 
inventory where the material is known as described in B(2)(i) 
through (iii) of this secƟon. This inclusion is in alignment 
with and supports CT’s regulatory approach regarding 
connectors. CT’s inventory template includes ﬁelds where 
water systems are to record each service line’s connector 
material and if it was ever lead in the past. 
CT encourages EPA to keep the regulatory language regarding 
connectors. The due date for submission of the baseline 
inventory 3 years aŌer the LCRI is ﬁnalized and published in the 
register is ample Ɵme for systems to check their records as 
required in B(2)(i) through (iii) of this secƟon and add to their 
inventory. 
141.84(a)(2)(ii) 
CT supports these new classiﬁcaƟons regarding the 
connector. These new classiﬁcaƟons describe the situaƟon 
amply without requiring another data ﬁeld. 
CT encourages EPA to keep the regulatory language regarding 
connectors classiﬁcaƟons. 

CT DPH Comments on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
     (Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Rule Reference or Federal 
Register Page #/CFR 
citaƟon 
Comment/Concern/QuesƟon to be Addressed 
RecommendaƟon for EPA 
141.84(a)(4) 
CT supports the inclusion of the street address of the service 
line. 
CT encourages EPA to keep the regulatory language regarding 
the requirement a PWS to include street addresses in their 
inventory. Many PWS that use GIS systems to manage their 
service connecƟon include a geo located street address already. 
141.84(a)(6) 
CT supports the inclusion of the connector in their 
declaraƟon in lieu of making the inventory publicly available 
as required in (a)(5). 
CT encourages EPA to keep the regulatory language regarding 
the addiƟon of the connector in the determinaƟon of whether a 
PWS can use a declaraƟon or if they need to make their 
inventory publicly available. 
141.80(c)(3)(iii)(A) 
Does this not allow a system to use sample results collected 
above the minimum number of samples and forces the PWS 
to use the highest samples from the Tier 3,4,5 sites aŌer 
using all Tier 1 and 2 sample results? 
If the addiƟonal language is to not allow PWS to sample out of 
an ALE then, CT is supporƟve.   
141.2 DeﬁniƟons 
EliminaƟon of the Lead Trigger Level 
CT is supporƟve of the reducƟon in complexity of the rule by 
eliminaƟng the lead trigger level. 
141.2 DeﬁniƟons 
AddiƟon of the Connector 
CT is supporƟve of the inclusion of connectors to the rule and 
supports the proposed deﬁniƟon including the 2 feet criteria as 
long as any lead connector being greater than 2 feet will be 
handled as a lead service line. 
141.2 DeﬁniƟons 
Change in deﬁniƟon of a parƟal replacement 
CT supports the deﬁniƟon change of ParƟal Lead Service Line 
Replacement as it clariﬁes quesƟons regarding the original 
deﬁniƟon. 
141.81(f)(2) 
Added language to clarify if a PWS will need to conƟnue 
operaƟng their OCCT while conducƟng their mandatory 
replacement plan. 
CT Supports the addiƟon of 141.81(f)(2). This addiƟonal 
paragraph clariﬁes and ensures that PWS operate and maintain 
corrosion control while they are replacing service lines under 
141.84(d).  
141.84(a)(6) 
Inclusion of connectors in the requirement for PWS to uƟlize 
the writen statement in lieu of making the inventory 
publicly available. 
CT is in support of including connectors in the list of 
requirements in which a PWS can uƟlize the writen statement in 
lieu of making the inventory publicly available. 
 
 
 
Please add rows such that there is one comment per row.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0830 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
By Electronic Submission: Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC  20460 
 
Dear Mr. Michael Goldberg: 
 
The West Virginia Municipal Water Quality Association (WVMWQA) appreciates the opportunity 
to comment on USEPA’s proposed revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation 
(NPDWR) for lead and copper. On December 6, 2023, EPA issued for public comment further 
proposed revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR), found in 40 C.F.R. § 141.80.91), known 
as the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). Although the WVMWQA supports a robust 
Lead and Copper Rule, we have significant concerns, summarized below, about several of the 
proposed changes.  
 
The WVMWQA comprises public water and sewer statewide. Our members are dedicated to 
protecting public health and the environment – this includes reducing the amount of lead and 
copper present in our finished drinking water. We never seek to avoid necessary and appropriate 
requirements. Instead, we embrace such requirements and work to prioritize them and obtain the 
funding necessary to comply from the public that we serve. That said, as public utilities we must 
provide public water service in an affordable and cost-effective manner.  
 
With that perspective, we are compelled to submit these comments because the proposed LCRI 
requirements create a massive regulatory and economic obligation for both public water systems 
and their ratepayers. Adding these distribution system obligations is especially burdensome on 
top of the PFAS-related treatment obligations anticipated with EPA’s pending MCLs. Lead Service 
Line (LSL) removal is particularly challenging given the need for significant public outreach and 
interaction in relation to private laterals. US EPA estimates that there are around 9.2 million LSLs 
in the United States, which the AWWA estimates could cost over $90 billion to replace. Below we 
explain why we believe that the inventory obligation and removal of any LSLs that are found may 
be a major challenge both administratively and financially and will lead to significant conflict 
between EPA, the States, and water utilities as they struggle to define the universe of LSLs and 
complete the mandated replacements. 

WVMWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 2  
 
 
2 
 
I. 
Achieving 100% Lead Pipe Replacement Within 10 Years is Both Financially and 
Practically Impossible.  A Phased-In Deadline Based Upon System Lead Levels is 
Both Necessary and Appropriate 
 
The 10-Year Timeline 
 
The proposed LCRI would require water utilities to complete 100% lead service line replacement 
(LSLR) within 10 years. 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84882 (Dec. 6, 2023).  While there are alternative 
timelines for (1) systems with a high proportion of lead and GRR service lines in their distribution 
system relative to their total number of households served and (2) systems that would otherwise 
be required to replace greater than 10,000 service lines per year under the proposed 10-year 
replacement requirement, Id. at 84913, the ten-year timeframe is woefully inadequate.   
 
Anytime we talk in terms of “all” in relation to 50,000 water systems, spread across the country, 
we should pause for a reality check.  We should especially pause when a significant number of 
the LSLs to be replaced have not even been identified.  We should further pause when faced with 
a potential price tag of upwards of $100 billion dollars. 
 
EPA estimates that there are more than 50,000 water systems nationwide.  It is simply impractical 
for such a large number of systems to make significant distribution system changes in a ten-year 
period.  This is especially the case given the (1) fact that many/most of the LSLs have not been 
identified, (2) cost of such replacements, (3) need for public outreach around utility-owned LSL 
replacement, and (4) need for outreach and coordination with homeowners across the country 
regarding replacement of their customer-owned LSLs.  Such an historic and unprecedented effort 
would come during the worst period in modern history for trying to plan, finance, bid, and deliver 
projects.  There is simply not enough engineering or construction talent available to do the work 
- even if we could fund it. 
 
Many of our water systems are struggling right now with basic water availability, especially during 
the winter months.  Cold weather each of the last several winters has taken a major toll on water 
systems leading to numerous water main breaks and boil water advisories.  These have been 
especially prevalent across the southern United States and into the mid-Atlantic.  For example, 
much of the District of Columbia had a boil water notice in January of 2024 due to cold weather-
related line breaks. 
 
US EPA has for several decades made a priority of imposing incredibly expensive (and in many 
ways, counter-productive) sewer system improvement mandates on local governments 
nationwide.  As a result of this sewer-first enforcement approach, local resources have been 
forced to the sewer side, often at the expense of water utilities’ ability to raise revenue.  Those 
deferred investments are now coming home to roost for water systems.  On top of general system 
needs, thousands of water systems face historically expensive PFAS-related capital upgrades 
and incredible annual operation and maintenance costs for those facilities.  Adding a LSL 
replacement obligation over the next 10 years on top of these historic financial challenges is a 
bridge too far financially and from a project delivery perspective. 
 
A one-size-fits-all LSL removal period will have water systems with low lead levels vying for the 
same funding and engineering/contracting resources as water systems with much higher lead 
levels.  This makes no sense whatsoever. 
 

WVMWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 3  
 
 
3 
 
A more logical approach to LSL replacement is for USEPA to adopt a phased approach where 
utilities with higher P90 lead levels have earlier deadlines to replace their LSLs while utilities with 
lower P90 numbers defer their replacements.  Such an approach will allow EPA, the States, and 
utilities to prioritize available federal and State grant/loan resources as well as engineering and 
construction resources to water systems with higher lead levels.    
 
We specifically recommend that the final rule authorize the states to establish phased-in deadlines 
for their water systems.  Any water system above the 10 ppb lead action level must remove their 
LSLs within 10 years of the effective date of the rule.  Utilities with P90 values below the 10 ppt 
would be prioritized based upon their levels for LSL removal, generally not to exceed a 20-year 
compliance period.   We believe that 20 years is a more realistic (albeit, still very challenging) 
compliance period.  Significantly, such an implementation period will allow water utilities to 
coordinate LSL removal with other system upgrades both getting and giving economies of scale 
to water system projects.  This will reduce the financial burden and system planning disruption 
that will otherwise result from a crude, 10-year LSL removal deadline. 
 
This phased approach, coupled with a one-third reduction in the lead action level, will ensure 
additional protection going forward for all Americans who receive public drinking water, from day 
one of the Rule’s effective date. 
 
II. 
Lead Service Line Replacement Must Only Include Public Lead Service Lines. 
 
The concept of LSL replacement must be revised to include replacement of only utility-owned 
LSLs. EPA lacks the authority to require public water utilities to replace privately-owned water 
infrastructure located on private property.  There are significant legal questions about whether 
public entities can even spend public funds for this private purpose.   
 
EPA cannot withhold credit for a public side lead service line replacement unless water systems 
undertake illegally impermissible action on private property.  EPA needs to address the legality of 
requiring public water systems to replace private lead service lines before imposing such a 
requirement in the LCRI. 
 
Rather than illegally seeking to force public water systems to make improvements to private 
indoor plumbing, EPA should give water utilities a benefit for each full LSL replacement that is 
performed.  For example, a utility could be given more time to complete LSL removals (within our 
suggested 20 year from the rule effective date compliance period) if they meet certain private side 
LSL removal goals (such as 30 or 40 percent associated with public LSL removal). 
 
We also question whether EPA’s assumed cost to implement the proposed rule has included 
private side LSL replacement costs.  If “yes,” we would like to know what EPA estimates those 
private costs to be and the basis for those estimates.   
 
Revise the Definition of “Under the Control of the Water System” to Exclude Customer-Owned 
LSLs 
 
Relatedly, we disagree with the proposed LCRI rule requirement that full LSL replacement is 
required when lines are “under the control” of the water system. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84882. The term 
“under the control” of the water system is defined as wherever a water system has adequate 
access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full-service line replacement or 
replacement of the lead connector. Id. at 84920.  

WVMWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 4  
 
 
4 
 
This definition is impermissibly overbroad.  The definition must clarify that water utilities are not 
obligated to replace customer-owned LSLs as EPA cannot legally require public utilities to make 
changes to private property. The key aspect should be ownership. The present proposed 
incentives are written for a complete replacement (with customer agreement) so that water 
systems do not get credit for LSL replacement if it doesn’t include the customer’s side. We believe 
this is an illegal provision and although we support full replacements, our members cannot be 
required to go on private property and replace indoor plumbing. Those private side replacements 
should instead be driven by federal funding efforts and partial replacements should be given the 
credit they are due, considering they take great effort and expense to identify and accomplish.  
Instead, and as noted above, water utilities should be given a benefit if they achieve a certain 
goal for customer-owned LSL replacement as part of LSL replacement of publicly-owned water 
distribution lines. 
 
Lining and Coating Service Lines Should Qualify for Extended Removal Deadlines 
 
As noted above, removing “all” LSLs in the country in ten years is a shocking financial and 
practical proposition.  Rather than requiring removal, we believe EPA should allow a range of 
effective lead reduction approaches, such as lining or coating technologies to count equally as 
LSL replacements.  At a minimum, lined or coated service lines should qualify for deferred removal 
schedules.  
 
Lined or coated service lines immediately control lead from entering drinking water. EPA’s 
inventory and full service line replacement requirements in the LCRI will impose substantial costs 
on water systems that must simultaneously investigate unknown lead status service lines and 
connectors, finance capital projects associated with replacing known or discovered lead and GRR 
service lines and lead connectors and assemble the resources and personnel to replace all the 
service lines requiring replacement. 
 
Granting water systems an additional period to complete the replacements of coated or lined 
service lines, e.g. for the service life of the coating or lining product, will lower the personnel and 
financial burdens of the LCRI on water systems while immediately reducing lead from drinking 
water as water systems will dedicate resources to those services lines most likely posing a risk of 
lead exposure. 
 
III. 
Galvanized Replacement Service Lines. 
 
Definition of “Galvanized Requiring Replacements” 
 
Under the proposed LCRI, galvanized service lines that have ever been downstream of LSL 
require replacement (GRR). 88 Fed. Reg. at 84882. The EPA defines galvanized requiring 
replacement service lines as a “galvanized service line that currently is or ever was downstream 
of a lead service line or is currently downstream in the direction of flow of a lead status unknown 
service line.” Id. 85054 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.2). If the water system cannot demonstrate the 
galvanized service line was never downstream of a lead line, the line is a galvanized requiring 
replacement service line. Id. 
 
The EPA’s proposed definition of GRRs is unreasonable and counterproductive.  The definition 
will likely result in water systems having to replace all galvanized service lines within the same 

WVMWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 5  
 
 
5 
 
10-year period they must replace LSLs.  We think the presumption that a galvanized line requires 
replacement is too strong.  Rather than requiring the water system to know that there was never 
a LSL above the galvanized line, a water utility should be able to conclude, based upon available 
information, that there is no information that there was ever a LSL above the galvanized line.  In 
those cases, the water system should be able to prioritize the lining/coating/removal of galvanized  
lines over a longer compliance period – say 20 years.  Again, the longer period is absolutely 
critical if water systems are to see economies of scale with other water distribution system work 
in conjunction with LSL and galvanized line removal.  This is especially the case for water utilities 
with P90 numbers that are well below the proposed 10 ppb action level.  We continue to believe 
that the states should be given the authority to prioritize LSL (and GRR) removal. 
 
The Lead Connector Threshold Should be 36 Inches and Unknown Connectors Assumed to Be 
36 Inches or Smaller 
 
We disagree that lead connectors greater than two feet in length should be considered service 
lines. See 88 id. at 84919, 85083. Connectors greater than 24 inches have been sold to utilities 
and the EPA does not present evidence suggesting significantly higher lead concentrations 
resulting from a lead connector that is 36 inches as opposed to 24 inches in length. If EPA is 
going to impose an arbitrary connector length, it should be at least 36 inches.  Moreover, there 
should be a presumption that connectors of unknown size and composition are less than three 
feet in length. 
 
IV. 
Locating Legacy Lead Pipes Remains a Monumental Task for Utilities. 
 
It might be one thing for EPA to impose a 10-year LSL removal requirement if we already 
understood how many LSLs there were and where they are located.  That would allow us to better 
estimate the cost of removal and time needed.  Instead, EPA is shooting blind in that they don’t 
even have the benefit of the existing LSL inventories that won’t come due until October 16, 2024.  
Almost all of those inventories will be derived using predictive tools with only a small percentage 
of LSLs actually having been ground-truthed. 
 
The fact remains that it is a spring for most water systems to meet October 16, 2024 initial 
inventory deadline.  We suspect that hundreds, if not thousands of water systems will miss the 
deadline.  It will take many years following the development of the initial deadlines to ground truth 
where LSLs actually are in each water system.   
 
Accordingly, we request that EPA clarify what, if any, inventory update requirements are 
contemplated between the initial inventory under the LCRI and baseline inventories in the 
proposed LCRI. We suggest the EPA suspend inventory updates between the two deadlines to 
allow water systems an opportunity to develop a complete and accurate baseline inventory in light 
of the substantial difficulty most water systems will have categorizing the material composition 
and location of their service lines and connectors. Alternatively, the EPA should consider 
eliminating the initial inventory requirement and allow water systems to dedicate all of their 
resources into developing complete and accurate baseline inventories available to the public by 
2027. 
 
Baseline Inventory Requirements 
 

WVMWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 6  
 
 
6 
 
We request the EPA to reconsider requiring water systems to investigate connector locations and 
composition in its baseline inventory. The proposed rule would require water systems to remove 
lead connectors upon discovery. 88 Fed. Reg. at 85066 (Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(e)). The 
EPA’s justification for not requiring water systems to find and replace all lead connectors as part 
of the full-service line replacement requirement is that “regular progress towards lead connector 
replacement is made in coordination with other activities, such as planned infrastructure work, 
while resources are prioritized for replacement of all LSLs and GRR service lines as quickly as 
feasible.” Id. at 84919.  
 
EPA noted that most lead connectors will be replaced under the proposed rule because “all lead 
connectors that are attached to a lead or GRR service line would be replaced by the end of the 
mandatory service line replacement program.” Id. In addition, EPA “also expects that many lead 
connectors may be connected to aging water mains and likely to undergo replacement with 
routine main replacement activities in coming years,” especially because EPA estimates that any 
given lead connector “is expected to be a minimum of 41 years old by the LCRI compliance date 
in 2027” and the “average service life of cast iron, ductile iron, and asbestos-cement pipe is 40 
years.” Id. EPA thus acknowledged that water systems will encounter and replace the vast majority 
of lead connectors during routine maintenance as a result of aging infrastructure or as a result of 
its mandatory service line replacement requirements. 
 
At the same time, EPA acknowledges that short lead connectors pose a lower lead exposure risk 
than LSL and GRR service lines that are significantly longer. Id. at 84919 (“EPA expects that 
galvanized lines downstream of lead connectors may contribute less lead into drinking water than 
those that were downstream of much longer LSLs”). EPA therefore prioritized service line 
replacement. Because EPA accepts that its requirement for water systems to replace lead 
connectors upon discovery will address the vast majority of lead connectors in a water system 
and acknowledges that lead connectors pose less of a health risk than lead service lines, we 
request EPA to reconsider its decision to include connectors in the baseline inventory. 
 
Removing the investigation of connectors from the baseline inventory removes expensive and 
laborious investigations into the location and composition of connectors when those resources 
are best spent identifying, locating, and removing lead and GRR service lines. Water systems 
reporting the composition and location of encountered connectors and the number of replaced 
lead connectors will still provide valuable information to the water system and the public about 
the location and composition of connectors in a water system and the probability that lead 
connectors are present. 
 
Validation Pool Requirements 
 
The proposed regulation instructs water systems to develop a “validation pool” consisting of all 
lines categorized as non-lead minus the non-lead lines that already replaced LSL or GRR lines, 
non-lead lines already visually inspected at two points along the line, or non-lead lines with 
documentation demonstrating their composition. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84935, 85063 (proposed 40 
C.F.R. § 141.84(b)(5)). The rule would require water systems to randomly and visually inspect as 
many service lines in the validation pool as necessary to ensure a “95% confidence level” that the 
observed proportion of non-lead lines validated is representative of the larger validation pool 

WVMWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 7  
 
 
7 
 
within ten years of the rule’s publication and seven years of submitting baseline inventories. Id.; 
Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, EPA 815-
R-23-003 at 24-25 (Nov. 2023). 
 
The timing of this LSL/GRR inventory requirement reinforces the impracticality of the ten-year 
LSL/GRR removal requirement. 
 
EPA is currently calculating the number of visual inspections of lines necessary to ensure that 
lines categorized as non-lead are in fact non-lead by assuming a standard normal distribution and 
an “expected sample proportion” of 0.5. EPA assumed the expected sample proportion “to be 50 
percent, meaning that 50 percent of the non-lead service lines investigated are expected to be 
confirmed as non-lead.” Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements, EPA 815-R-23-003 at 25 (Nov. 2023). EPA acknowledged “this proportion will most 
likely be much higher since most non-lead lines will end up being confirmed as nonlead.” Id. EPA 
nonetheless maintained the proportion at 0.5 because, “an assumption of 0.50 provides the most 
conservative (or largest) sample size…meaning that any system validating this number of lines 
will be guaranteed to have met or exceeded the minimum number for statistical significance 
regardless of the true sample proportion.” Id. 
 
We question why EPA does not simply stick with the 95% confidence and allow each water utility’s 
consultant to develop a testing program that will achieve that level of confidence for the utility’s 
list.  Why does EPA pick a very aggressive 95th percent confidence level and then structure the 
rule to force an even higher level of confidence? 
 
The method for determining the number of visual inspections necessary is also not particularly 
well explained. At a minimum, EPA should clarify its validation calculations, e.g. what data it used, 
if any, to determine the expected sample proportion, what the relevant comparison EPA is making 
between the validated lines and the validation pool and what that significance of that comparison 
is, and where EPA derived its formulas for determining the appropriate sample size and provide 
citations. 
 
EPA should also assume in its sample proportion that water systems will correctly assess line 
status more than 50% of the time given its concurrent requirements to investigate lead status 
unknown lines. As EPA has explained the sample proportion, EPA is essentially assuming water 
systems will be no better at determining service line composition than flipping a coin. In light of 
the other significant investigation costs imposed by the rule, EPA should reconsider this 
assumption because it should significantly lower the number of validations water systems must 
make.  
 
We support EPA’s decision to exclude service lines which water systems have confirmed as non-
lead through records investigations from the validation pool. Id. at 84935, 85063.  
 
We also request the EPA to consider delaying the date the inventory validation must be submitted 
to better align with the categorization of lead status unknown service lines. Water systems must 
identify the material of all lead status unknown service lines within ten years from the compliance 
date. Id. at 85063. Conversely, the validation study must be submitted no later than ten years 

WVMWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 8  
 
 
8 
 
from the rule’s publication date or seven years from the compliance date. Id. at 85063. If water 
systems submit inventory validations before all unknown lines are categorized, then the validation 
pool will not include some lines categorized as “non-lead.” Allowing the validation to occur at least 
after all lead status unknown lines have been categorized will create a validation pool 
representative of all of the non-lead categorized service lines and provide water systems three 
more years to validate their inventories. 
 
Public Disclosure of LSL Addresses In Service Line Inventory 
 
The LCRI, like the LCRR, continues to require that a water system’s annual inventory updates be 
publicly accessible. Although the LCRR includes location identifiers (street, intersection, 
landmark, etc.) served by each LSL, the LCRI states utilities must include a street address with 
each service line and connector. Id. at 84936. We continue to disagree with the need to publicly 
publish a list of homes served by LSLs. Each home will get an annual reminder of this fact. Any 
home that tests for lead will receive its results – there is no need or clear authority for the EPA to 
mandate that this specific information must be made publicly available.  We especially think it is 
irresponsible to include unknown LSL in these lists. 
 
V. 
Lowering the Lead Action Level will be significant in many states. 
 
EPA is proposing to lower the lead action level from 15 µg/L to 10 µg/L. 88 Fed. Reg. 84880 while 
eliminating the lead trigger level that was introduced under the 2021 LCRR. If the AL is exceeded, 
the system must inform the public (Tier 1 public notification within 24 hrs of learning of 
exceedance) and reduce lead exposure while concurrently working to replace all lead pipes (for 
example, installing/adjusting corrosion control treatment). Id. 
 
Lowering the Action Level from 15 ug/L to 10 ug/L will be a big deal in some states with some 
states asserting that the number of systems exceeding the new action level could double.  This 
is likely to be the case for a number of smaller systems.   
 
We take no position on the reduction in the action level.  However, we do believe that P90 
numbers should be a basis for phasing in LSL/GRR removal requirements and that the states are 
in the best position to prioritize LSL/GRR removal.  States are also in the best position to work 
with water systems to mitigate lead levels pending LSL removal.   
 
VI. 
We Disagree With the Requirement to Make Point-of-Use Filters/Pitchers Available 
to All Households After Three Action Level Exceedances.    
 
Under the LCRI, water systems with three lead action level exceedances would be required to 
conduct additional outreach to consumers and make pitcher filters or point-of-use devices certified 
to reduce lead available to all consumers. See id. at 84954.  
 
Providing such filters/pitchers will be overkill in that it will scare many residents not served by 
LSL/GRRs into thinking their tap water is not safe.  That loss of confidence can be difficult, if not 
impossible, to overcome to the long-term detriment of the residents and the utility.   
 
Moreover, distributing filters/pitchers will be a massive administrative and financial task.  The 
filters/pitchers would have to be provided to each residential and non-residential location served 
by the public water supply.   

WVMWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 9  
 
 
9 
 
We are also very concerned that residents would not properly replace the filters and could end up 
concentrating lead and copper beyond what would otherwise be present in their drinking water. 
 
VII. 
Utilities Must Be Allowed to Invalidate a Homeowner Sample That Does not Follow 
Proper Collection Procedures. 
 
Under the proposed rule, a water utility could not invalidate a homeowner’s sample even if the 
sample was not taken in accordance with LCRI requirements.  This is unacceptable.  All data 
must meet applicable QA/QC/Sampling requirements.  At a minimum, the rule should give the 
water utility the discretion to use a non-conforming sample but should not mandate the use of 
such samples. 
 
VIII. 
Water Systems Must Be Able to Select Homes From Lower Tiers Where Not Enough 
Tier 1 Homeowners Are Willing to Participate. 
 
The LCRI must clarify that water systems which, despite best, good faith efforts, cannot attract 
enough Tier 1 homeowners to participate in sampling, can use lower tier homes. 
 
Otherwise, the water system will be in non-compliance due to causes (lack of homeowner 
willingness to participate) which are beyond its control. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Our member utilities work tirelessly to provide high quality finished drinking water for our 
customers in an affordable and cost-effective manner.  We appreciate EPA’s consideration of our 
concerns about the practicality and affordability of the requirements we object to above.  We also 
appreciate EPA’s consideration of our suggested improvements to the proposed rule.  In 
particular, we strongly believe that a final rule needs to provide additional time for LSL/GRR 
removal and that a state-directed phased approach over twenty years from the rule’s effective 
date, is warranted. 
 
Sincerely, 
       
 
F. Paul Calamita  
General Counsel 
  
  
C: WVMWQA Members

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1130 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 05, 2024 
 
 
Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
 
State of Oregon’s Comments on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
 
The State of Oregon concurs with the comments submitted by the Association of State Drinking Water 
Administrators. Additionally, Oregon offers the following comments on portions of the proposed rule that 
are of particular interest in Oregon. 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Samina Panwhar, Manager 
Drinking Water Services  
Oregon Health Authority  
 
PUBLIC HEALTH DIVISION 
Center for Health Protection, Drinking Water Services  
 
 
Tina Kotek, Governor 
800 NE Oregon Street, Suite #640 
Portland, OR 97232-2162 
(971) 673-0405 
(971) 673-0694 – FAX 
http://healthoregon.org/dwp 

State of Oregon Comments on Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
EPA Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
2 
 
 
Requests for Comments 
Location in FR 
Request for Comment 
Comment 
IX. Request for Comment  
Service Line Replacement 
 
All aspects of the proposed scope of the replacement 
requirements, including the criteria used to define a full 
service line replacement (e.g., cutting the pipe at abandoned 
properties, replacing the entire service line) and which lead 
sources are subject to replacement under the mandatory 
program. EPA is seeking comment on whether to prohibit 
reconnection of any disconnected LSL or GRR service line. 
EPA is requesting comment on whether the Agency should 
include lead connectors or galvanized service lines that are or 
were downstream of a lead connector as part of mandatory 
replacement 
Only galvanized lines that have been identified 
as ever being downstream of lead service lines 
or a lead connector in the past should be 
required to be replaced in public water systems 
where little to no lead has ever been 
documented as being used. In Oregon we have 
no history of lead being used in public service 
lines, so the GRRs are designated as such only 
because the systems lack documentation 
proving it was never downstream of lead. To 
have the system contact a customer four times, 
suggesting they replace their service line in 
absence of a likely health threat is too much and 
confusing to the customer. Flexibility in water 
systems with no LSLs is needed.  
Whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent 
should be more than four times (e.g., five, six, or seven 
times). 
4 times is appropriate for lead and GRRs 
identified as downstream of a lead service line 
or connector. For GRRs designated as such due 
to lack of adequate documentation, one 
notification is appropriate.  
 
IX. Request for Comment  
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
 
Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of 
the proposed sites should be included in Tier 3, if additional 
sites should be included, or if some should be included in a 
different, lower priority tier, such as Tier 4. Specifically, 
comment on whether sites served by galvanized service lines 
or containing galvanized premise plumbing that are identified 
as ever being downstream of an LSL or lead connector should 
be included in the same tier as other sites with a current lead 
connector (e.g., copper service line downstream of a lead 
connector). 
Clarify that Tier 3 only includes galvanized 
downstream of known lead, not GRR due to 
lack of documentation in systems with no other 
lead. 
 
 

State of Oregon Comments on Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
EPA Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
3 
 
IX. Request for Comment Service Line Inventory and 
Service Line Replacement Plan 
 
EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the 
accuracy of non-lead service lines in their inventory that were 
categorized using methods other than records review or visual 
inspection of at least two points along the line. EPA is 
requesting comment on the number of validations required, 
the proposed 95 percent confidence level approach used to 
develop the number of validations required, the criteria for 
which methods used to categorize non-lead service lines 
should be included in the validation pool (including whether 
non-lead lines categorized based on records should be subject 
to validation), and the seven-year timeline for systems on a 
10-year replacement deadline to complete the validation 
requirements. 
Oregon allows systems with zero evidence of 
past or current lead service lines to list the 
unknowns as non-lead if they can physically 
inspect a number to have 95% confidence in 
that assertion, similar to EPA’s proposed 
verification requirements. EPA should clarify 
when this verification must be done and how a 
PWS can demonstrate that they have met the 
requirement through following state protocols.  
Also, the proposal states that 2-point 
verification must be done. EPA should clarify 
that if one portion of the service is known and 
the other is unknown, only one-point 
verification of the unknown line is needed.  
 
IX. Request for Comment  
Lead Action and Trigger Levels 
 
EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of 
0.010 mg/L, as well as comment and supporting data on 
alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, with regards to 
generally effective corrosion control treatment and identifying 
systems most at risk of elevated levels of lead in drinking 
water. 
10 ppb is an appropriate action level. 5 ppb 
would require more small systems to install 
treatment that they do not have the expertise to 
operate, potentially resulting in more lead 
exposure or other risks.  
IX. Request for Comment: Compliance Alternatives for a 
Lead Action Level Exceedance for Small Community 
Water Systems and Non-Transient, Non-Community 
Water Systems 
 
EPA is proposing that small system flexibilities be limited to 
CWSs serving 3,300 persons and fewer and all NTNCWSs 
for the remaining compliance alternatives of point-of-use 
devices and plumbing replacement. EPA is seeking comment 
on whether the Agency should allow systems serving up to 
10,000 persons (or another threshold) to be eligible to use the 
small system compliance flexibility provision. 
Practically speaking, plumbing replacement, or 
installing POU devices is only feasible for 
systems that have control over the devices or 
plumbing. 3,300 population is a reasonable cap 
and allows for state flexibility in 
implementation. 
IX. Request for Comment 
Public Education 
 
Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination 
that water systems are capable of providing consumer notices 
of individual tap sampling results within three calendar days 
of obtaining those results, regardless of whether the results 
exceed the lead or copper action level, or if a longer time 
frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar 
days, 14 calendar days). 
Systems would not have their 90th percentile 
calculation in 3 days. Recommend keeping the 
30 days. 
 
 

State of Oregon Comments on Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
EPA Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
4 
 
IX. Request for Comment 
Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities 
 
Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples 
and/or to sample more frequently in schools and child care 
facilities. 
Since the objective is for public awareness 
rather than a treatment technique rule, the final 
rule should require a minimal number of sites (2 
for childcare facilities and 5 for schools) and 
allow for state program flexibility.  
The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to 
community water systems from the requirement for lead 
sampling in schools and child care facilities during the five-
year period after the LCRI compliance date if the facility was 
sampled for lead after January 1, 2021 but prior to the LCRI 
compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver 
requirements of § 141.92(h). 
EPA should more clearly define what is a 
school, particularly a private school. Since these 
are not overseen in any way by the state, 
definitions can vary widely. EPA should also 
consider a minimum number of students for 
private schools, such as 20. Conversely, EPA 
could also consider requiring that PWSs 
conduct outreach for private schools and test 
upon request rather than require each private 
school to be identified and tested.   
The minimum requirements for States to provide a waiver 
(e.g., should the waiver be limited to locations where the filter 
use is required by State or local law; should the waiver be 
limited to locations where State or local law requires periodic 
sampling or testing to ensure proper filter use). 
Waivers should be allowed in both 
circumstances. EPA should clarify that partial 
waiver are also allowed, such as waivers in 
states that require testing of public schools but 
not private schools.  
Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and child 
care facility sampling results publicly available, and if so, 
how frequently and in what manner. 
EPA should allow flexibility as to how results 
are provided to the public, to account for states 
that already have a public notification process. 
Requiring the public water system to publicize 
school and childcare facility test results is 
burdensome in any state but would be 
redundant in states that require the schools and 
childcare facilities to make their results 
available to users or the public.  
 
IX. Request for Comment 
Reporting and Recordkeeping 
 
EPA is requesting comment on the expansion of the inventory 
reporting to include lead connectors and non-lead service 
lines. 
Expansion of the inventory to include 
connectors should be optional for water 
systems. If a system has the records or 
determined through repair work it can be 
recorded, otherwise this component can only be 
determined by excavation. This goes above and 
beyond the LCRR which was stated would not 
be changed. 

State of Oregon Comments on Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
EPA Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
This summary of EPA’s Requests for Comment was developed by ASDWA and is not guaranteed to be 100% accurate.  
5 
 
EPA has heard concern over the ability of States to review all 
required site sample plans and provide approvals in time for 
the first tap monitoring period, and is requesting comment on 
whether EPA should consider a phased approach or alternate 
approach to reduce the burden on States following the rule 
compliance date. 
A phased approach would be more feasible.  
 
Questions from within Preamble 
 
A system’s existing authority to access the service line and 
complete the full service line replacement might provide the 
system with the legal authority to conduct the service line 
replacement over the objection of the property owner or 
resident. However, as some stakeholders noted, requiring 
service line replacement at properties where customers object 
to their replacement could create potential safety concerns for 
utility staff. EPA is seeking comment on whether the 
proposed LCRI should either allow systems to treat those 
service lines as not under the control of the system and forego 
replacement of the lines or require systems to conduct full 
service line replacement in situations where the system has 
legal access to conduct the full replacement but property 
owners or residents deny physical access. 
Private service line pipe material and 
replacement information should be part of real 
estate transactions.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0752 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
I believe this is a great idea because human health should always be the number one 
priority. If we allow lead and copper in our drinking water that can cause so many terrible 
health issues. Water should be something we go to drink as the most healthy opon and people 
should not have to worry about things like lead or copper when it comes to drinking water. 
Please listen and take notes to what is being said here because this is vital not just to us but are 
kids and our grandkids. If we do not put an end to this now it will only get worse for our future 
generaons.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0825 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1102 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
The Honorable Michael S. Regan, Administrator
Feb 5, 2024
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20460
RE: Ensuring Safe Drinking Water at School - Proposed Lead and Copper Rule
Improvements (Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801)
Dear Administrator Regan,
On behalf of millions of American families, educators and concerned citizens, we urge you to
strengthen the proposed Lead & Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) to ensure safe drinking
water at schools and child care centers.
Lead contamination of drinking water is a serious, longstanding and widespread threat to public
health. A key reason this problem persists is that federal policy has only required action when
highly variable testing detects lead. To finally ensure safe drinking water for all Americans, the
EPA must transform that “test and fix” policy to one that prevents lead contamination at every
drinking water tap.
A perfect example of this preventative approach is the LCRI’s requirement that water utilities
replace all lead service lines within 10 years. These 9+ million toxic pipes are the single greatest
source of lead contamination for buildings served by them. We wholeheartedly support turning
President Biden’s goal of eliminating these lead pipes within a decade into an enforceable
reality.
We need similarly bold policies to stop lead from contaminating the water where
America’s children go to learn and play each day. Even low levels of lead can damage
children’s health - including learning disabilities, behavior problems, and more. Yet national
standards have allowed the fountains, faucets, pipes and plumbing in our schools to contain a

significant amount of lead. (Even some post-2014 faucets can cause contamination.) As a
result, lead contamination of schools’ drinking water is now widespread.
Yet for most schools and child care centers, the proposed rule only requires water systems to
offer testing (and very limited testing at that). Even federally regulated schools and child care
centers would only have to remediate taps where tests show lead concentrations at 10 parts per
billion (ppb) or more.
These proposed policies will fail to secure safe water for kids and educators. Because lead
testing is highly variable, the water from a fountain or faucet can be “highly hazardous” even if
several samples fail to detect lead. Moreover, the 10 ppb action level means that no remediation
will be required for a huge proportion of taps where some level of lead is detected. This weak
policy is also contrary to EPA’s own 3Ts Guidance, which urges schools to reduce lead levels “to
the lowest possible concentrations.”1
America’s kids and educators deserve better. Just as we must replace every lead service line,
federal policy should aim to prevent lead contamination at every tap at schools. Except where a
school district or child care facility affirmatively opts out, the LCRI should require Community
Water Systems (which serve 90% of schools) to implement one of the following options at
schools and child care facilities:
a) Prevent lead contamination at every tap, including:
1.
Filter first: Install and maintain point of use filters certified to remove lead on every tap
used for drinking water, cooking or beverage preparation. As fountains contain lead and
cannot accept filters at the point where water comes out, they should be replaced by
new water stations with filters. A growing number of jurisdictions have already adopted
some version of this “filter first” policy for schools - Including Michigan, Philadelphia,
Portland (OR) and the District of Columbia;
2.
A health-based limit on lead: Limit lead in schools’ water to 1 ppb, as recommended
by the American Academy of Pediatrics. Schools and child care centers are particularly
well-situated to meet this low lead concentration because they have full control of their
water delivery systems - all the way to the tap. Taps should be tested after filter
installation to ensure this standard is being met; and
3.
Get the lead out: To stop the cycle of lead contamination at school, new and
replacement taps and plumbing should meet the Q≤1 standard recently adopted by
California, where lead leached into water is less than or equal to 1 ppb; or
b) Test every drinking water tap at least once every 6 months, and then replace taps and install
filters whenever lead concentrations exceed 1 ppb. While not ideal, this much more robust “test
and fix” option would be more effective at reducing the likelihood of lead-contaminated water at
school than the infrequent testing and no required remediation in the proposed rule.
For the roughly 10% of schools and child care facilities that are federally regulated as
Non-Transient Non-Community Water Systems, the EPA can and should simply require the
much more protective Option a) above in the LCRI rule.
1 U.S. EPA, 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities (2018) at Module
4, page 36, accessed on January 10, 2024.

Right to Know: To counter the strong likelihood of a false sense of safety from inherently
variable testing, the LCRI should also require all water utilities to regularly communicate
(including online) the following to families, educators and the public regarding schools and child
care facilities: full test results showing any level of lead at each tap; that tests are variable and
can fail to detect lead; that there is no safe level of lead; prevention/remediation measures taken
at each tap; and any school districts or child care facilities opting out of their Community Water
System’s measures outlined above.
In addition to these requirements for schools and child care centers regulated as NTNCWS,
EPA should also incorporate policy changes that will better prevent lead contamination at all
other schools and child care facilities:
●
Establish a clear preference for awarding grants aimed at prevention - such as replacing
fountains with filter-equipped water stations - rather than funding more testing. Condition
grants on adhering to the Right to Know provisions outlined above.
●
Change the name of EPA’s 3 Ts Guidance to “Preventing Lead Contamination at Every
Tap” and replace its “test-and-fix” recommendations with the prevention-oriented
measures outlined above for LCR-regulated schools.
America’s children and educators need safe drinking water to thrive and be healthy. We urge the
EPA to act more boldly to get the lead out at school.
Sincerely,
National Parent Teacher Association (PTA)
American Federation of Teachers (AFT)
National Education Association (NEA)
National Association of School Nurses
National Association of Pediatric
Nurse Practitioners
National Collaborative for Infants & Toddlers
National League for Nursing
Learning Disabilities Association of America
Able Differently
Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments
AFSCME
Waterkeeper Alliance
Black Millennials 4 Flint
Campaign for Lead Free Water
Environment America Research & Policy Center
Clean Water Action
Environmental Protection Network
Environmental Working Group
Environmental Action
Lawyers for Good Government
League of Conservation Voters (LCV)
Natural Resources Defense Council
Student Public Interest Research Groups (PIRGs)
Sierra Club
U.S. Public Interest Research Groups (PIRG) Education Fund
Alaska Environment
Learning Disabilities Association of Alabama
Cahaba River Society

Learning Disabilities Association of Arkansas
Environment Arizona
Arizona PIRG
California Safe Schools
Environment California
California Public Interest Research Group (CALPIRG)
350 Conejo / San Fernando Valley
Active San Gabriel Valley
California Environmental Voters
Children Now
CHN, Sacramento Climate Coalition, SacAct
CleanEarth4Kids.org
Friends Committee on Legislation of California
Learning Disabilities Association of California
San Francisco Bay Physicians for Social Responsibility
Santa Cruz Climate Action Network
Wholly H2O
CoPIRG
Environment Colorado
Environment Connecticut
ConnPIRG
Learning Disabilities Association of Connecticut
Learning Disabilities Association of Delaware
Environment Florida
Learning Disabilities Association of Florida
Environment Georgia
Learning Disabilities Association of Georgia
Environment Iowa
Learning Disabilities Association of Iowa
Environment Illinois
Illinois PIRG
Learning Disabilities Association of Illinois
Learning Disabilities Association of Indiana
Massachusetts PTA
MASSPIRG
The Health Foundation of Central Massachusetts
Environment Massachusetts
Community Action Works
Maryland PIRG
Environment Maryland
Learning Disabilities Association of Maryland

Environment Maine
Learning Disabilities Association of Maine
Environment Michigan
PIRGIM
Learning Disabilities Association of Michigan
Learning Disabilities Association of Minnesota
Environment Minnesota
Environment Missouri
Environment Montana
Clean Water for North Carolina
Environment North Carolina
Learning Disabilities Association of North Carolina
Learning Disabilities Association of Nebraska
Environment New Hampshire
Environment New Jersey
New Jersey PIRG
Learning Disabilities Association of New Jersey
Environment New Mexico
Environment Nevada
Heart of the City Neighborhoods, Inc.
Environment New York
Learning Disabilities Association of New York
Northeast Ohio Black Health Coalition
Ohio River Foundation
Environment Ohio
Learning Disabilities Association of Ohio
Learning Disabilities Association of Oklahoma
Environment Oregon
OSPIRG
PennEnvironment
Women for a Healthy Environment
Learning Disabilities Association of Pennsylvania
PennPIRG
Environment Rhode Island
Rhode Island PIRG
Learning Disabilities Association of South Carolina
Shelby County (TN) Lead Prevention & Sustainability Commission

Environment Texas
TexPIRG
Learning Disabilities Association of Texas
Learning Disabilities Association of Utah
Environment Virginia
Learning Disabilities Association of Virginia
Environment Washington
WashPIRG
Learning Disabilities Association of Washington
Freshwater For Life Action Coalition
Wisconsin Environment
Learning Disabilities Association of Wisconsin
WisPIRG

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0852 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024
The Honorable Michael S. Regan
Administrator
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, D.C. 20460
RE:
Comments: Improvements to Lead & Copper National Primary Drinking Water
Regulations, Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036
Dear Administrator Regan,
On behalf of our members and supporters, we write to express our strong support for the
proposed improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule. We urge the EPA to finalize the strong
improvements to the rule and share some additional ideas for consideration to further
strengthen the rule.
Specifically, we strongly support the 10 year timeline for a full lead service line (LSL)
replacement. As the most critical element of the rule, it puts an end date on when lead
service lines need to be removed and replaced, for the first time. Ohio has the second most
LSLs in the country, and we believe that the 10 year timeline is achievable for the majority of
our cities. Additionally, requiring water utilities to complete and regularly update a
comprehensive inventory of water service lines will help utilities to plan and scope the work
ahead and give communities more information about what materials are being used to deliver
the water to their homes.
The proposed rule’s stronger testing requirements, requiring sampling from both the first and
fifth liter of water from the tap, will ensure that more instances of elevated lead levels are
caught and that households are notified. The provision where water utilities will be required
to provide filters when there have been repeated exceedances of the action level will ensure
that citizens are better protected while waiting for their service lines to be replaced. Though,
we are concerned that the utilities are able to focus their resources most intently on actual
lead service line replacement. Thus, we recommend requiring utilities to provide filters only
to households with lead service lines or unknown materials.
There are some areas of the updated rule that we would like to see strengthened to better
protect Americans. While the updates to testing requirements in the home are stronger, we
urge the EPA to also strengthen the testing requirements for schools and childcare centers.
The proposed rule currently requires only one lead test to be performed at five locations in
each school and two locations in childcare centers. This is problematic because lead can still
be found in faucets and fixtures, especially in old buildings. We urge the agency to ensure
that the water flowing from taps and fountains in our schools and childcare centers are 100%

lead free. The rule should require retesting, testing at more locations, and that results of
those tests be shared with parents and staff.
Secondly, the rule as written, will allow utilities to forego removing and replacing lead service
lines in circumstances such as when the utility is not able to gain access to the property or
when the property owner is unable or unwilling to pay for the private-portion of the
replacement. This will disproportionately impact low-income individuals and renters who do
not have control over whether their landlord will give permission to the utilities. We urge the
EPA to strengthen the language in the rule to ensure that utilities must take every step
possible to gain access to the property and to either cover the cost of the private side of the
line or to provide financial assistance to low-income households/property owners for the
private portion of the line.
Finally, the drop in the lead action level from 15 ppb to 10 ppb is a step in the right direction,
but we know that no detectable level of lead is safe for children and adults. We urge the EPA
to consider lowering the lead action level even further to cover any detectable amount of
lead.
The $15 billion earmarked for lead service line replacement is an essential first step at
funding the requirements of the rule yet it is still not enough. The expected costs associated
with replacing the 185,000 LSLs in Cleveland, Ohio alone is close to $1 billion. Cincinnati
expects another $150-$200 million will be needed to get to 100% replacement of their
remaining LSLs. We need more federal funding and a commitment from the EPA to continue to
fight for more federal dollars and to send them to the communities who need them most.
Ohioans deserve clean, safe and affordable drinking water. We urge the EPA to finalize this
strong rule and chart the path forward to finally getting the lead entirely out of our drinking
water delivery systems.
Thank you,
Ohio Environmental Council
Ohio Lead Free Kids Coalition
The Junction Coalition
Black Environmental Leaders Action Fund

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0746 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: David Trouteaud <DBT@johnsoneng.com>  
Sent: Wednesday, January 3, 2024 9:31 AM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Cc: Paul Lohr <PML@johnsoneng.com>; Mike Lohr <MLL@johnsoneng.com> 
Subject: City of Cape Coral - Lead and Copper Rule Improvements and lead service line replacement 
 
 
Good Morning,  
 
We are working with the City of Cape Coral on preparing their Case Study that will include the number 
of potential Lead Service Lines that will need replaced/verified.  I know this is a General Email, but I was 
hoping to contact someone that we can bounce ideas off of for project specific type questions.  Is there 
someone that is responsible for The City of Cape Coral area?  Or SW Florida? 
Please let me know.  Thank you! 
Dave 
 
Dave Trouteaud, P.E. 
JOHNSON ENGINEERING, INC 
2122 Johnson Street 
Fort Myers, FL 33901 
(O) (239) 461-2438 
(C) (239) 707-0669 
dbt@johnsoneng.com 
www.johnsonengineering.com 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0866 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0958 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
Michael Goldberg 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water (Mail Code 4607M) 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest 
Washington, DC  20460 
Email: LCRI@epa.gov   
 
RE: 
US EPA’S Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
[Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801]  
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg: 
The Texas Chemistry Council (TCC) submits the following comments on EPA’s proposed rule for National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) (88 FR 84878, December 6, 2023, EPA Docket ID No. EPA-
HQ-OW-2022-0801), hereafter “Proposed Rule.”   
 
TCC is a statewide trade association of chemical manufacturers representing more than 60 member companies who own 
and operate over 200 manufacturing and research facilities across Texas. The business of chemistry provides employment 
for approximately 500,000 Texans and its products are the state’s top non-energy export with more than $50 billion in 
state exports annually to customers around the world. TCC’s member companies have industrial facilities throughout the 
United States, of which some are also registered Non-Transient Non-Community Public Water Systems (NTNCWSs).  Our 
membership is committed to the safety of our employees, including the protection of their health when consuming 
drinking water in the workplace.   
 
When assessing the requirements of the Proposed Rule and considering the competing priorities of the proposed PFAS 
regulations for Drinking Water, TCC echoes the comments of the American Petroleum Institute (API) and American 
Chemistry Council (ACC) in identifying the following opportunities for EPA to provide additional flexibility and clarity to 
NTNCWSs.  Specifically, TCC requests EPA allow the option for NTNCWSs to install point-of-use devices in lieu of lead 
service line (LSL) replacement for NTNCWSs and to provide bottled water as an alternative to pitcher filters or POU devices 
following disturbances.  Additionally, TCC requests that EPA provide clear and timely guidance to all PWSs, including 
NTNCWSs on expectations associated with the final rule and the definition of Service Line.  Finally, TCC argues that EPA 
has underestimated the cost burden to NTNCWSs, and TCC formally requests that EPA consider feedback on assumptions 
that EPA has made on NTNCWSs when considering compliance alternatives. 
 
TCC offers the recommendations in these comments to inform EPA’s consideration in advance of any future regulatory 
action and support the separate comments submitted to this docket from API and ACC.  The following points highlight key 
elements of our detailed comments: 
• 
EPA should allow Point-of-Use Devices in lieu of LSL replacement for NTNCWS that do not supply water to 
sensitive populations, such as schools or child-care facilities. 
• 
EPA should add alternative options and sample validation as an option for risk mitigation after disturbances for 
NTNCWSs. 

Comments of TCC on EPA Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations  
for Lead and Copper Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
Page 2 
 
• 
EPA should provide clear and timely guidance for industrial facility NTNCWSs. 
• 
EPA should clarify the definition of Service Line. 
• 
EPA’s assumptions result in an underestimated Cost Burden to NTNCWSs. 
• 
Sample Tiering based on Premise Plumbing presents undue burden to Public Water Systems. 
 
TCC’s specific comments are included below.  
 
1. EPA should allow Point-of-Use Devices in lieu of LSL replacement for NTNCWS that do not supply water to 
sensitive populations, such as schools or child-care facilities – The Proposed Rule contains Small System Flexibility 
provisions that allow NTNCWSs to leverage Point-of-Use (POU) systems in lieu of the corrosion control treatment 
requirements as described in the Proposed Rule § 141.93.  TCC echoes API and ACC’s appreciation of EPA’s 
inclusion of Small System Flexibility and encourages EPA to consider additional applications for flexibility. TCC 
proposes that EPA allow any NTNCWSs regardless of sizes that do not supply water to sensitive populations (e.g., 
schools or child-care facilities) the option to use POU devices as an alternative to conducting Lead Service Line 
Inventories or Lead Service Line Replacements on the portion of the service line onto which the POU is installed.  
This arrangement would allow NTNCWSs to outfit specific segments of their service lines with POU systems while 
replacing other lines if identified as LSLs. TCC echoes the comments of API and ACC that this additional flexibility 
would further EPA’s objectives of the proposed rule by addressing both service lines and premise plumbing as 
potential lead sources. 
 
The Proposed Rule was issued in the same year as the proposed per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (PFAS NPDWR).  The proposed PFAS NPDWR identified Granular 
Activated Carbon (GAC) and Reverse Osmosis (RO) amongst the possible treatment technologies capable of 
removing PFAS from drinking water.  GAC and RO are also identified and certifiable via NSF / ANSI standards1 for 
the removal of lead from drinking water.  Where a single solution can achieve removal of both PFAS and Lead, 
EPA should allow NTNCWSs the flexibility to use a single solution instead of both removing LSLs and adding 
treatment for PFAS.  
 
Under the Proposed Rule, systems must make annual updates to service line inventories, tracking both changes 
in service lines and connector materials and systems would be required to identify service lines of unknown 
materials.  TCC proposes PWSs that use POU devices be exempt from the requirement to identify the material of 
connectors and unknown service lines.  A resulting LSL inventory would thus identify either the service line 
material or the presence of a POU system.  Expanding flexibility for NTNCWS compliance with the Proposed Rule 
will maintain alignment with EPA’s goals in the Proposed Rule of protection of human health and transparency to 
the NTNCWS water consumers. 
 
2. EPA should add alternative options and sample validation as an option for risk mitigation after disturbances for 
NTNCWSs – EPA is maintaining the Lead and Copper Rule Revision (LCRR) requirement that water systems provide 
pitcher filters or point-of-use devices for six months following partial and full LSL replacement, replacement of a 
lead connector, and other scenarios.  At NTNCWSs that serve at workplace, employers may find it feasible to 
supply employees with bottled water as an alternative to pitcher filters or POU devices.  Some workplace 
 
1 The Proposed Rule’s provisions for use of a POU device specify that the device must be independently certified by a third party to 
meet the American National Standards Institute standard applicable to the specific type of POU unit to reduce lead in drinking water.  
EPAs’ Consumer Tool for Identifying Point of Use (POU) Drinking Water Filters Certified to Reduce Lead specifies NSF/ANSI Standard 
53. 

Comments of TCC on EPA Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations  
for Lead and Copper Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
Page 3 
 
environments are staged with water coolers that contain large (e.g., 5 gallon) bottles of water, in which case 
allowing continued use of that water supply would prevent waste of pitcher filters that would not be used. API 
requests that the flexibility to use bottled water be added for NTNCWSs in addition to the options of providing 
pitcher filters or POU devices.   
 
EPA specified a six-month period of time to provide pitcher filters or POU devices on the basis of a 2008 study2, 
which referenced that one site in the study suggested the potential for lead accumulated in the system to be 
released for months following disturbance, while most detected releases in systems took place in the first several 
days following LSL replacement.  The reason why one system was impacted for a lengthy period was not specified 
in the preamble.  The source document summarized elevated lead concentrations following LSL replacement as 
occurring in many cases for the first three days after replacement.  NTNCWSs at industrial facilities have the ability 
to control flushing of service lines and premise plumbing within buildings as well as the ability to conduct their 
own sampling following disturbances.   As such, industrial facilities are capable of monitoring taps.  TCC agrees 
with API’s proposal that EPA allow NTNCWSs the option to sample taps after a minimum of 96 hours following a 
disturbance and eliminate the use of mitigations upon receipt of analytical results confirming that lead 
concentrations are below the lead action level.    
 
3. Clear and timely guidance for industrial facility NTNCWSs is requested – EPA has concluded “the overwhelming 
majority of NTNCWSs that do have LSLs and Galvanized Requiring Replacement (GRR) service lines are expected 
to have relatively few of these service lines requiring replacement over the proposed 10-year deadline” (88 FR 
84912).  EPA’s position is based upon several assumptions, namely: 
• 
That responses from just 147 NTNCWSs to the 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey 
Assessment3  indicating that lead service lines are rarely used are representative of all 17,418 NTNCWSs 
in the Safe Drinking Water Information System, 
• 
That responses from three states estimating the number of LSLs at NTNCWSs in 20174 are accurate and 
representative across the country, and 
• 
That NTNCWSs have no stand-alone lead connectors and no GRR service lines since NTNCWSs are unlikely 
to replace only the upstream portion of an LSL and leave a galvanized service line in place, because they 
own the entire service, and galvanized lines have a high failure rate given age and disturbance like that 
produced by removing a section of LSL.5  
 
The assumption that few NTNCWSs have lead service lines cannot be confirmed until the October 2024 deadline 
to submit Lead Service Lines inventories.  Furthermore, piping makeup and configuration of NTNCWSs at industrial 
facilities could be influenced by the specific sector in which the piping is used.      
 
Conducting Lead Service Line Inventories is a complex undertaking.  NTNCWSs at industrial sites that attempt to 
leverage guidance documents that are developed for Community Water Systems are left to interpret guidance 
 
2 Sandvig, A., Kwan, P., Kirmeyer, G., Maynard, B., Mast, D., Trussell, R.R., Trussel, S., Cantor, A., and Prescott, A. (2008). Contribution 
of service line and plumbing fixtures to lead and copper rule compliance issue. AWWA Research Foundation, 523. 
3 88 FR 84912: Regarding NTNCWSs, Needs Survey responses from 147 NTNCWSs showed LSLs are rarely used in these systems since 
132 of them did not report any lead, GRR, or unknown service lines. 
4 Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvement, 2023. In August 2017, EPA disseminated a questionnaire 
to nine states asking for the estimated number or percentage of NTNCWSs with one or more LSLs and the total number of LSLs in 
NTNCWSs.  EPA received responses from seven states.  Four states did not provide any estimate.  The remaining three states 
provided estimates ranging from five to zero percent.  Based upon this data, EPA assumed 2.5% of NTNCWSs would have LSLs. 
5 Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvement, 2023 

Comments of TCC on EPA Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations  
for Lead and Copper Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
Page 4 
 
written for systems that provide water to homes.   EPA Issued "Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service 
Line Inventory" in August 2022, and guidance tailored for small CWSs and NTNCWSs was not issued until June of 
2023.  TCC echoes the comments of API and ACC that, although EPA developed guidance tailored for smaller 
systems, the guidance was issued after LSL inventory development was underway.  Accordingly, TCC echoes the  
requests of API and ACC that EPA provide timely and clear guidance for NTNCWS with examples applicable to 
NTNCWSs at Industrial facilities. Furthermore, TCC would comment that eyewash stations should be included as 
active connections and therefore lines servicing them should be counted in the initial inventory. TCC comments 
that the “human consumption” definition does not list eyewash stations (skin absorbtion) and guidance 
documents should inform affected NTNC entities that they are to be included in the count.  
 
4. Clarity to the definition of Service Line is requested – EPA has added a definition of “Service Line” to the Proposed 
Rule, which states “Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe which 
connects the water main to the building inlet. Where a building is not present, the service line connects the water 
main to the outlet."  NTNCWSs at industrial facilities have service lines that do not enter buildings and are used 
for purposes other than drinking or cooking.  TCC comments that EPA has the opportunity to add clarity and reduce 
ambiguity by specifying whether outlet in the definition is intended to mean all possible water uses or is specific 
to uses associated with cooking and drinking. 
 
TCC joins API and ACC in requesting that EPA clarify the definition of "Service Line" as follows: “Service line, for 
the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe that connects the water main to the building 
inlet. Where a building is not present, the service line connects the water main to an outlet used for cooking or 
drinking."  
 
5. EPA’s assumptions for Cost Burden to NTNCWSs is an underestimate – EPA’s Economic Analysis of the Proposed 
Rule has assumed that NTNCWSs will not incur burdensome  costs to update their inventories since they own their 
own service lines and are not expected to have any unknowns.  This assumption is not accurate.  NTNCWSs at 
industrial facilities that have been developing their inventories have incurred costs to field-identify service lines 
in advance of the October 16, 2024 submission deadline.  Unknown service lines can occur through a variety of 
reasons including age of a facility and loss of drawings. Furthermore, NTNCWSs are unlikely to have customer 
meters, thus unlikely to have water meter readings or replacements as an opportunity to collect service line data.  
Further, EPA has assumed NTNCWSs are able to rely on drawings as a means to identify connectors and service 
line materials of construction; however, due to the age of some facilities, this is not consistently applicable to 
NTNCWSs. TCC proposes PWSs that use POU devices be exempt from the requirement to identify the material of 
connectors and unknown service lines and/or alternative options for connector identification if information is 
difficult to maintain in a system with no lead concerns. 
 
Cost will be a significant challenge in replacing all lead service lines, especially when considered alongside 
competing priorities such as PFAS removal. The average cost to fully replace a single lead service line is estimated 
to be between $6,507 and $8,519 per the Proposed Rule’s Economic Analysis; however, for NTNCWSs at Industrial 
facilities, these costs are likely higher due to line length maintenance and safety practices required within 
industrial facilities and the possibility that piping may run adjacent to or through process units. While the federal 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Act has allocated funding for lead service line replacement, this funding will not be 
available to industrial facilities.  Similarly, the NTNCWSs at commercial facilities are not eligible for other funding 
mechanisms described in Section IV.G of the Proposed Rule’s preamble.  EPA should consider these realities for 
NTNCWSs when considering the additional flexibilities proposed by TCC, API, and ACC.  
 

Comments of TCC on EPA Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations  
for Lead and Copper Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
Page 5 
 
6. Sample Tiering based on Premise Plumbing presents undue burden to Public Water Systems – The Proposed 
Rule maintains the tiering structure established by the original Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) and updated by the 
LCRR. In the Proposed Rule, EPA is proposing to adjust the definition for the highest priority tiers (Tier 1 and Tier 
2) to include sites with premise plumbing made of lead.  EPA specifies that by premise, plumbing made of lead, 
EPA means premise plumbing that consists of pure lead pipes, like the pipes used for LSLs, rather than pipes 
made from metal alloys which may contain lead content.  EPA further proposes galvanized premise plumbing to 
be an element of Tier 3. 
 
EPA has not requested that Lead Inventories include premise plumbing material construction.  TCC echoes the 
concern of API and ACC that identifying the premise plumbing material of construction includes additional time 
and cost that EPA has not considered in the Economic Analysis.  TCC joins API and ACC in commenting that EPA 
should not assume that NTNCWSs are likely to have previous knowledge of the premise plumbing present in 
buildings that are in their control.  
 
Conclusion:  
 
TCC appreciates the opportunity to file comments in this letter concerning the Proposed Rule.   EPA has requested 
feedback as to whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the regulatory approach used to 
address lead in drinking water consistent with the statutory standard for a treatment technique rule in section 
1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. TCC joins API and ACC in proposing that the LCRI could be simplified and burden could be 
reduced without affecting the ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects by allowing 
NTNCWSs additional flexibility as described within these comments. 
 
Please contact me at (512) 646-6403, pearson@texaschemistry.org, when you wish to discuss these comments or if you 
would like any additional information concerning the issues raised in these comments.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Shea Pearson 
General Counsel & Director of Regulatory Affairs 
Texas Chemistry Council

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0909 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
Re:  National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
        Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
 
Dear Docket, 
Since 1973, the Rural Community Assistance Partnership (RCAP) Incorporated has helped build capacity 
for and facilitated access to the most basic necessities in rural communities: clean, safe, and affordable 
drinking water and wastewater services. RCAP uses a locally driven approach in every state and territory 
to address various needs in rural and tribal communities, driven by a network of regional non-profit 
partners, who provide hands-on technical assistance under the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) and 
conduct in-person training on a variety of technical and regulatory topics as it relates to safe drinking 
water and sanitary wastewater disposal.  
RCAP appreciates the opportunity to provide comments to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). RCAP commends EPA throughout 
the last two decades for making updates to the regulation, for its focus on developing a better 
understanding of the challenging health effects of lead and copper on human health, and for 
modernizing the rule to match the demands of the 21st Century.  
We believe these improvements are a crucial step forward in safeguarding public health and addressing 
environmental concerns. The proposed enhancements underscore the agency's commitment to 
ensuring the safety of our drinking water by imposing enhanced regulations like reducing the action 
level for lead in drinking water. By focusing on reducing the concentration of this harmful metal in our 
drinking water, EPA aims to protect vulnerable populations, especially children and pregnant women, 
from the adverse health effects associated with lead exposure. The proposed improvements also include 
measures to speed up the replacement of lead pipes and enhance water monitoring and testing 
protocols. The EPA's proactive steps demonstrate a commendable dedication to advancing the well-
being of communities across the nation and fostering a cleaner and healthier environment for 
generations to come. However, RCAP believes that rural water utilities may face unique challenges in 
complying with the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. 
Based upon RCAP’s more than four decades of experience assisting small community drinking water 
systems to comply with SDWA regulations and state drinking water requirements, we offer the following 
recommendations and comments on the new LCRI released in November 2023:  
1. Aging Infrastructure: 

 
 
 
2 
 
• 
Many small rural water systems have outdated infrastructure, including pipes and 
plumbing materials that contribute to lead and copper leaching, making any new 
reduction to the action level difficult to manage or reach. 
2. Limited Financial Resources: 
• 
Small rural communities often struggle with limited finances, which makes it difficult for 
them to invest in the necessary upgrades and improvements needed to reduce lead 
levels in their water systems. Moreover, additional expenses for locating legacy pipes 
and conducting community outreach can further strain their finances. 
3. Lack of Technical Expertise: 
• 
Limited access to specialized technical knowledge and expertise may hinder small rural 
water systems from implementing effective lead reduction strategies. 
4. Inadequate Monitoring and Testing: 
• 
Limited resources may result in insufficient monitoring and testing, leading to delayed 
detection of elevated lead levels and difficulty in addressing the issue promptly once 
detected.  
5. Community Awareness: 
• 
Continued awareness and education in small communities about the risks of lead 
exposure will be required for successful lead reduction efforts. 
6. Geographic Isolation: 
• 
Rural locations may be geographically isolated, leading to challenges in accessing and 
transporting the necessary materials and equipment required for the additional 
suggested lead reduction measures.                                                                  
7. Population Decline: 
• 
Small rural communities may experience population decline, resulting in fewer 
consumers to share the financial burden of necessary improvements for lead reduction. 
8. Limited Regulatory Compliance Resources: 
• 
Smaller water systems may struggle to allocate resources for navigating and complying 
with additional EPA regulations, including National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
for lead and copper. 
9. Seasonal Variations: 
• 
Seasonal changes, such as temperature fluctuations, can impact water chemistry and 
contribute to variations in lead and copper levels, making consistent mitigation more 
challenging for small water systems with fewer resources. 
10. Inadequate Corrosion Control: 

 
 
 
3 
 
• 
Lack of effective corrosion control measures can exacerbate the leaching of lead and 
copper from pipes and plumbing fixtures. 
11. Insufficient Data Management: 
• 
Small water systems often lack proper data management systems, which makes it 
difficult to track and analyze both legacy pipe and water quality data over time. This 
hinders effective decision-making concerning the prioritization of improvements for 
lead reduction. 
12. Limited Access to Funding Programs: 
• 
Small rural water systems already face challenges in accessing federal and state funding 
programs aimed at assisting with infrastructure improvements for lead reduction. 
Creating a lower action level and new legacy pipe guidelines will make it more 
challenging to compete with larger systems for SRF funds. 
13. Limited Area to contractual resources: 
• 
Small water systems in rural areas struggle to find contractors to develop infrastructure 
projects, due to the scope of the work and the cost of the projects, Across the nation, 
contractors are in high demand with pipeline replacement projects for large systems.  
Small utilities are unable to compete for and attract their services. Locating legacy pipes 
will add to the burden and competition for contractors, which will further increase 
costs. 
RCAP appreciates the opportunity to comment on the important proposed LCRI and we stand ready and 
willing to assist small community drinking water systems to comply with the requirements under the 
improved rule. RCAP and our network partners have the technical capability, training, and resources to 
assist small systems in compliance with this new regulation as well as assistance in the newly required 
development of lead service line (LSL) inventories. 
 
If you have any questions about these comments or would like RCAP to provide additional input on the 
rule improvements, please feel free to email me at omorales-pate@rcap.org or give me a call at (575) 
640-3386.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Olga Morales Pate  
Chief Executive Officer  
Rural Community Assistance Partnership Incorporated    
 
 
Cc:  
Radhika Fox – EPA OW  
Jennifer McLain – EPA OGWDW

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0814 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
2835 Crescent Springs Road                        P.O. Box 18640            
Erlanger, KY  41018 
Phone (859) 578-9898                                                                                                    Fax (859) 578-7893 
 
 
 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency                                             Submitted via Regulations.gov 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Mail Code:  28221T 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE:  
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
The Northern Kentucky Water District (NKWD) respectfully submits the enclosed comments to the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to assist with evaluating, drafting and finalizing EPA’s Lead 
and Copper Rule Improvements (“LCRI” or “Rule”).   
 
The Lead and Copper Rule is imperative for the protection of public health, which is an important 
priority for the Northern Kentucky Water District.  NKWD supplies water to a population base of 
300,000 people through approximately 86,850 water service accounts, which include residential, 
commercial, industrial, wholesale, and government accounts.  Because portions of the NKWD water 
treatment and distribution system in service today date back to the late 1800s, NKWD is extremely 
challenged with replacing aging infrastructure while simultaneously complying with evolving 
regulations such as the proposed LCRI. 
 
While NKWD appreciates EPA’s efforts in proposing a regulation to reduce lead service lines 
throughout the United States, the proposed regulation does not accurately perceive or appropriately 
address the costs and impacts that such a regulation would create on water systems like NKWD.  
NKWD offers the following high-level concerns that are supported by our detailed comments that 
follow thereafter:  
 
I. 
Replacement is Technically and Financially Infeasible within the Ten-Year Replacement 
Timeframe without Significant Resources 
 
NKWD is concerned that because a mere handful of utilities have been able to complete lead service 
line replacement in a short window with the substantial support of significant technical and financial 
resources, that ALL utilities are expected to do the same within ten years—albeit without the same 
support, while also attempting to keep water rates “fair, just and reasonable” as required by Kentucky 
law.  This logic is similar to that of believing any team of United States NBA basketball players will 
win the Olympics just because the United States Men’s Basketball Dream Team with NBA players 
won the Olympics in 1992.  If the proposed Rule is promulgated as presently drafted, NKWD and 
similarly-situated water systems will be forced to overcome near insurmountable barriers that the 
 

Page 2 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
handful of example water systems did not face—and far more than what the 1992 Dream Team of 
Magic Johnson, Michael Jordan, and Larry Bird could have ever overcome. 
 
II. 
Unforeseen Costs and Needs are Insufficiently Considered 
 
The expected costs considered by EPA do not take into consideration the added costs for accelerating a 
service line replacement program faster than what can be accomplished by coordinating the work with water 
main replacement, not to mention the competition for resources needed to support the LCRI.   For 
example, a service line replacement may involve greater restoration than a small pavement patch repair.  In 
our service area, the roads are maintained by either one of the 33 cities, one of the 3 counties, or the State, 
and repair will require substantially larger areas of the road to be restored by milling and paving.  This 
requirement is not within our control and will significantly increase the cost to replace service lines.  Further, 
in the lead replacement cost analysis, EPA eliminated the top 25% of the surveyed costs and those higher 
costs represent real costs many utilities like NKWD will face.  
   
NKWD is in a region where a significant amount of the nation’s lead service lines are located, which 
means there will be substantial competition regionally for contractors, materials, and other resources 
in an effort to comply with the proposed regulation.  NKWD is very concerned with creating both a 
scarcity of available resources as well as driving up the costs of the resources that are available.  As a 
result, NKWD strongly suggest revisions to the proposed Rule that will make the limited resources 
available first to those most in need, meaning those consumers and water systems having the highest 
lead tap sampling results and highest socioeconomic indicators such as disadvantaged communities, 
followed later by those systems having lower lead tap sampling levels. 
 
III. 
Funding is Grossly Inadequate and at Risk 
 
While NKWD recognizes that historic funding is being provided under the Bipartisan Infrastructure 
Law (BIL), NKWD suggests substantially more federal funding be provided to cover the cost of 
service line replacement throughout the country.  As a special purpose governmental entity, NKWD 
is a water-only stand-alone utility that does not have access to revenue sources other than water rates.  
Spending on service line removal will be directly reflected in customer water bills.  In the absence of 
funding for these programs through grants or other sources, NKWD will be forced to pass the cost 
of service line replacements to our customers.  Funding service line replacements through grants will 
have the immediate benefit of removing the lead line from service, and it will keep customers, 
particularly in disadvantaged communities, from facing higher bills for their water.   
 
NKWD also strongly urges EPA to evaluate and ensure that a critical source of funding for water 
systems—governmental bonds—is financially viable and available for LCRI projects.  It is our opinion 
that the Economic Analysis (“EA”) (found at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-
OW-2022-0801-0712) fails to consider the implications of requiring public water systems, many of 
which are governmental entities like NKWD, to potentially use public funds to replace and repair 
privately-owned service lines.  
 
While EPA has stated that certain funding is available to assist water systems to implement the 
LCRI—such as funding sources through the BIL—the EA did not include an adequate analysis of the 
funding sources available to public water systems to fund these replacements and repairs.  As EPA is 
aware, some funding may come from the BIL, but the BIL does not have enough funding available to 

Page 3 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
pay for all required service line replacements contemplated by this proposed Rule.  This leads public 
water systems like NKWD to raise water rates and/or be left to obtain other sources of funding such 
as drinking water state revolving funds (SRFs) and governmental bonds (or tax-exempt bonds).  Just 
like BIL funding, SRFs do not have the necessary funding to pay for all lead service line replacements 
leaving many public water systems to rely on funding through the issuance of governmental bonds.  
For example, NKWD’s 2024 Capital Improvement Fund (CIP) Plan identifies 66 separate capital 
projects.  Of these 66 projects, 63 are being funded through the issuance of governmental bonds.  
 
Like NKWD, many water systems owned, operated, or funded through governmental units rely 
heavily on governmental bonds to fund various infrastructure projects and often receive special 
funding terms because of tax-exempt status.  As a result, these bonds have lower-interest rates 
compared to bonds that are not tax-exempt. This is critical to sustain the financial viability of public 
water systems, which as mentioned above, are already financially overburdened because of aging 
infrastructure, increased regulatory obligations, and rising costs.  
 
The use of governmental bonds, however, is notably subject to various private use restrictions.  Thus, 
governmental bonds may become “private activity bonds” and public water systems could 
potentially lose their tax-exempt status if more than 10% of bond proceeds (1) are used for a 
private use, and (2) are directly or indirectly derived from payments in respect of the property, or 
borrowed money, used for a private use. See 26 U.S.C. Section 141.1  Because the governmental bond 
proceeds could possibly be used to replace private property (potentially satisfying the first threshold) 
and the private property itself remits payments to the public water system (potentially satisfying the 
second threshold), the use of governmental bonds by public water systems is potentially at risk.2  The 
proposed Rule unfortunately fails to discuss or account for this nearly universal circumstance at play 
for many public water systems like NKWD.  This is on top of state-specific limitations which restrict 
replacement of private service lines by water systems (discussed further below). 
 
In summary, NKWD acknowledges and supports EPA’s overall objective that water systems make 
regular progress towards lead service line replacement in a method that promotes public health but as 
outlined above and more herein, doing this work in a ten-year timeframe will be exceptionally 
challenging.  To this effort, NKWD makes the following comments below using the outline from 
EPA’s request for comments: 
 
General Matters  
 
1. Whether the proposed revisions to the LCRR treatment technique are effective to prevent known 
or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible in accordance with the SDWA. 
  
Response:  No Comment. 
 
 
1 H.R. 1407, 118th Congress – Financing Lead Out of Water Act, commonly known as the FLOW Act is a potential 
solution to this concern. 
2 The Department of the Treasury, via Internal Revenue Service Publication 4079 (Rev. 9-2019) (found at 
https://www.irs.gov/tax-exempt-bonds/tax-exempt-bonds-publications), raises this issue at length, though fails to 
provide clarity or guidance regarding whether the use of governmental bonds for the replacement of privately owned 
service lines would be exempt from the above criteria.  NKWD is unaware of any action taken by EPA or the Treasury 
that has analyzed, accounted for, or addressed this significant funding issue. 

Page 4 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
2. Whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the regulatory approach 
used to address lead in drinking water consistent with the statutory standard for a treatment technique 
rule in section 1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. Specifically, EPA requests comment on ways that the 
proposed LCRI could be simplified and ways that burden, including paperwork burden, could be 
reduced without affecting the ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects.  
 
Response:  NKWD has several suggestions for reducing the burden water systems as 
outlined in the following paragraphs: 
 
First, NKWD suggests that lines used solely for the purposes of providing fire 
protection in a building (or other non-potable uses) not be included in the inventory.  
If not removed from the inventory, NKWD has approximately 650 fire protection lines 
that will need to be investigated and included.  Fire lines are typically larger than 2 
inches, which are not made of lead, so NKWD does not expect any lines used for fire 
protection systems to be made of lead or galvanized requiring replacement.  Removing 
this requirement would reduce the burden NKWD faces in complying with the 
proposed regulation.  In the unlikely event a fire line is discovered to be made of lead 
or galvanized requiring replacement, it would be reasonable to have provisions in 
place to prohibit it from ever being used to supply potable water to the building.  
NKWD suggests that this would be a proper interpretation under the Safe Water 
Drinking Act as the Act’s definitions contemplate regulating only water that is used 
for human consumption.     
 
Second, NKWD suggests documenting all previously replaced lead service lines and 
connectors not be required as these past records are not readily available and unduly 
burdensome particularly for systems that date back to the 1800s like NKWD. 
 
Third, NKWD, like other water systems, has accounts served by a “master meter” 
where after the master meter, the service line divides and segments to provide service 
to multiple facilities or spaces (e.g., trailer parks, shopping centers, wholesale water 
purchasers) or instances where a service only covers a sprinkler system or other type 
private piping system. NKWD suggests that for these illustrated instances, water 
systems only count the service line up to the master meter and not the privately owned 
water distribution or piping network.  This would align with the proposed Rule’s 
definition for service line which contemplates in its plain language a single line to the 
building inlet.   
 
Fourth, NKWD suggests simplifying public education and notification requirements 
to reduce the burden on water systems and to prevent consumers from becoming 
desensitized to repeated notices. EPA should consider creating optional 
communication templates for both mail and telephone that can be used by water 
systems when attempting to contact consumers who are affected by the LCRI 
replacement requirements. 
 
3.  Whether the proposed requirements of the rule are enforceable and promote compliance without 
the need for State or Federal enforcement action. EPA also solicits comment on ways the rule could 
be modified to better promote compliance.  

Page 5 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
 
Response:  NKWD does not believe the proposed Rule promotes compliance due to the 
aggressive deadlines and high implementation costs (see response under question 4 to the 
Service Line Replacement section below for additional information).  In short, NKWD 
does not believe the 10-year requirement alone can be met,  particularly when  the other 
expansive requirements of the proposed Rule are added.  NKWD believes extending the 
timeframes for service line replacement using one or more of the following methods would 
promote better compliance:   
 
(1) develop a phased approach based on tap sampling results; or 
 
(2) create another option for deferred replacement taking affordability into account 
such as coordination with water main replacement and asset management plans. 
 
These options would support improving public health while taking advantage of the 
opportunity for lower implementation and compliance costs, as well as addressing 
dramatically varied levels of technical and financial resources by water systems across the 
country.   
 
4. The revised definition of “connector,” including that connectors are defined as “not exceeding two 
feet.”  
 
Response:  No Comment. 
 
Service Line Replacement  
 
1. All aspects of the proposed scope of the replacement requirements, including the criteria used to 
define a full service line replacement (e.g., cutting the pipe at abandoned properties, replacing the 
entire service line) and which lead sources are subject to replacement under the mandatory program. 
EPA is seeking comment on whether to prohibit reconnection of any disconnected LSL or GRR 
service line. EPA is requesting comment on whether the Agency should include lead connectors or 
galvanized service lines that are or were downstream of a lead connector as part of mandatory 
replacement.  
 
Response:  NKWD suggests that the replacement pool or replacement rate calculation 
account for the number of property owners who have failed to provide consent as the 
proposed Rule clearly indicated the water system is not required to replace any portion 
of the service line that is not in their “control.” As currently written, water systems who 
require property owner consent will be in non-compliance with the replacement rate 
and three-year rolling average simply due to property owner’s decision to refuse  
service line replacement.  As outlined in the proposed Rule, after four unsuccessful 
attempts to obtain consent, the water system should be deemed to be in full 
compliance of the LCRI.  Furthermore, NKWD suggests the proposed regulation be 
revised to remove unknowns from the replacement pool until the point the unknown 
becomes known lead, galvanized requiring replacement, or not lead.  While EPA has 
given water systems time to identify unknowns, counting unknowns to the 

Page 6 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
replacement pool eviscerates that allowance under the proposed regulation resulting 
in overburdening of the water systems.        
 
NKWD requests that the regulation clarify that systems have more than 45 days to 
replace a property owner-initiated replacement when additional time has been 
approved by the State.  This will allow water systems to comply when unique 
circumstances arise that make it infeasible to timely complete the work (i.e., extreme 
weather conditions, material availability).   
 
NKWD also suggests that water systems only be required to offer a pitcher filter or 
point-of-use device instead of mandatory distribution of these devices when:  service 
lines are partially or fully replaced; an action level is exceeded multiple times; or when 
a disturbance occurs.  This will improve the availability of these items for those that 
are most in need and will reduce the cost to the water system (and its rate payers) by 
not giving them to people who will not use them for various reasons (such as the 
particular consumer is already using an adequate water filtering device).  It is further 
recommended that EPA and the States provide a path for water system compliance in 
the event supply chain issues arise for these devices. 
 
2. Whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent should be more than four times (e.g., 
five, six, or seven times).  
 
Response:  NKWD has several concerns regarding the reasonable effort to obtain 
consent: 
 
First, NKWD fears repeated communications could desensitize consumers to 
communications from the water system and cause consumers to ignore other 
communications such as boil water advisories and other priority service alerts.  Any 
more than four attempts will increase the chance for consumer indifference regarding 
our important notices.  Keeping the number at four attempts also avoids placing 
additional burden on limited water system resources.  Further, NKWD has not seen 
any information to believe that additional communications will yield substantially 
better results. 
 
Second, NKWD suggests that the requirement to offer full lead service line 
replacement to a new property owner within 6 months of change in ownership be 
modified to state “account holder” as water systems do not have a way of tracking 
changes in real property ownership.  NKWD only maintains accounts for the consumer 
procuring and using water service.  The account holder may change while the property 
owner does not (i.e., new tenant renting owner’s property) and in other situations the 
property owner may change (which NKWD would not be aware of) and the account 
holder does not (i.e., same tenant but change in property ownership).  Offering a lead 
service line replacement to each new “account holder" would reengage the process as 
envisioned by EPA without overburdening the individual water systems for 
information outside their control. 
 

Page 7 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
Third, NKWD suggests revising the “reasonable effort” requirement of two different 
methods of communication when reasonably feasible and allow for only one method 
of communication in situations approved by the States.  For instance, in many cases 
NKWD can only ascertain property ownership information from the County Clerk’s 
recorded deeds.  In those deeds, typically the only indicia of the property owner’s 
contact information is the address listed for mailings of tax bills.  When the property 
owner does not occupy the property (and thus is not an account holder), any effort to 
contact the property owner through a mailing to the listed address will not be readily 
available or successful.     
 
Fourth, NKWD is concerned about the safety of its employees or contractors and does 
not support requirements that would necessitate accessing the property to conduct 
work when consent from the property owner and occupant is not obtained.  
 
Fifth, NKWD suggests that EPA provide communication templates if a water system 
is attempting to obtain consent from a property owner. These templates should 
include two forms—one for written communication via mail and one for 
communication via telephone with the last known telephone number of the property 
owner.          
 
3. Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets “control” for the purposes of the mandatory 
replacement provision (i.e., require systems to conduct full service line replacement in situations where 
the system has access to conduct the full replacement).  
 
Response:  NKWD has concerns that the proposed Rule’s requirement for control of 
private service lines extends the Agency’s reach beyond the lawful grasp under the Safe 
Drinking Water Act.  See West Virginia v. EPA, 142 S. Ct. 2587, 2609 (explaining agency 
must have ‘clear congressional authorization’ for the power it claims).  42 USCS § 300f 
(4) states that a public water system “means a system for the provision to the public of 
water for human consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances, if such 
system has at least fifteen service connections or regularly serves at least twenty-five 
individuals.”  The Safe Drinking Water Act’s plain language definition clearly 
envisions an endpoint of the public water system at the connection point with the 
consumer.  Additionally, possession of the water itself also leaves NKWD’s ownership 
and is transferred to the customer at the point of sale which is at the point where water 
passes the meter as NKWD charges for all such water, regardless of whether it is used 
for its intended purpose (or lost due to negligence or mechanical failure). 
 
While that end point may vary between water systems, ownership of either the water 
or piping is unequivocally the logical point of connection to an water system owned 
portion of public water system under the SDWA definition. Any attempt to exert 
regulatory obligations beyond the plain reading of the Safe Drinking Water Act (and 
in contradiction of the statutory definition) puts the proposed LCRI in precarious legal 
standing.           
 
 
4. The proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement deadlines. EPA is seeking comment on 
whether it is feasible for systems across the nation to complete service line replacement in a shorter 

Page 8 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
timeframe than ten years, such as in six, seven, or eight years. EPA is seeking comment on the rate 
construct approach, including how to calculate compliance with a given service line replacement 
deadline and average annual rate calculated across a rolling three-year period. EPA also seeks comment 
on whether systems should be required to meet a minimum replacement rate in the first three years 
after the compliance date to give States an opportunity to enforce replacement rate progress sooner 
than three years after the compliance date. EPA also seeks comment on the complexity of the rate 
construct.  
 
Response:  NKWD does not believe the proposed replacement rate and deadlines are 
practical or feasible.   
 
First, NKWD recommends EPA offer another deferred replacement option for systems 
such as ours.  NKWD is highly concerned with both the feasibility of completing 
replacement within 10 years due to availability of resources, including qualified 
plumbers, and the affordability of implementing the LCRI.  NKWD has considered 
options for completing the work, such as coordinating with planned improvements or 
conducting stand-alone service line replacement, and we have serious concerns with 
any approach.   
 
The estimated cost for replacing lead service lines with and without conducting water 
main replacement at the same time are shown in the table below (based on NKWD’s 
current estimate of 28,260 lead service lines).  These costs are in 2024 dollars and do 
not include any other costs to comply with any other components of the LCRI.   
 
 
Description of Approach 
Estimated Cost, $ Million 
Service Line 
Replacement 
Water 
Main 
Replacement 
Total 
Conduct LSLR with Water Main Replacement $240 M 
$636 M 
$876 M 
Conduct LSLR First and  
Water Main Replacement Later 
$424 M 
$636 M 
$1,060 M 
 
The estimated cost of $240 million to conduct lead service line replacement with water 
main replacement is significantly lower than the estimated cost of $424 million to replace 
all lead service lines without replacing the water mains at the same time.  NKWD has 268 
miles of unlined cast iron water main that are over 60 years old.  A majority of the lead 
service lines in NKWD’s system are connected to these older unlined cast iron water mains.   
 
According to the American Water Works Association (AWWA) report prepared by CDM 
Smith dated November 2022 titled “Considerations when Costing Lead Service Line 
Identification and Replacement”, the cost of performing lead service line replacements 
independently of water main replacement has been reported to be at least 20% more than 
the cost of completing the work at the same time as water main replacement using EPA 
data.  However, the report suggests the cost difference is higher using information from 

Page 9 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
water utilities.  The AWWA report indicates utilities spend nearly 70% to 100% more to 
replace lead service lines separately rather than coordinating with planned work.    
 
NKWD believes EPA’s approximately 20% difference underestimates the restoration cost 
NKWD will endure due to city ordinances in NKWD’s service area that require us to mill 
and pave the road following placement of the temporary patch.3  Because of the historic 
areas NKWD serves and the cost for extensive restoration requirements that will be borne 
by our water system, NKWD anticipates conducting service line replacement without 
water main replacement will increase the total project costs by approximately 75%.  This 
cost increase is within reason based on the information reported by other water systems 
with similar restoration requirements as referenced in AWWA’s report.  NKWD will still 
have to replace the water main at a later time and pay to mill and pave the road again.  In 
summary, the inevitable total cost to NKWD’s customers will be substantially more if lead 
service line replacement is not performed with water main replacement. 
 
In light of the aforementioned, NKWD has calculated its expected rate increases under 
the proposed Rule under four different scenarios as outlined in the table below: 
 
Description of 
Approach 
2024 
Average 
Monthly Bill 
Projected Rate Increase 
Estimated 
New 
Monthly Bill 
Service Line 
Replacement 
Water Main 
Replacement 
Conduct LSLR with 
Water Main Replacement 
(customer pay for private 
side replacement) 
$44.32 
$6.35 
(15%) 
$38.62 
(87%) 
$89.49 
(102%) 
Conduct LSLR First and 
Water Main Replacement 
Later (customer pay for 
private side replacement) 
$44.32 
$12.16 
(27%) 
$38.62 
(87%) 
$95.10 
(115%) 
Conduct LSLR with 
Water Main Replacement 
(NKWD pay for private 
side replacement) 
$44.32 
$14.64 
(33%) 
$38.62 
(87%) 
$97.58 
(120%) 
Conduct LSLR First and 
Water Main Replacement 
Later (NKWD pay for 
private side replacement) 
$44.32 
$28.21 
(64%) 
$38.62 
(87%) 
$111.15 
(150%) 
 
These estimated rate increases were based on NKWD’s current estimate of 28,260 lead 
service lines and do not include the revenue that would be needed for any other work 
or any other escalation factors.  Kentucky’s affordability index rate of $57.54 for 
NKWD’s water service area would be grossly exceeded in many instances outlined in 
the table above.   These rates would be well above what NKWD’s low-income 
 
3 NKWD is required in several cities in its service area to complete mill and paving beyond the excavation site.  In those 
jurisdictions, city ordinance generally requires NKWD to restore 20 feet in length on each side beyond the edge of the 
excavation site and one lane width.  In applying these ordinances, in many cases a four-by-four foot excavation site creates 
a 500 square foot street restoration. 
 
 

Page 10 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
customers can afford, many of whom are already receiving assistance to pay water bills 
through the Low Income Household Water Assistance Program.   
 
The money going to water systems in Kentucky through the BIL for service line 
inventory and replacement projects (approximately $111.3 Million or 0.74% of total $15 
Billion) is inadequate to fund the debt NKWD by itself is facing, let alone all water 
systems in the state.  Based on funding provided thus far, a significant portion of this 
federal money will be used to complete the required inventories and not lead service 
line replacement.  There are very limited funds available to NKWD when competing 
with other water systems in the State, and much of these funds will be in the form of 
loans that will need to be repaid through water rates.   
 
In Kentucky, the amount any utility may be awarded could be capped at $7.5 Million 
per year as was the practice this past year.  In addition, for lead service line 
replacement, any award is only partially in the form of grants. Accordingly, if NKWD 
is fortunate enough to receive the maximum annual allocations going forward, the 
overall maximum based on what has been offered thus far may only be $17.1 million in 
grants subject to NKWD taking an additional $12.9 million in loans.   
 
Even to that end, NKWD is further limited by the fact it may be unable to accept the 
funds due to statutory limitations on NKWD’s ability to pay for privately-owned 
plumbing systems.  If enacted, the proposed Rule’s explanation of “substantial 
funding available” is simply illusory to NKWD as it will only provide a token portion 
of the total funding required to comply with the proposed Rule.  To alleviate these 
concerns, NKWD requests another deferment option be given so that additional time 
beyond 10 years can be granted by EPA or States that takes affordability and other 
regional issues into consideration.  Furthermore, EPA  should also align the 
expectations for service line replacement with appropriation of adequate federal 
funding to fully pay for privately owned lead service line replacement.   
 
Second, while some water systems have conducted replacement of a substantial 
number of lines in a short period, this was done under different conditions than what 
EPA is mandating with the proposed LCRI.  Foremost, not every water system was 
trying to do the same work at the same time, which will undoubtedly raise prices 
because of the high demand nationally but may also create major limitations in the 
availability of supply to do the work.  Another potential unintended outcome under the 
proposed Rule is that water systems like NKWD will be faced with making hard 
decisions on which capital improvement projects to do and which ones to defer or 
scale back.  The projects that may be deferred or downsized are undoubtedly needed, 
whether it be for maintaining system reliability or for complying with various 
standards under the Safe Drinking Water Act. 
 
5. EPA is taking comment on whether States, as a condition of primacy, or EPA when it is directly 
implementing the program, should be required to set initial shortened deadlines by a certain timeframe, 
such as no later than 60 days after the compliance date.  
 

Page 11 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
Response:  NKWD does not believe setting a shortened deadline for service line 
replacement is even remotely feasible for our utility.  Due to concerns stated herein 
regarding resource availability and cost for implementation, it is recommended that 
neither the State nor EPA require shorter deadlines for any water system. 
 
6. The overall approach and basis to offer deferred service line replacement to systems with a high 
proportion of LSLs and GRR service lines in their distribution system relative to their total number 
of households served. EPA is requesting comment on its proposed threshold of 0.039 average annual 
number of replacements per household served, which is used to calculate the number of years that 
systems can defer.  
Response:  NKWD requests either the 0.039 number be reduced substantially or 
another option for a deferred replacement be considered. Specifically, a deferred 
replacement option that would allow systems to replace service lines at a rate that takes 
affordability and the potential added costs for not completing service line replacement 
with water main replacement into consideration. 
NKWD agrees with EPA’s statement that systems should conduct service line replacement 
in coordination with planned work to realize the efficiencies that can be gained.  However, 
requiring replacing all service lines within 10 years will not allow water systems such as 
NKWD to take real advantage of these efficiencies.  It will cost more to complete the work 
for service line replacement and water main replacement if done as two separate projects 
instead of one.  In addition, replacing service lines in an area and then returning later to 
replace the water main will significantly increase the total cost of infrastructure 
replacement by having to restore the pavement twice instead of once.   
 
7.  Whether to require the State, as a condition of primacy, to approve the use of the deferred deadline 
provision where the water system qualifies for it and/or whether to require the State, as a condition 
of primacy, to assess whether it would be feasible for a system to meet the 10-year deadline or a shorter 
deadline even if the system meets the regulatory criteria for the deferred deadline.  
 
Response:  No Comment. 
 
8. Whether there are additional data on service line replacement rates achieved by systems in proactive 
programs (i.e., excluding programs that only replace service lines in coordination with main 
replacement or emergency repair).  
 
Response:  No Comment. 
 
9. The proposed use of a maximum threshold of 10,000 annual service line replacements for systems 
with atypically high numbers of LSLs and GRR service lines as well as seeking comment on the 
alternate threshold of 8,000 annual service line replacements. EPA is also seeking feedback on other 
thresholds and supporting data. EPA is also seeking feedback on if there’s data available that would 
inform if the maximum threshold for annual service line replacement could increase after ten years, 
such as if replacement rates could double.  
 

Page 12 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
Response:  While 8,000 annual service line replacements is more reasonable than 
10,000, NKWD suggests the number should be substantially lower as both numbers 
are unreasonable, arbitrary and capricious.  NKWD recommends giving primacy 
States flexibility in working with water systems to develop service line replacement 
plans that consider factors that are specific to the water system. 
 
10. Whether systems conducting deferred service line replacement should be subject to any additional 
requirements beyond those for systems that are not replacing service lines in accordance with a 
deferred deadline.  
 
Response:  NKWD suggests that additional requirements not be placed on systems 
with deferred service line replacements as these systems will already be heavily 
burdened by the volume of work required.  Placing additional requirements on 
deferred programs could impede the goal of replacing service lines as quickly as 
possible. 
 
11. The requirement for systems to install a dielectric coupling when conducting a partial replacement 
of an LSL or GRR to separate the remaining LSL or GRR service line and the replaced service line 
unless the replaced service line is made of plastic and other recommended risk mitigation activities.  
 
Response:  NKWD uses dielectric coupling when conducting a partial replacement.  
NKWD suggests that EPA label dielectric coupling as a best practice in additional 
guidance it will surely make available after a final rule is promulgated.   
 
12.  The proposed requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line replacement unless it is 
conducted in accordance with emergency or planned infrastructure work (excluding planned 
infrastructure work solely for the purposes of replacing lead and GRR service lines as part of a service 
line replacement program). Additionally, EPA is seeking comment on whether partial service line 
replacement should be prohibited during “planned infrastructure work” or with certain types of 
planned infrastructure work.  
 
Response:  NKWD will need the ability to repair or replace portions of the utility-
owned service line under emergency work to avoid a customer being without water for 
an extended period of time.  Banning partial replacements in these circumstances 
would mean the line would be out of service until a licensed plumber is able to perform 
the replacement work on the customer-owned service line.  For planned infrastructure 
work, NKWD has 268 miles of unlined cast iron water main that are over 60 years old, 
and logically these mains would have a majority of the system’s lead service lines 
connected.  With approximately 20 percent of NKWD’s total 1,300 miles of water main 
being cast iron that are already past or nearing the end of its expected service life, 
NKWD needs to continue to replace unlined cast iron mains.  Our water main 
replacement program helps to reduce non-revenue water and service disruptions 
caused by failures.  With a ban on partial replacements, refusal by any affected property 
owners to replace the portion of the service line owned by respective property owner 
could halt the entire water main replacement project.  Therefore, NKWD suggests not 
prohibiting partial service line replacements during planned infrastructure work or 

Page 13 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
emergency work as this practice will severely inhibit the replacement of aging 
infrastructure and repair of failing service lines.   
 
13. The ability of the market to correct for potential shortages in workers and materials to conduct 
service line replacement, as well to provide sufficient quantities of filters to comply with the service 
line replacement and other relevant provisions in the proposal.  
 
Response:  NKWD continues to see longer lead times post the COVID-19 Pandemic 
and as such, has concerns that the market will not be able to correct in a sufficient and 
timely manner to meet the requirements outlined in this proposed Rule, particularly 
when competing for resources with water systems regionally and nationally.  Of 
particular concern for NKWD will be the ability to get licensed  plumbers to complete 
the work as required by Kentucky Revised Statute 318.030.  Unlike Newark, New 
Jersey, who hired workers off the street and trained them to conduct service line 
replacements, Kentucky requires work on private property to be completed by a 
licensed Master Plumber.  Please note, pursuant to the Kentucky Department of 
Housing, Buildings and Construction, Division of Plumbing regulations it takes a 
minimum of four years’ experience and passing of two separate examinations to obtain 
a Master Plumber License in Kentucky. 
 
Furthermore, it appears EPA believes that the market will correct for any potential 
worker shortage.  While in the past, this may have been the case and a reasonable 
expectation, it is simply not the case in our region and a trend that appears to be 
growing nationally.  In Northern Kentucky, the Area Development District reports that 
our region currently has two (2) jobs for every one working age person available.  
Similarly at the national level, a similar labor concern has arisen as depicted in the 
report titled The Demographic Drought which is available at: https://www.datocms-
assets.com/62658/1663085587-demographic-drought-v18.pdf.  While our workforce 
limitation concerns may vary from other regions, it is a distinction which the Agency 
should consider and account for in its rule making.     
 
14. The extent to which property owner consent, if required by State or local law or water tariff 
agreement, might complicate full service line replacement and whether there are additional measures 
EPA can take to facilitate access through the LCRI.  
 
Response:  In Kentucky, NKWD does not have the legal authority to replace private 
service lines. Kentucky Administrative Regulation, 807 KAR 5:066 Section 12 lays 
ownership of service lines past the meter and meter box with the customer.  NKWD’s 
meters are located in the right-of-way (or are ordered by the Kentucky Public Service 
Commission to be relocated from an inside location to an outside location within the 
next 15 years).  After the point where NKWD’s ownership ends, NKWD, as a special 
purpose governmental entity whose statutory purpose under Kentucky Revised Statute 
74.012 is limited to furnishing public water supply, is prohibited from seizing 
ownership of the service line beyond that point in accordance with Kentucky 
Constitution Sections 10, 13 and 242. 
 

Page 14 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
Furthermore, legally funding full service line replacement, particularly private lead 
service lines, will be problematic in part due to the limitations of NKWD’s statutory 
authority as a special purpose governmental entity to only furnish the “public water 
supply.”  Additionally private service line replacement is further limited as the 
Kentucky statutory scheme limits NKWD’s ability through the Public Service 
Commission to recover rates for such expenditures.  Specifically, Kentucky Revised 
Statute 278.030 requires rates to be “fair, just and reasonable” and Kentucky Revised 
Statute 278.170 requires that rates not create any unreasonable preference or advantage 
or subject any to unreasonable prejudice or disadvantage.   
 
As mentioned above, the use of governmental bonds would likely be at risk as well.  
NKWD suggests that EPA assistance in the form of grants is the best funding source 
for NKWD and other similarly-situated water systems to minimize or clear the legal 
hurdles outlined herein and reach maximum lead service line replacement levels.   
  
 
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
 
1. Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of the proposed sites should be included 
in Tier 3, if additional sites should be included, or if some should be included in a different, lower 
priority tier, such as Tier 4. Specifically, comment on whether sites served by galvanized service lines 
or containing galvanized premise plumbing that are identified as ever being downstream of an LSL or 
lead connector should be included in the same tier as other sites with a current lead connector (e.g., 
copper service line downstream of a lead connector). 
  
Response:  No comment. 
 
2. Comment and available data, such as modeling or sampling data, that inform lead corrosion rates 
over time.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
3. Comment on the applicability of alternate sampling protocols to assess CCT performance, increase 
customer participation, and other relevant factors.  
 
Response:  NKWD suggests that the stagnation time for tap samples be limited to 18 
hours to match the maximum stagnation time outlined in EPA document “3Ts for 
Reducing Lead and Drinking Water and Child Care Facilities.”  
 
4. Comment on the proposed updated definition of wide-mouth bottles that is “bottles that are one 
liter in volume with a mouth, whose outer diameter measures at least 55 mm wide,” and specifically 
on the availability of qualifying bottles.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
5.  Comment and any relevant data on the number and tiering of samples used to calculate the 90th 
percentile lead and/or copper levels for systems with LSLs for purposes of assessing CCT efficacy. 

Page 15 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
Specifically, whether samples from non-LSL sites that have higher lead concentrations than samples 
from LSL sites should be included and whether these higher values should replace lower values from 
LSL sites in the 90th percentile calculation.  
 
Response:  No comment.  
 
6.  Comment on whether State authority to specify sampling locations when a system is conducting 
reduced monitoring should apply regardless of the number of taps meeting sample site criteria.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan  
 
 
1. In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a threshold of systems serving greater than 50,000 persons to host 
the inventory and plan online, which is the required threshold under the LCRR. EPA is seeking 
comment on the size threshold at which systems must host their publicly accessible inventory, 
inventory summary data, replacement summary data, and service line replacement plan online, and 
whether it should be lowered relative to the LCRR requirements.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
2. In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of non-lead 
service lines in their inventory that were categorized using methods other than records review or visual 
inspection of at least two points along the line. EPA is requesting comment on the number of 
validations required, the proposed 95 percent confidence level approach used to develop the number 
of validations required, the criteria for which methods used to categorize non-lead service lines should 
be included in the validation pool (including whether non-lead lines categorized based on records 
should be subject to validation), and the seven-year timeline for systems on a 10-year replacement 
deadline to complete the validation requirements.  
 
Response:  NKWD suggests that non-lead lines categorized based on records should 
not be subject to validation because this would divert resources away from efforts to 
replace lead and galvanized service lines.  Furthermore, NKWD is hopeful that EPA 
will support the use of material verification methods such as predictive modeling to 
reduce the number of unknown service lines. 
 
3.  Comment on establishing a deadline for systems to identify all unknown service lines prior to their 
service line replacement deadlines.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
4.  Comment on a requirement for systems to update their service line replacement plans if there are 
any changes, such as changes to laws and policies applicable to full service line replacement.  
 

Page 16 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
Response:  While NKWD agrees that plans may need to be updated for changes in 
circumstances, NKWD suggest additional language be added to allow for variances 
from original replacement plan and the proposed Rule to account for these changes. 
 
 
Lead Action and Trigger Levels  
 
1. EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of 0.010 mg/L, as well as comment and 
supporting data on alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, with regards to generally effective 
corrosion control treatment and identifying systems most at risk of elevated levels of lead in drinking 
water.  
 
Response:  As elaborated by EPA with its proposed Rule, to minimize confusion, 
NKWD would recommend that only one action level (proposed 0.010 mg/L) be used.   
 
2. EPA is also seeking comment on the use of the action level to determine when additional public 
education is required, and the use of the same action level for public education as for the CCT 
provisions.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
3. EPA is seeking public comment, data, and information on the anticipated benefits and tradeoffs, 
including for public health and administrative burden on systems and States, if more small and medium 
systems are required to conduct a detailed OCCT demonstration and take other actions if they exceed 
the proposed action level of 0.010 mg/L or other lower values, while water systems are simultaneously 
required to mandatory conduct full service line replacement.  
 
Response:  No comment.   
 
 
Corrosion Control Treatment  
 
1. The proposed determination that the CCT treatment technique is feasible and prevents known or 
anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible. 
 
Response:  NKWD agrees with EPA’s determination that CCT is feasible, affordable and 
prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible, but NKWD 
suggests other methods beyond those listed for CCT that may be available now or in the 
future should be considered.  NKWD is also aware that CCT, particularly the addition of 
phosphate-based corrosion inhibitors, can impact some consumers.  These consumers 
may be faced with installing, operating, and maintaining systems to treat the water to 
remove phosphorus so that it is suitable for their uses.  These consumer-borne costs were 
not considered in the economic analysis. 
 
2. Comment on whether it would be more appropriate to require water systems to re-optimize again 
following an action level exceedance regardless of meeting their optimal water quality parameters and to 
provide the State with the authority to waive this requirement. 

Page 17 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
 
Response:  If no changes to source water or treatment have been made and water systems 
are meeting their optimal water quality parameters, requiring a system to re-optimize again 
seems like an unnecessary burden and should be avoided.  NKWD supports the States 
having the authority to waive re-optimization again following an action level exceedance 
but suggests that the EPA provide additional guidance for States regarding the factors to 
consider when determining if re-optimization would be necessary. Also, if a utility has 
already done a CCT study similar to that required in the LCRI but prior to the LCRI the 
utility should not have to do another CCT if conditions have not changed.  
 
3. The proposed option for a water system to delay OCCT until after the system has replaced all of its LSLs 
and GRR service lines, while the system achieves at least 20 percent removal per year and must have no 
LSLs, GRR service lines, or lead status unknown service lines remaining at the end of the five-year period. 
 
Response: NKWD agrees with giving water systems an option to delay OCCT until after 
the system removes all of its LSLs and GRRs, and unknowns are determined to the extent 
considered practical and reasonable by the State or EPA. 
 
4. The treatment recommendation and CCT study process can take multiple years to complete. For systems 
with existing corrosion control, the system may be able to alter the existing treatment (e.g., increase pH 
and/or orthophosphate dose) without a new CCT study on a much faster timeframe rather than waiting 
for study results that may recommend that same change. EPA is requesting comment on whether there are 
situations and/or conditions where existing treatment modifications may achieve similar lead reductions 
rather than delaying new treatment for two and a-half years while a study is underway. 
 
Response: NKWD agrees that there are situations for water systems with existing corrosion 
control in which altering existing treatment may provide quicker lead reduction than the 
extra time a new CCT study would require.  NKWD recommends this be within the State’s 
authority to consider and approve. 
 
 
Compliance Alternatives for a Lead Action Level Exceedance for Small Community Water 
Systems and Non-Transient, Non-Community Water Systems  
 
1.  EPA is proposing that small system flexibilities be limited to CWSs serving 3,300 persons and 
fewer and all NTNCWSs for the remaining compliance alternatives of point-of-use devices and 
plumbing replacement. EPA is seeking comment on whether the Agency should allow systems serving 
up to 10,000 persons (or another threshold) to be eligible to use the small system compliance flexibility 
provision. EPA is also seeking information, data, and analysis on whether point-of-use devices and 
plumbing replacement are as effective as OCCT at systems serving up to 10,000 persons (or another 
threshold).  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
2.  EPA is requesting comment on the ability and practicality of point-of-use devices to address 
multiple contaminants.  
 

Page 18 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
Response:  No comment.  
 
 
Public Education  
 
1. The proposed determination that the public education treatment technique is feasible and prevents 
known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible.  
 
Response: No comment. 
 
2. Comment and supporting data on the capacity of water systems to conduct some or all of the 
required public education activities in 30 days, or another period of time that is less than 30 or 60 days, 
after the end of the tap sampling period in which a systemwide lead action level exceedance occurs.  
 
Response: NKWD recommends removing the requirement for water systems to deliver 
educational materials to organizations such as pediatricians, obstetricians-
gynecologist and midwives, WIC and Head Start programs, etc. and that notice to the 
local Health Department along with direct notice to customers (account holders) be 
sufficient when an action level is exceeded. 
 
3. Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water systems are capable of 
providing consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three calendar days of obtaining 
those results, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or copper action level, or if a longer 
time frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 calendar days).  
 
Response:  While NKWD attempts to notify as soon as practical, NKWD recommends 
that notification be required within seven (7) calendar days of obtaining the results.  
This will ensure water systems will be able to comply, particularly when an influx of 
many test requests come in simultaneously and reduce the possibility of water systems 
receiving violations and associated administrative burden. Under the proposed Rule’s 
three (3) calendar days, holidays and other situations could easily result in a violation.   
 
4. Whether the proposed requirement for water systems to offer lead sampling to consumers with 
LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines in the notice of service line material is effective at 
reducing adverse health effects. EPA is also requesting comment on the requirement for water systems 
to deliver consumer-initiated test results within three days of obtaining those results.  
 
Response:  NKWD also suggest notification of individual consumer-initiated tap 
sampling results within seven (7) calendar days of obtaining the results for the reasons 
stated above in our response to question number 3 and to keep notification of results 
on the same timeline.  Having multiple notification deadlines for different types of 
samples would simply be confusing and add to the administrative burden. 
 
5. Whether the types and timing of outreach activities proposed for systems failing to meet the 
mandatory service line replacement rate are appropriate and whether other activities should be 
considered.  
 
 

Page 19 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
Response: Some of the alternative activities for systems serving more than 3,300 
persons, specifically certified mail (currently $4.40 for each envelope as compared to 
regular mail at $0.68) and visiting targeted customers, would be very costly and time 
consuming, particularly for systems that may not utilize social media and therefore 
would not have that option as an activity.  NKWD suggests requirements for sending 
notices by certified mail be removed and that using social media not be required.  
 
6.  Whether EPA should require systems to annually notify consumers if they are served by a lead 
connector, in addition to notifications for sites with lead, GRR, or lead status unknown service lines.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
7. Whether EPA should require water systems to provide filters to consumers when there is a 
disturbance resulting from replacement of a water main. 
 
Response:  NKWD suggests that it only be mandatory for the water system to offer 
filter pitchers to consumers and that it not be mandatory to provide them.  Not only 
will this save the water system money and resources, but it may also save the customer 
money if the water system has a specific charge for the filter pitchers.  NKWD also 
seeks clarification that merely changing out a meter within the meter setting does not 
require a filter pitcher, only instructions for flushing the line. 
 
8. Whether EPA should require additional public education requirements to further encourage swift 
service line replacement faster than the 10-year replacement deadline. For example, should water 
systems that have LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines five years after the compliance 
date for the LCRI be required to increase the frequency of the notification of service line materials 
from annual to once every six months?  
 
Response:  NKWD suggests annual notification is a sufficient interval for outreach as 
long as LSLs, GRR or unknowns exist. 
 
9. EPA is seeking information and data on when a system provides translated materials to consumers 
with limited English proficiency, what resources are used to translate materials (e.g., State resources, 
community organizations), and what barriers water systems may face in providing accurate translated 
materials.  
 
Response: A barrier to water systems would be identifying resources to translate 
materials in a timely and cost-efficient manner. It would be helpful if EPA provided 
translation resources so that systems would have easy and affordable access.   
 
10. Whether the Agency should require States, as a condition of primacy, to provide translation 
support to water systems that are unable to do so for public education materials to consumers with 
limited English proficiency.  
 
Response: It would be helpful if EPA would provide translation resources so that 
systems would have easy and affordable access.  
 

Page 20 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
11. EPA is also requesting comment on additional ways to streamline public education and associated 
certification requirements (e.g., combine deadlines for systems to conduct public education or submit 
information to the State).  
 
Response:  NKWD suggests EPA create a template and checklist for water systems 
that lists the certification requirements and all other annual monitoring, public 
communication, and reporting requirements.  
 
NKWD recommends EPA simplify data management requirements and provide a data 
management system that can be used by both states and utilities. 
 
NKWD further suggests EPA simplify customer education requirements so water 
systems can send fewer communications to customers to avoid desensitizing 
customers to water system public health communications. 
 
 
Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances  
 
EPA is proposing new actions to be required of systems that exceed the lead action level multiple 
times, based on the proposed criteria of three action level exceedances in a five-year period. EPA is 
requesting comments on all aspects of this proposed requirement, and specifically the following:  
 
1. Whether water systems should be required to take additional actions when the system exceeds the 
lead action level multiple times and if so, what actions are appropriate and feasible, and when these 
additional actions should be required under the LCRI.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
2. Whether EPA should use three action level exceedances in a five-year period for identifying systems 
with multiple action level exceedances where additional action is warranted and, whether additional 
actions should be required sooner, or later, than the five-year period, or whether EPA should use a 
modified metric (number of consecutive action level exceedances in a set time period) or a different 
metric entirely (i.e., based on one or more factors other than the number of action level exceedances 
in a set time period).  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
3. The proposed public education activities after a system exceeds the lead action level multiple times. 
EPA is specifically seeking any information, data, or analysis on whether the proposed public 
education activities support preventing adverse health effects in this situation. EPA is also requesting 
comment on whether systems should be required to conduct more than one (e.g., two or three) of the 
public education activities proposed.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
4. Whether EPA should require water systems to make filters certified to reduce lead and replacement 
cartridges, along with instructions for use, available to all consumers within 60 days of a system having 

Page 21 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
multiple action level exceedances and whether there are any supporting or contrary data on whether 
the proposed filter requirement would be protective of public health.  
 
Response:  NKWD suggests water systems make pitcher filters available only to those 
customers served by a LSL, GRR, or service line of unknown material in the event of 
multiple action level exceedances. 
 
5.  The proposed requirements for systems to develop a filter plan and submit to the State after the 
system has multiple action level exceedances for the first time, and whether EPA should require 
systems to take additional actions to facilitate filter distribution.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
6. Alternative requirements for systems with multiple action level exceedances to provide filters to 
their consumers, such as requiring water systems to provide filters and replacement cartridges to 
consumers served by an LSL, GRR service line, or unknown service line or to all consumers, or to 
require systems to consult with the State upon meeting the criteria for multiple action level 
exceedances, after which the State determines the appropriate action to reduce lead exposure.  
 
Response:  NKWD suggests water systems make pitcher filters available only to those 
customers served by a LSL, GRR, or service line of unknown material in the event of 
multiple action level exceedances. 
 
7. An additional provision providing discretion to States to allow systems with multiple action level 
exceedances to discontinue the proposed required actions sooner if the system takes actions (e.g., 
installs optimized or re-optimized CCT, completes mandatory service line replacement) and is at or 
below the lead action level for two consecutive monitoring periods.  
 
Response:  NKWD suggests EPA revise the regulation so water systems could 
discontinue conducting additional steps triggered by three action level exceedances if 
the system is at or below the lead action level for two consecutive monitoring periods. 
 
8. Whether, in addition to the proposed requirements, EPA should provide States discretion to 
determine appropriate action following a multiple action level exceedance that is tailored to meet 
specific system needs.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
 
Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities  
 
EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed lead sampling in schools and child care 
facilities requirements, and specifically:  
 
1. Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or to sample more frequently in 
schools and child care facilities.  
 

Page 22 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
Response:  While NKWD supports testing for lead in schools and child care facilities, 
NKWD suggests the best strategy to address lead in schools and child care facilities is 
through a holistic program implemented through the Department of Education, 
Health and Human Services, and EPA in collaboration with relevant state agencies.  
Water systems should be encouraged to assist schools and child care facilities in 
reducing lead exposure from drinking water, but not be required to conduct 
mandatory testing of these public and private facilities.  NKWD has concerns that such 
requirements step beyond NKWD’s legal authority as a special purpose governmental 
entity whose statutory purpose under Kentucky Revised Statute 74.012 is limited to 
furnishing public water supply.  Such requirements, if complied with by NKWD under 
certain circumstances may be in violation of NKWD’s limited authority and further 
considered a violation of Kentucky Constitution Sections 10, 13 and 242.    
 
Additionally, NKWD would also suggest some refinement to further minimize or 
mitigate the scope and extent of sampling.  For instance, NKWD has approximately 
86,850 water service accounts in Northern Kentucky and provides services to 175 
daycares, 69 elementary schools, 36 middle and high schools which are part of 11 
different public-school districts and multiple private schools (including 38 schools that 
are part of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Covington system).  The coordination and 
staffing that would be required, not only of NKWD but each independent school and 
school system would be substantial. 
  
2.  The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community water systems from the 
requirement for lead sampling in schools and child care facilities during the five-year period after the 
LCRI compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021 but prior to the LCRI 
compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver requirements of § 141.92(h).  
 
Response:  The waiver construct is problematic as an “all or nothing” approach.  In 
lieu of or in addition to the waiver, NKWD suggests allowing sampling data from 
individual schools and child care facilities that were tested in accordance with the 
sampling requirements.  NKWD supports allowing sampling data collected from 
schools and child care facilities after January 1, 2021 but prior to LCRI compliance date 
to be eligible for submittal under the LCRI.  NKWD also suggests allowing the 
submission of earlier data going back to January 1, 2014 to coincide with the Lead 
Reduction in Drinking Water Act.  Repeating testing that has already been completed 
is not a sensible use of limited resources. 
 
3. Whether or not to allow States to waive the requirements of § 141.92 for CWSs in schools and child 
care facilities that use and maintain filters certified to reduce lead, and if so, whether the waiver should 
only be allowed where schools and child care facilities are required by State or local law to install POU 
devices and maintain them.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
4. The minimum requirements for States to provide a waiver (e.g., should the waiver be limited to 
locations where the filter use is required by State or local law; should the waiver be limited to locations 
where State or local law requires periodic sampling or testing to ensure proper filter use).  

Page 23 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
5. Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and child care facility sampling results publicly 
available, and if so, how frequently and in what manner.  
 
Response:  NKWD suggests the school and child care facility sample results be made 
publicly available by the administrators of the school or child care facility.  Requiring 
water systems to conduct these efforts could place a large burden on the water system 
to manage the communication of the results, and water systems would not be in a 
position to communicate follow-up actions being taken by the school and child care 
facilities.  In addition, NKWD suggests notification of testing results to the school 
board and child care facility management be sufficient and that notification to each 
individual facility not be required.  Again, NKWD suggests the best strategy to address 
lead in schools and child care facilities is through a holistic program implemented 
through the Department of Education, Health and Human Services, and EPA in 
collaboration with relevant state agencies.   
 
Reporting and Recordkeeping  
 
EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed reporting and recordkeeping, and specifically 
the following:  
 
1. EPA is requesting comment on the expansion of the inventory reporting to include lead connectors 
and non-lead service lines.  
 
Response:  NKWD suggests that lead connectors should not be part of the inventory.  
By removing this proposed  requirement from the inventory, it would greatly minimize 
the administrative and financial burden upon water systems. 
 
2. EPA has heard concern over the ability of States to review all required site sample plans and provide 
approvals in time for the first tap monitoring period, and is requesting comment on whether EPA 
should consider a phased approach or alternate approach to reduce the burden on States following 
the rule compliance date.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
3. EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be required to maintain records related to 
distribution system and site assessments conducted by water systems.  
 
Response:  NKWD suggests the records related to distribution system site 
assessments should be maintained by the water system and made available for 
inspection during the sanitary survey or upon request by the State. 
 
4. EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be required to maintain documentation of 
determinations of more stringent implementation, including but not limited to conditions or approvals 

Page 24 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
related to reduced compliance monitoring and additional information required to conduct a review or 
designate OCCT.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
 
Compliance Dates  
 
The proposed LCRI includes a three-year implementation period following the publication of the final 
rule until the compliance date to allow States time to obtain primacy and work with systems to prepare 
to comply. It also allows systems time to plan and obtain funding for LSLR as appropriate. EPA is 
seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed LCRI compliance dates and whether it would be 
practicable for water systems to implement any of the proposed LCRI requirements earlier than three 
years from the date of final action on the proposed LCRI. Specifically:  
 
1. Whether it is practicable for water systems to implement notification and risk mitigation provisions 
after full and partial service line replacement (§ 141.84(h)), notification of a service line disturbance (§ 
141.85(g)), and associated reporting requirements (§141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) upon the effective date of 
the LCRI.  
 
Response:  No comment. 
 
2. Whether earlier alternative compliance dates for LCRI are practicable such that water systems 
transition directly from LCR to LCRI in less than three years (i.e., one or two years) based on the 
assumption that water systems would comply with the LCR until the LCRI compliance date. 3. 
Whether there are other LCRR provisions besides the initial inventory and notifications of service line 
material for which the October 16, 2024 compliance date should be retained.  
 
Response:  NKWD supports keeping the proposed three-year implementation period 
following publication of the final Rule to allow time for systems to reduce the number 
of service lines having unknown material which will enhance the quality of the 
replacement plans.  The three-year implementation period is a vital portion of time 
that will allow water systems to properly prepare and plan for compliance with EPA’s 
Rule.    
 
 
Other Proposed Revisions to 40 CFR Part 141  
 
1. Consumer Confidence Report  
 
a. EPA is requesting comment on the proposed requirement for systems to provide an informational 
statement in the CCR about the school sampling requirements with the information that consumers 
can contact the school or child care facility about any potential sampling results.  
 
Response:  NKWD believes that the additional information in the CCR regarding 
schools and day care facilities may lead to confusion on the part of the consumer.  By 
adding additional information such as this, it will make the CCR overly cumbersome 

Page 25 of 25 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
and lower the likelihood it is read by the consumer.  NKWD suggests that providing 
such information to the schools and allowing them to disseminate the information is 
the prudent course of action.   
 
2. Definitions 
a. EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed definitions, and specifically the following:  
b. EPA is proposing to define a two-foot maximum length of connectors. EPA proposes that 
“connectors” that exceed two feet in length be treated as a service line. EPA is requesting comment 
on the defined length of a connector.  
 
Response:  No comment.  
 
 
NKWD appreciates your consideration of these comments.  While NKWD would have appreciated 
additional time through a longer comment period to give further consideration and to refine our comments 
on the proposed Rule, NKWD hopes you will find these comments useful and informative in your decision-
making process.   NKWD would be happy to respond to any questions that you may have regarding our 
comments.  If we can be of assistance, please contact Amy Stoffer at astoffer@nkywater.org or Tom Edge 
at tedge@nkywater.org. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Amy Stoffer, P.E. 
Vice President of Engineering, Production & Water Quality 
 
 
 
 
Tom Edge 
General Counsel & Manager of Legal, Compliance, and Regulatory Affairs

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0776 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
900 SW 16th Street, Suite 305, Renton, Washington 98057   ▪   206.246.1299   ▪   800.244.0124   ▪   FAX: 206.246.1323   ▪   staff@waswd.org  ▪   www.waswd.org
January 31, 2024
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
RE: Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 Lead and Copper Rule Improvements
Dear Sir or Madame:
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI).  
The Washington Association of Sewer and Water Districts (WASWD) represents more than 180 
public water and sewer districts throughout the state, serving nearly 20% of our state’s 
population. WASWD members provide these cost-effective essential public services in the 
state’s largest population centers and in the smallest rural communities. Safe drinking water is 
a major concern to both our membership and the customers they serve.  We support strong 
protections for drinking water from the source to the tap that are furthered with the LCRI. We do 
have some concerns, however, with the proposed LCRI.
Frequency of lead service line (LSL) inventories: Annual updates are impractical as they are 
required too frequently. Particularly in areas of the country where lead service lines were 
infrequently utilized, conducting LSL inventories at this frequency would take up valuable time 
and resources that could be used for other public health issues such as PFAS.  For smaller 
utilities with few staff the frequency of the inventories is especially a real burden.  A longer time 
frame for updating inventories is warranted for these reasons.
Timeframe for compliance: Optimized corrosion control treatment (OCCT) is working well in 
many jurisdictions where LSLs are present.  These systems should have extended time frames 
for replacement of LSLs since they have already taken action and made capital investments to 
control lead and copper in their water systems.  Health and safety is not at issue in these 
systems as it is in those with no OCCT, so allowing them to spread out the time and money 
needed to replace LSLs makes economic sense. 
Private service line obligations: In Exhibit 1 on page 84886 of the Register, it summarizes:
“Systems conducting partial service line replacement must offer to replace the remaining 
portion of the service line not under their control (within 45 days in emergencies)”
In some states, such as Washington, this is not legal.  Public funds cannot be spent on private 
property.  Public utilities are able to do work on private property and charge costs to the owner.  
For example, some utilities have done initial line installation and extended repayment over a 
number of years via utility billing.  However, state law does not allow the utility to force the 
owner to replace the line, or even to enter onto the property without the owner’s consent unless 

Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 Lead and Copper Rule Improvements
Page 2 of 2
900 SW 16th Street, Suite 305, Renton, Washington 98057   ▪   206.246.1299   ▪   800.244.0124   ▪   FAX: 206.246.1323   ▪   staff@waswd.org  ▪   www.waswd.org
it is recorded on the original site plans, which it would not be with older development that is 
most likely to have LSLs. This poses a significant obstacle to compliance with this provision.
Education Requirements: Required public education and its timing need to be simplified and 
scalable for different sizes of utilities.  These programs should be developed by a central 
agency, such as a state health authority, who is aware of the needs of local utilities.  It is too 
much to expect small utilities to do this on their own when they have few staff.
Funding: Funding for inventories and replacements will always be an issue. The financial 
pressures for meeting these requirements at the same time as working to meet other regulatory 
requirements are high, particularly on smaller utilities. Without ongoing federal funding, 
customers will experience rising utility rates that will be unaffordable to some, and potentially 
jeopardizing secure housing in some communities.
We appreciate the efforts of EPA in ensuring safe drinking water for all Americans.
Sincerely,
Judi Gladstone
Executive Director
WASWD

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0850 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1053 SPRUCE RD * P.O. BOX 3348 * ALLENTOWN, PA  18106-0348 
610-398-2503 * email: service@lehighcountyauthority.org 
www.lehighcountyauthority.org 
 
Every drop matters. Every customer counts. 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
Mr. Michael Regan, Administrator 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 
Mail Code: 28221T 
Washington, DC 20460-0001 
 
RE:  
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan,  
 
Lehigh County Authority (LCA) is a medium-sized water utility serving approximately 
200,000 people in the City of Allentown and 14 suburban municipalities throughout the Lehigh 
Valley region in eastern Pennsylvania. We appreciate the opportunity to comment on the 
Environmental Protection Agency’s proposed rule, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
for Lead and Copper: Improvements (EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801). 
 
In 2021, the EPA finalized the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR), which strengthened the 
regulatory framework initiated by the 1991 Lead and Copper Rule.  LCA supported the revisions 
in light of improved water quality and public awareness of the health impacts of lead.  While the 
LCRR made notable revisions to protecting public health, the revised rule also significantly 
increased capital and operational costs associated with complying with the regulation.  
Unfortunately, the cost of complying will undoubtedly have significant rate impacts to consumers 
across the county.  In December 2023, the EPA proposed the Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI), which further strengthens the LCRR, while also increasing the burden to 
utilities and their ratepayers.  Due to the importance of this rulemaking and significant impacts 
the regulation will have on water utilities and ratepayers, LCA is pleased to submit the following 
comments: 
 
Deadline for Completing Mandatory Service Line Replacements 
The proposed LCRI requires water systems to replace all lead and galvanized requiring replacement 
(GRR) service lines under the control of the water system within 10 years after publication of the LCRI.  

Lehigh County Authority – Public Comments 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
February 5, 2024 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
Every drop matters. Every customer counts. 
Accomplishing characterization and replacement within 10 years is extremely aggressive, especially for 
many large water utilities. Cities such as Allentown, PA, who can trace their public water system to the 
late 19th century, contain a disproportionate number of the nation’s lead service lines.  Based on current 
inventory data, LCA estimates approximately 13,000 service lines will need to be replaced within the 10-
year time frame.  Based on the estimated service lines that require replacement, a capital investment of 
approximately $130,000,000 will be required.  While these numbers are large, it is expected to grow even 
higher as we uncover the 16,500 unknown service lines.  When utilities are competing for contractors, 
there will undoubtedly be price escalation and logistical difficulties as water systems across the United 
States will be competing for the same construction resources (e.g. personnel, equipment, materials, etc.). 
EPA has not created a record to demonstrate such resources are available and affordable to water systems.  
Government agencies currently estimates that there are up to 10 million lead service lines in the United 
States1.  The total cost to replace these lines will exceed over $90 billion.  Additionally, the EPA has 
estimated through the 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment that the traditional 
20-year national drinking water infrastructure need is $625 billion2.  While lead service line replacements 
are included within this estimate, the funding needed to support the LCRI and other equally important 
regulations has not been adequate. To support eliminating LSLs, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs 
Act (IIJA) included $15 billion specifically for lead service line replacement projects and associated 
activities directly connected to the identification of LSLs and planning for the replacement of LSLs.  
Utilities that are not successful in securing grants through programs such as the IIJA, will likely have to 
acquire loans, which are ultimately paid for through increases to customer rates.  This comes at a time 
where customer rates are unaffordable for many.  A recent study has shown that 17% of households spend 
more than one day each month working to pay for water services and sanitation services3.  The EPA must 
ensure funding is available for the sustainability of utilities making efforts to comply with these 
regulations. 
 
The EPA has not provided rationale behind the 10-year requirement.  A select number of examples was 
provided as a means of determining feasibility; however, their success not was not accomplished under 
the same guidelines as the proposed LCRI.  More importantly, none of the programs cited in the preamble 
accomplished the replacement program in 10 years (or anticipated achieving program goals in 10 years) 
 
1 White House. 2021. FACT SHEET: The Biden-⁠Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan 
2 EPA. 2023. Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment, 7th Report to Congress 
3 Lauren A. Patterson, Sophia A. Bryson, Martin W. Doyle. 2023. "Affordability of Household Water Services Across the United States," PLOS 
Water, May 10, 2023. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pwat.0000123. 

Lehigh County Authority – Public Comments 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
February 5, 2024 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
Every drop matters. Every customer counts. 
without substantial outside subsidy when the system had an appreciable number of service lines requiring 
replacement. In other words, the anticipated replacement rate and timeframe is not feasible within the 
fiscal, managerial, and technical capacity of even large systems.  EPA also has not taken into account the 
fact that there is likely to be a shortage of skilled labor to perform these replacements when all systems 
are mandated to replace them on the same timeline. A few examples of systems able to complete the work 
within a 10-year timeframe when they did not have to similarly compete for such labor does not provide a 
record supporting the feasibility of this timeframe. 
 
Replacement Rate Calculation & Inclusion of Unknown Service Lines 
In addition to the challenges associated with the 10-year deadline to replace LSLs and GRRs, the LCRI 
includes a confusing process for calculating the replacement rate due to the inclusion of service lines of 
unknown material into the equation. While utilities will strive to achieve the 10-percent replacement rate 
required to meet the 10-year deadline, this rate will be difficult to achieve when credit is given only for 
LSLs and GRRs replaced in a given year, but credit is not provided for the number of unknown service 
lines that are investigated and classified during the same period. LCA believes the tracking of unknown 
service lines should be separated from the calculation of LSLs and GRRs, so utilities have a more 
accurate way to determine how many service lines must be replaced during the course of the replacement 
period, and more accurate metrics to report to state agencies and the public.  
 
In addition, within the LCRI, EPA does not take access into account when establishing the deadlines for 
characterization of all unknown service lines or the calculation of annual replacement rate. While EPA 
recognizes the need to physically access private property with respect to service line replacement, this 
issue is not recognized when it comes to investigating service line material for inventory purposes. This 
will set many utilities up for failure in achieving compliance, as access cannot be guaranteed in all 
situations.  
 
Reporting and Notification Requirements 
The LCRI adds additional requirements to the already burdensome LCRR.  While LCA agrees that there 
are health benefits with keeping the public informed with the health impacts of lead, reporting to the state 
on individual activities should not be required.  States nor utilities are adequately staffed to prepare and 
review documents which have no added benefit to the public.  Rather, utilities should be able to provide 
documentation upon request and submit an annual certification of compliance with all applicable 
regulations.   

Lehigh County Authority – Public Comments 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
February 5, 2024 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
Every drop matters. Every customer counts. 
 
Partial Replacement Ban 
In the LCRI, EPA is proposing to prohibit partial service line replacements unless it is conducted as part 
of an emergency repair or in coordination with planned infrastructure work, excluding planned 
infrastructure work solely for the purposes of LSL or GRR service line replacement.  While LCA agrees 
with the goal of conducting full-service line replacements, they are not always feasible.  For many water 
utilities, full-service line replacements require collaboration with property owners.  Banning partial 
replacements as a part of replacement programs impedes a utility’s ability to make incremental 
improvement by reducing at least the portion of the service line to which it has access.  While partial 
service lines replacements have been shown to increase lead levels, the EPA and states have required risk 
mitigation measures to impede the elevated lead risks associated with full and partial replacements.    
Properly installed and maintained POU filters, certified under both NSF/ANSI-53 and NSF/ANSI-42 can 
protect all populations, including pregnant women and children, by reducing lead in drinking water to 
levels that would not result in a significant increase in overall lead exposure4. Other risk mitigation 
measures are available through public education, system flushing, and post-partial-replacement lead 
testing. When properly administered, these measures can reduce risk exposure after a partial LSL 
replacement, which is preferrable over the alternative of leaving the public-side LSL in service. 
 
LCA, like most water utilities, does not have access to privately owned portions of the service line unless 
access is granted by the property owner.  By banning partial service line replacements, the EPA is 
creating situations where utilities are being required to leave lead portions in service, with the requirement 
to excavate and disturb service lines and roads again at a later date.  This has the potential to interfere and 
slow the process of completing the replacement work. 
 
Action Level Exceedance - Pitcher Filter Requirement 
The proposed rule requires water systems that exceed the action level to provide pitcher filters to all 
customers.  This requirement should be removed from the final rule as it only provides a benefit to a 
select number of customers at a significant cost.  The basis of the LCRR and LCRI is structured around 
controlling the leaching of lead from service lines.  Compliance monitoring for lead occurs at locations 
where lead is most likely to be present, but is not necessarily representative of lead levels throughout the 
 
4 Bosscher, V., Lytle, D. A., Schock, M. R., Porter, A., & Del Toral, M. 2019. POU water filters effectively reduce lead in drinking water: a 
demonstration field study in flint, Michigan. Journal of environmental science and health. Part A, Toxic/hazardous substances & environmental 
engineering, 54(5), 484–493. https://doi.org/10.1080/10934529.2019.1611141 

Lehigh County Authority – Public Comments 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
February 5, 2024 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
Every drop matters. Every customer counts. 
system.  Providing pitcher filters to customers with service lines that do not meet the requirements for 
replacement would provide little to no benefit to consumers.  The excessive funds that would be applied 
to providing filters would be better served by removing service lines meeting the removal requirements.  
LCA has over 33,500 connections in its largest system.  Complying with this requirement would 
logistically be impossible.  Locating a supply to meet the demand would not be feasible and would 
undoubtedly exceed municipal purchasing guidelines.  This would ultimately result in pitcher distribution 
delays due to the bidding and administrative process.   
 
As the infrastructure in America continues to age, water utilities struggle with maintaining affordable 
rates. The regulatory and reporting requirements, as proposed, will place additional financial and 
personnel workload burdens on utilities.   The proposed regulation is complex and implementation will be 
difficult for both water utilities and state agencies.  Effectively addressing lead exposure must be 
addressed through a collaborative approach with federal, state, and local agencies.  The responsibility is 
shared across multiple stakeholders, and not solely water utilities.  
 
LCA thanks you for the opportunity to comment on this important regulatory change. Please contact me 
at lieselgross@lehighcountyauthority.org or 610-398-2503 if you wish to discuss the comments and 
concerns expressed in this submission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Liesel M. Gross 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chief Executive Officer

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0917 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
EPA Docket Center  
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket, Mail Code 28221T  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
 
RE:   Comments of the Alliance for the Great Lakes on Lead and Copper Rule 
 
Improvements, Docket #: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Dear Environmental Protection Agency, 
Please accept these comments submitted by the Alliance for the Great Lakes (“Alliance”) and its 
approximately 40,000 supporters on the U.S. EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements, Docket #: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 (“Proposed Rule”). The Alliance is a 
nonpartisan nonprofit working across the Great Lakes region, whose mission is to protect, 
conserve, and restore the Great Lakes, ensuring healthy water in the lakes and in our 
communities for all generations of people and wildlife. Ensuring safe, clean, and affordable 
drinking water is a pillar of the Alliance’s water advocacy. Therefore, the Alliance generally 
supports the U.S. EPA’s proposal to strengthen requirements to control lead and copper in 
drinking water – in particular the requirement to replace harmful lead service lines throughout 
the country within the next decade.  
The Great Lakes region contains by far the greatest number of lead service lines of any region in 
the country, and so has borne an especially heavy burden from this toxic legacy that is still with 
us today. Addressing lead service lines once and for all will bring huge benefits to the region by 
reducing negative impacts to childhood development and improving cardiac health. At the same 
time, the Alliance believes the Proposed Rule risks leaving the most burdened too far behind by 
allowing significant extensions of the timeframe for lead service line replacement in cities with 
the greatest number of lead service lines, including the Great Lakes cities of Chicago and 
Cleveland. This and other comments are taken up in more detail below and generally 
summarized as follows: 

 
 
2 
 
• U.S. EPA should require that systems with the greatest number of lead service lines meet 
ambitious minimum replacement rates set as a percentage of their total lead service lines, 
with such rates regularly revisited to ensure maximum feasible replacement over time. 
• U.S. EPA should further tighten the Action Level to 5 ppb to protect public health, ensure 
systems are using effective corrosion control treatment, and further promote outreach and 
education that can help spur lead service line replacement and other removal of lead from 
water systems.  
• The Alliance supports U.S. EPA’s proposed enhanced transparency measures and 
requests that U.S. EPA (a) include requirements that posted information be easily 
searchable, extractable and exportable, and (b) remove the 50,000-resident threshold for 
online provision of lead service line replacement plans.  
• The Alliance supports and suggests ways to bolster U.S. EPA’s emphasis in the Proposed 
Rule on environmental justice and civil rights obligations pertaining to lead service line 
replacement and overall Lead and Copper Rule compliance.  
The Alliance also generally supports parallel comments being submitted by Elevate, the Natural 
Resources Defense Council and Earthjustice, the Environmental Policy Innovation Center, the 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the Illinois Water Justice 
Coalition, the Chicago Environmental Justice Network, and the Healing Our Waters Coalition. 
I. Timeframe for Lead Service Line Replacement 
The Alliance strongly supports U.S. EPA’s proposal to require water systems to replace their 
lead service lines within ten years. The harms of lead are well understood and the time for 
replacing lead service lines is well past. As such, the Alliance is concerned that allowing decades 
more to the systems with the most lead service lines will subject vulnerable residents to 
heightened lead levels for way too long. In addition, the Alliance questions the rationale for 
assuming that a large city like Chicago with substantial resources at its disposal can only replace 
as many lines per year as significantly smaller cities have achieved in the past. Rather than give 
some cities exceptionally long timeframes at the outset based on assumed annual replacement 
counts, the Alliance recommends requiring cities with the most lead service lines to meet an 
ambitious minimum initial replacement rate set as a percentage of the city’s total lead service 
lines at the outset, coupled with periodic review, robust technical assistance, and funding to 

 
 
3 
 
ensure that water systems meet targets as experience grows, funding increases, and supply and 
labor markets adjust.  
The Alliance is also concerned that giving cities like Chicago much longer than its suburban 
neighbors to replace lead service lines potentially increases inequities that U.S. EPA is 
committed to improving. As a Great Lakes advocate partner recently noted, setting a ten-year 
timeframe only for systems with fewer lines – including many with substantial economic 
resources – risks those systems collectively tying up limited equipment and certified workforce 
for lead service line replacement in the near term. Such resource distribution challenges from 
disparate replacement timelines could create potential shortages and even more delay for the 
systems with the most lines to replace and that are home to more low-income residents and 
residents of color. Setting more consistent timeframes for systems, and expecting cities with 
greater numbers of lines to reach ambitious annual targets, has the potential to create greater 
incentive for such cities to get out in front and secure needed resources by leveraging their 
economies of scale. It also sends a clearer and more urgent signal to supply and labor markets.  
We recognize that the same concern with being shut out of resources pertains to smaller, low-
income communities with significant proportions of residents of color located outside of large 
cities. We encourage U.S. EPA to engage with and increase the participation of these 
communities in WaterTA and with the Get the Lead Out Initiative. With subsidized assistance 
for planning and implementation, these jurisdictions could prioritize limited resources on 
securing supplies and labor, and may explore opportunities for achieving efficiencies of scale 
through coordination across water systems.  
Moreover, it is critical that Congress, U.S. EPA and state government support cities with the 
greatest number of lead service lines, as well as disadvantaged smaller communities facing 
substantial resource constraints, by ensuring that they receive funding in proportion to ambitious 
replacement goals and consistent with their proportion of vulnerable residents. As many have 
noted, the federal funding allocated for lead service line replacement to date is insufficient to 
meet the need. In addition, to the extent that cities with more lead service lines can achieve 
efficiencies by coordinating replacement with other road and water infrastructure work, and 
housing remediation, more funding will also be needed to make sure that this coordination can 
happen. U.S. EPA can play an important role in growing existing and establishing new 

 
 
4 
 
partnerships with the Department of Housing and Urban Development and Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, among other federal agencies, to incentivize and remove barriers to 
integrated funding for local infrastructure improvement goals.  
The Alliance is also concerned that some State Revolving Fund programs have been allocating 
lead service line replacement funding under existing state rules that do not ensure that funds go 
to the most vulnerable, underserved residents. We support states adopting revisions to their State 
Revolving Fund programs as soon as possible to enable more equitable distribution of funding, 
and look forward to working with community partners, state agencies, and U.S. EPA to this end. 
(See below on civil rights compliance and adding State Revolving Fund assessments to the 
special primacy requirements.) 
II. Who Bears the Costs of Lead Service Line Replacement 
The Alliance shares concerns with other advocates that allowing water systems to separately bill 
customers for replacing the portion of the service line that runs on private property runs a high 
risk of exacerbating historical inequities. We similarly believe that substantial evidence exists for 
water system control of service lines. Even if U.S. EPA finds water systems do not sufficiently 
control the entirety of the service line, thus not requiring water systems assume the full cost of 
lead service line replacement, it is critical that water systems allocate their resources in an 
equitable manner. Water systems should ensure that low-income and overburdened customers do 
not face barriers to replacement programs due to cost, and are instead prioritized for near-term 
replacement at no out-of-pocket cost to them.  
The Alliance supports U.S. EPA’s reminders throughout the proposal that federal civil rights 
obligations attach to water systems’ spending of federal funds, including awards from State 
Revolving Funds, on lead service line replacement obligations. We add that other civil rights 
laws, such as state civil rights laws and the federal Fair Housing Act, may impose obligations on 
lead service line replacement programs in addition to those under Title VI of the federal Civil 
Rights Act. Similarly, state administrators of State Revolving Fund programs are obligated to 
administer those programs consistent with Title VI. State administrators of State Revolving Fund 
programs thus are in a position to help ensure that funds for lead service line replacement do not 

 
 
5 
 
amplify inequities between water systems or within them, but instead help reduce such 
inequities.  
In addition, the Alliance believes that, regardless of U.S. EPA’s willingness to treat the entirety 
of a service line as part of the public water system, clarifying legislation at the state and/or local 
level may help local water agencies equitably meet ambitious lead service replacement timelines. 
Such legislation can significantly reduce local water agencies perceived or real exposure to 
potential litigation and clarify how a water agency will equitably fund lead service line 
replacement in its jurisdiction. Legislation should clearly delegate to local water agencies the 
authority to control service lines in their entirety, to raise local revenue needed to supplement 
federal and state funding to replace water system service lines in their jurisdiction, and to provide 
100% utility-funded lead service line replacement programs for those who qualify. While there 
are good examples of such legislation, we believe U.S. EPA should develop and/or identify 
model legislation that states and local jurisdictions can adopt to reduce barriers to achieving 
delegated authority and expediting service line replacement. Such legislation should clarify 
utility control over the water system service lines, and the utility’s authority to raise revenue 
using an equitable funding strategy. This type of targeted technical assistance in the form of 
model legislation would address significant barriers to equitably advancing ambitious lead 
service line replacement. 
III. Action Level 
The Alliance supports U.S. EPA’s proposal to strengthen the Action Level from 15 ppb to 10 
ppb, and to remove the trigger level. At the same time, the Alliance believes that a stronger 
Action Level is warranted due to the negative health impacts of lead; given systems that contain 
substantial amounts of lead-bearing fixtures; and especially if U.S. EPA allows extension of any 
timeframes for lead service line replacement beyond ten years. As is well-recognized, there is no 
safe level of lead exposure. In addition, it is the Alliance’s understanding that many water 
systems throughout the Great Lakes region had 90th percentile lead levels under the past Lead 
and Copper Rule sampling requirements that hovered in the 8 to 11 ppb range – indicating 
substantial sources of lead that were not being adequately controlled over the years. By 
tightening the action level further to 5 ppb (and with the addition of 5th draw samples to the 

 
 
6 
 
sampling regime), U.S. EPA will better ensure that these systems take steps to address their 
ongoing harmful levels of lead as they work toward lead service line replacement.  
According to U.S. EPA’s evaluation of corrosion control treatment performance in systems with 
lead service lines, nearly 40% of systems were able to achieve better than 5 ppb1, indicating that 
5 ppb is a reasonable level representative of well-implemented corrosion control treatment 
performance. U.S. EPA’s alternatives analysis also supports setting the Action Level at 5 ppb.2 
While the Alliance appreciates U.S. EPA’s desire not to impose significant administrative 
burdens on water systems (or the state agencies that support them), we are concerned that having 
low expectations for corrosion control treatment may be currently limiting water system 
operators’ understandings of complex water chemistry and corrosion control technology. 
Perpetuating low expectations by setting the Action Level at a threshold that a large majority of 
the systems are expected to meet may thus continue to hinder achieving the most effective use of 
corrosion control treatment and prevent greater learnings about the treatment technology that 
could benefit operators and the customers who rely on them.  
Strengthening the action level to 5 ppb would also have the added benefit of triggering more 
public outreach and education than an action level of 10 ppb. As noted in Section IV of these 
comments, increased outreach as a result of Action Level exceedances presents additional 
opportunities to increase public receptivity to lead service line and lead-containing home fixture 
replacement programs. Thus, further strengthening the Action Level to 5 ppb would help 
advance removal of lead from water systems.  
IV. Transparency and Accountability 
The Alliance appreciates U.S. EPA’s consideration of public education as a method of public 
health protection and thus a treatment technique that “...prevents known or anticipated adverse 
health effects ‘‘to the extent feasible...’’.3  As such, explicit requirements to improve lead health 
impact messaging4, provide materials in multiple languages5, and to make lead service line 
 
1 See 88 Fed. Reg. 84,878 (December 6, 2023), at 84,940.  
2 See id. at 85,005-12. We note that the alternatives analysis also supports setting the Action level at 7 or 8 ppb if 
U.S. EPA determines it is important to give greater weight to reducing administrative burdens.  
3 See id. at 84,946.  
4 Id. at 84,951 and 84,953. 
5 Id. at 84,953-54; 84,962-63.  

 
 
7 
 
inventories and lead service line replacement plans publicly available, are baseline best 
management practices that will increase opportunities to educate residents on the benefits of 
participating in lead service line replacement programs. Additionally, the Alliance wholly 
supports EPA’s proposal to require water systems to deliver public education materials to every 
service connection address served, not just bill-paying addresses. This change expands 
notifications to renters and ensures education materials are distributed community-wide, 
considering environmental justice concerns that residents in rental properties may not otherwise 
be provided adequate information about the impacts of lead exposure to take protective steps.6  
 
The Alliance also supports improvements to customer notification requirements and agrees with 
U.S. EPA’s feasibility determination that the outreach requirements listed below are appropriate 
and achievable. Each notification increases customers’ exposure to lead service line replacement 
messaging, with the hopeful result of increasing willingness to provide access for service line 
replacement.7 These include: 
 
A) Annual notifications to customers with known lead service lines, galvanized service lines 
requiring replacement, or unknown service line types. The specificity required for 
“reasonable attempts” to engage property owners about lead service line replacement is 
clear, and achievable.8 Further, the stipulation that U.S. EPA reserves the ability for states 
to require systems to conduct additional outreach and/or specific outreach methods that 
exceed these standards further extends the potential impact of repeat messaging.9  
B) Notification triggers to provide educational materials to consumers for which water-
related work could disturb lead service lines, galvanized service lines requiring 
replacement, or unknown service lines servicing their property.  
C) Action Level exceedance triggers – both for each exceedance and additional outreach for 
multiple (3 or more) exceedances. Additional notification of tap sampling results 
regardless of the lead or copper results also encourages customer system awareness.10  
 
6 Id. at 84,951.  
7 Id. at 84,946-47. 
8 Id. at 84,948.  
9 Id. at 84,923. 
10 Id. at 84,949. 

 
 
8 
 
D) Notification of customers when lead service line replacement rates in the lead service line 
replacement plan are not met, and annually thereafter until met with a series of outreach 
options.11  
 
Requiring utilities (and States) to identify any state or local laws or water tariff agreement 
provisions that might impede adequate access to a full service line and include these access 
barriers in a publicly available lead service line replacement plan is crucial. As noted in the 
Proposed Rule, the benefits of this requirement are two-fold. First, researching legal barriers may 
elucidate legal pathways for full service line replacement previously unknown to or 
misunderstood by the utility, or identify for the utility policy changes required to service a line 
fully. Second, a utility’s perception of legal barriers to full service line replacement becomes 
public information, increasing the transparency around a utility’s processes and potentially 
enhancing public discussion around reforms.12  
 
The Proposed Rule could, however, take further steps to make transparency a priority – by 
requiring that lead service line inventories be easily searchable, extractable, and exportable. 
Additionally, the Proposed Rule requires only jurisdictions/utilities with greater than 50,000 
connections to make lead service line replacement plans and inventories accessible online.13 The 
Proposed Rule and LCRR do not provide justification for establishing this population-based 
cutoff for posting inventories online, nor reasoning for why posting lead service line replacement 
plans online presents a significant burden. The Alliance requests the requirement to make plans 
available online in an accessible format extend to all communities equally – regardless of 
community size.  
 
Engagement around lead service line replacement and the health impacts of lead exposure should 
explicitly consider successful models for engaging communities in equitable lead service line 
replacement planning. The Alliance is encouraged by U.S. EPA reiterating AWWA LSLR 
Collaborative and prior U.S. EPA findings that utility/provider partnerships with community-
based organizations are particularly effective at centering community needs in lead service line 
 
11 Id. at 84,947.  
12 Id. at 84,920-21. 
13 Id. at 84,952 and 85,036. 

 
 
9 
 
replacement program engagement.14 The Alliance also reiterates U.S. EPA’s finding that 
engagement with community groups is essential to comply with anti-discrimination civil rights 
laws.15 Indeed, contractual partnerships between water system operators and community-based 
organizations have been successful in communities across the U.S. in developing more equitable 
lead service line replacement processes and engaging more residents in removal programs.16 
Input from engagement formalized in the service line replacement plan should address concerns 
of underserved and historically disinvested communities that may lack trust in messaging from 
their utility. We encourage U.S. EPA to recommend service provider and community-based 
organization partnerships as a standard practice through lead and copper rule implementation 
guidance, as well as Water Technical Assistance (WaterTA), and Drinking Water State 
Revolving Fund state administrator guidelines. 
 
V. Environmental Justice, Civil Rights 
The Alliance appreciates the attention that U.S. EPA gives to environmental justice and civil 
rights issues in its proposal, including the Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Rule 
and discussion of Title VI obligations. Our above comments address several environmental 
justice and civil rights issues as they pertain to the Proposed Rule. We raise additional items 
here. The Environmental Justice Analysis uses a method that examines the distribution of lead 
service line burdens within water systems, looking at several city case studies.17 The Alliance 
recommends that U.S. EPA also consider inter-system environmental justice issues in this and 
future rulemaking, in addition to the intra-system frame. An inter-system frame could assess 
whether relative access to funding resources for implementation of the rule, and/or different 
regulatory timelines for replacement among water systems, might produce greater (or lesser) 
inequities in lead service line distribution across/between systems than exist at the outset of 
implementation. The assessment could then also consider ways to mitigate any such heightened 
inequities.  
 
14 Id. at 84,948.  
15 Id. at 84,906. 
16 Id. at 84,922. 
17 Id. at 84,927; see also U.S. EPA, “Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements,” (November 2023), EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0689.  

 
 
10 
 
Relatedly, the Alliance requests that U.S. EPA consider whether the heightened primacy 
requirements described in Section IV of this letter should also require states to identify any 
barriers in their laws, regulations or policies to equitable distribution of federal funding resources 
for lead service line replacement. Equitable availability of federal funding for lead service line 
replacement through state-administered programs is inextricably linked to achieving the goals of 
the Proposed Rule, as well as to civil rights compliance.    
VI. Conclusion 
In sum, the Alliance welcomes these long-awaited improvements to the federal Lead and Copper 
Rule and encourages U.S. EPA to issue a strengthened final rule that delivers on the 
Administration’s promise of equitable 100% lead service line replacement to the country and the 
Great Lakes region.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
Meleah Geertsma, Director, Clean Water & Equity 
Jenna Voss, Program Manager, Clean Water & Equity 
Chrystopher L. Garzón Rivera, Water Policy Analyst, Clean Water & Equity 
Angela Larsen, Director, Planning 
Jennifer Lumpkin, Manager, Cleveland Local Partnerships 
Alliance for the Great Lakes

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0790 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
AAP Headquarters 
345 Park Blvd 
Itasca, IL 60143 
Phone: 630/626-6000 
Fax: 847/434-8000 
www.aap.org 
 
Reply to  
AAP Washington Office  
601 13th St NW, Suite 400N  
Washington, DC 20005 
Phone: 202/347-8600 
E-mail: kids1st@aap.org 
 
 
Executive Committee 
President  
Benjamin D. Hoffman, MD, FAAP 
President-Elect 
Susan J. Kressly, MD, FAAP 
Immediate Past President 
Sandy L. Chung, MD, FAAP 
Secretary/Treasurer 
Margaret C. Fisher, MD, FAAP 
CEO/Executive Vice President 
Mark Del Monte, JD 
Board of Directors 
District I 
Patricia Flanagan, MD, FAAP 
District II 
Jeffrey Kaczorowski, MD, FAAP 
District III 
Margaret C. Fisher, MD, FAAP 
District IV  
Patricia Purcell, MD, MBA, FAAP 
District V 
Jeannette “Lia” Gaggino, MD, FAAP 
District VI 
Dennis M. Cooley, MD, FAAP 
District VII 
Susan Buttross, MD, FAAP 
District VIII 
Greg Blaschke, MD, MPH, FAAP 
District IX 
Yasuko Fukuda, MD, FAAP 
District X 
Madeline M. Joseph, MD, FAAP 
At Large 
Angela M. Ellison, MD, MSc, FAAP 
At Large 
Kristina W. Rosbe, MD, FAAP 
At Large  
Joelle N. Simpson, MD, FAAP 
February 2, 2024 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW  
Washington, DC  20460 
 
RE: Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for 
Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
 
Dear Administrator Regan:  
 
On behalf of the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), a non-profit professional organization 
of 67,000 primary care pediatricians, pediatric medical sub-specialists, and pediatric surgical 
specialists dedicated to the health, safety and well-being of infants, children, adolescents, and 
young adults, I am writing to commend the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) 
proposed rule entitled “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements (LCRI)” (docket number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) and provide input on this 
proposed rule. The AAP appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on this important 
children’s health issue and urges EPA to approve the strongest rule possible.  
 
Childhood lead exposure is a critical public health issue. There is no safe level of lead exposure, 
and the health harms of lead exposure can be permanent and irreversible. A significant source 
of lead exposure for children is the drinking water systems in this country, which contribute 
significantly to the persistent public health challenge of childhood lead poisoning. Children are 
uniquely vulnerable to the lifelong and irreversible health effects lead can cause, and EPA has a 
critical role in preventing children’s exposure to lead. 
 
The EPA’s Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) is an essential public health tool that is used to 
determine where certain prevention methods are needed to reduce exposure to lead in 
drinking water, and it is essential to improving the primary prevention of childhood lead 
exposure. The LCR requires drinking water systems to monitor drinking water at customer taps. 
If lead concentrations exceed an action level of 15 micrograms per liter (µg/L) in more than 10% 
of customer taps sampled, the system must undertake several corrective actions. Since the 
promulgation of the original 1991 LCR, there has been a significant reduction in lead 
concentrations in tap water, and the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) strengthened 
these efforts.i The AAP commends EPA for this significant progress in reducing lead in drinking 
water while continuing to call on the EPA to finalize an updated LCR that recognizes the 
extensive scientific evidence that there is no safe level of lead. 
 
The AAP appreciates the EPA’s proposed rule to revise the LCR and LCRR to further limit 
childhood lead exposure, especially the provisions that propose to reduce the lead action levels 
from 15 µg/L to 10 µg/L to require more water systems to act sooner to control corrosion and 
provide public education. The AAP believes that these proposed revisions to the LCR and LCRR 
are an important step towards stronger protections against childhood lead poisoning from 
drinking water. Pediatricians know that there is no safe level of lead exposure, so the AAP also 
urges the EPA to adopt the strongest possible standard achievable to protect the health and 
well-being of children. 
 

The AAP provides the following comments to outline the child health risks of lead poisoning across the life 
span and provide further input on EPA’s proposed changes to the LCR and LCRR:  
 
There Is No Safe Level of Lead 
 
Lead is a potent neurotoxin that can cause permanent and irreversible damage to children. Children with 
elevated lead levels are more likely to have behavior problems, attention deficit and reading disabilities, and 
fail to graduate from high school. Elevated blood lead levels are defined as lead levels above the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) “reference level” of 3.5 micrograms per deciliter.ii Low-level lead 
exposure, even at blood lead concentrations below 5 µg/dL, is a causal risk factor for diminished intellectual 
and academic abilities, higher rates of neurobehavioral disorders such as hyperactivity and attention deficits, 
and lower birth weight in children. Despite historical reductions in children’s blood lead concentrations, 
pediatric lead exposure persists, and so preventing childhood lead toxicity remains a major public health 
priority in the United States. For these reasons, primary prevention of exposure to lead is essential to address 
this major public health issue. 
 
The EPA’s proposed rule updates the LCR and LCRR with stronger requirements around testing of drinking 
water and indicated actions to address the presence of lead over certain thresholds. The proposed rule also 
appropriately revises the lead action level from 15 µg/L to 10 µg/L, which is a significant improvement. While 
recognizing this proposed rule as a step forward, the AAP reaffirms our position that there is no safe level of 
lead and continues to call on EPA to set an action level of 0 µg/L for lead in drinking water. The AAP commends 
EPA for revising downward the action level of 15 µg/L, which was not done in the 2021 LCRR. Given the 
permanent and harmful effects of lead exposure, the AAP calls for the final LCRI to be a health-based standard 
to adequately protect children’s health. 
 
Trigger Level 
 
The AAP strongly supports the EPA’s proposal to eliminate the “trigger level,” which is currently 10 µg/L. The 
AAP has previously opposed the trigger level, and the science of the health impacts of childhood lead exposure 
supports this proposal to eliminate this arbitrary level. The AAP believes that eliminating this trigger level will 
move more water systems to take proactive measures to thoroughly prevent lead exposure more 
expeditiously. Under the current trigger level, an exceedance of the trigger level requires additional testing, 
but not the protection of a community’s needs when their water source is found to have concerning levels of 
lead. Requiring corrosion control only after a trigger level exceedance is nothing more than a stop gap 
measure, which fails to adequately protect children that drink water from lead service lines and relies on a 
reactive approach to a neurotoxin for which the optimal approach is primary prevention of exposure.  
 
By eliminating the trigger level, any water system with continually high levels of lead, which is determined by 
having multiple lead action level exceedances, would be required to conduct additional outreach to consumers 
about lead in the drinking water and make filters certified to reduce lead available for consumers. The AAP 
commends the EPA’s proposal to eliminate the trigger level, which demonstrates that the EPA understands the 
scientific evidence that there is no safe level of lead and will not set arbitrary standards that are not based on 
science.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lead Service Line Replacements 
 
The AAP strongly supports EPA’s proposal to require water systems to replace all lead service lines that are 
under the control of water systems. We appreciate EPA ‘s decision to require most of these replacements to 
occur in 10 years or less, and we encourage the EPA to vigorously enforce this timeline and move water systems 
to implement these replacements as soon as possible. 
 
The AAP previously called for an immediate moratorium on all partial lead service line replacements (LSLRs), 
and we were pleased that the 2021 LCRR removed provisions allowing partial service line replacement or “test-
outs” to count towards LSLR requirements. However, the AAP was disappointed that the EPA did not explicitly 
restrict or ban partial LSLRs. Partial LSLR, which is sometimes performed to minimize the cost-of-service line 
repair by water authorities, fails to reduce lead exposure. Replacement or other maintenance work can release 
additional particles of lead, further contaminating drinking water sources in the case of partial LSLRs and 
exacerbating exposure.iii  
 
The AAP supports EPA’s proposal in this LCRI to prohibit partial service line replacements. We are concerned 
about EPA’s proposal to allow for partial service line replacements if they are “conducted as part of an 
emergency repair or in coordination with planned infrastructure work, excluding planned infrastructure work 
solely for the purposes of LSLRs.” We urge EPA to eliminate this exception or ensure it is only available in 
uniquely extenuating circumstances. 
 
Overall, the proposed LCRI is a step in the right direction, although the AAP urges EPA to consider including 
additional steps in the final LCRI to prevent all cases of partial LSLRs. For example, the cost of replacing the 
homeowner-owned portion of the LSR remains on homeowners, with the proposed rule offering only 
encouragement that water systems develop financial assistance programs for supporting consumer 
replacement of service lines. It also includes requirements to communicate LSLRs to consumers, coordinate 
with planned infrastructure to replace the entire lead service line and take risk mitigation measures in the 
event of a partial lead service line replacement. While the AAP appreciates the modest improvements outlined 
in the proposed rule, the final LCRI should require water systems to pay for replacement of customer owned 
lead service lines to ensure full LSLRs and enact a moratorium on harmful, partial LSLRs.   
 
Locating Legacy Lead Pipes 
 
The AAP supports EPA’s efforts to discover where lead pipes are located in order to replace them efficiently and 
equitably. Water systems are currently required to provide an initial inventory of their lead service lines by 
October 16, 2024. Under the proposed LCRI, all water systems would be required to regularly update their 
inventories, create a publicly available service line replacement plan, and identify the materials of all service 
lines of unknown material. The AAP believes that these requirements are reasonable and appropriate in order 
to accomplish the important goal of replacing all lead pipes for all communities.  
 
Testing Protocols & Tap Sampling 
 
For too long, it has been easy for water systems to avoid needed primary prevention interventions through 
dubious water sampling protocols that are not reflective of real-world water use. These include pre-stagnation 
flushing, the cleaning or removing of faucet aerators, and the use of narrow-mouth sample collection bottles. 
The AAP appreciates that the LCRI proposed rule continues the changes made in the 2021 LCRR proposed rule 
that made steps to improve sampling reliability by no longer allowing tap sampling instructions that 
recommend these problematic practices, as well as a requirement for collecting samples in wide-mouth 
bottles. The AAP appreciates the progress that EPA has made in improving the testing protocols and continues 

to encourage EPA to ensure that the final LCRI requires rigorous testing protocols that ensure water samples 
are reflective of how families actually use their taps, so that the samples are comparable to the water they 
drink.  
 
Testing in Schools and Child Care Facilities 
 
Facilities that serve children, such as child care facilities and schools, should be required to conduct regular, 
publicly-reported tap water sampling from multiple sources. The AAP appreciates EPA’s proposal to retain the 
requirement for community water systems to sample for lead at schools and child care facilities from multiple 
sources that was included in the 2021 LCRR. However, the final rule should require community water systems 
to conduct comprehensive sampling at all taps used for cooking or drinking in these child-serving locations. 
Under the proposed LCRI, the results of this sampling would be required to be reported to the facility and to 
the local or state health department, but not to the parents of children who may be at risk of lead exposure. 
Schools and child care facilities would make their own decisions about whether to communicate these results 
to parents. The AAP urges the EPA to finalize a rule that also requires notification to parents when their 
children may be at risk of lead exposure due to contaminated tap water in child care facilities and schools. 
Finally, EPA should continue to consider other ways to ensure that proper actions are taken to protect children 
when sampling in child care facilities and schools detects lead contamination, including ways to keep the local 
medical community informed and encouraging parents to contact their pediatrician or medical provider if 
their child is exposed to high concentrations of lead or they have questions about their child’s exposure to lead. 
 
Public Education and Outreach  
 
Public education and outreach is crucial for parents and other caregivers to know of any lead contamination in 
tap water and make choices to protect their children. The AAP commends EPA for several revisions to the LCR 
and LCRR in the proposed LCRI.  
 
The AAP supports EPA’s decision to eliminate the non-health-based discrepancy that was included in the 2021 
LCRR. The 2021 LCRR required water systems with tap water samples that surpass the lead action level to notify 
customers within 24 hours of learning the result. However, under the LCRR, for samples less than or equal to 
the action level, water systems are only required to provide consumer notice by mail within 30 days. This 
discrepancy was not health-based, since childhood exposure to drinking water under the action level of 15 μg/L 
can still lead to permanent, harmful health effects. The AAP supports EPA’s proposal to eliminate this 
discrepancy in the proposed LCRI and instead to require water systems to notify all consumers of lead tap 
sampling results within the same time frame of three calendar days after the system learns of the results, 
regardless of whether the results exceed the lead action level. However, the AAP does encourage EPA to 
consider ways to ensure that water systems are informing consumers as soon as possible and not delaying until 
three days before informing consumers. In addition, this communication should provide families sufficient 
context to understand what the testing results mean. 
 
The AAP also appreciates EPA’s efforts to ensure that all consumers, including those with limited English 
proficiency, can receive education and notification materials in their respective languages. The AAP supports 
the provisions in the LCRI which require water systems to include in public education materials ways for 
consumers to obtain a translated copy of the materials, request assistance in the appropriate language, or the 
system must provide materials translated into the appropriate language. The AAP also encourages EPA to 
continue finding ways to ensure public education materials and notifications account for language, economic, 
and technological barriers to ensure that all families are notified. The EPA should also distribute education 
materials to pediatricians and Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Units (PEHSUs) in affected areas. 
 

Conclusion 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to comment on this critical health issue. The AAP commends the proposed LCRI 
as a major step forward toward more protective policies needed to ensure children can reach their optimal 
health and development, and we urge the EPA to adopt the strongest final rule possible. If the AAP can be of 
any further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact Zach Laris in our Washington, D.C. office at 202/347-
8600 or zlaris@aap.org.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Benjamin D. Hoffman, MD, FAAP  
President 
 
BH/zml 
 
 
i Triantafyllidou S, Edwards M. Lead (Pb) in tap water and in blood: implications for lead exposure in the United States. Crit 
Rev Environ Sci Technol. 2012;42(13):1297–1352.    
ii See https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/resources/guidelines.html.   
iii Del Toral MA, Porter A, Schock MR. Detection and evaluation of elevated lead release from service lines: a field study. 
Environ Sci Technol. 2013;47(16):9300–9307pmid:23879429.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0961 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Environmental Protection Agency
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule
Improvement
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, Neutral PartyTestimony
LaTanya Bell
Southfield, MI
Greetings, Chair Gilman, Vice Chair Johnson, and committee members. I would like to
thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony today. I am LaTanya Bell, from
Detroit, MI. I am the Co-Executive Director of the Wisdom Institute- Detroit, an African
American woman and girl-focused non-profit that works to achieve reproductive justice
at the intersections of access to clean, safe, affordable drinking water and bodily
autonomy. Wisdom Institute recently met with the EPA during Capitol Hill week to
discuss community engagement strategies and how we can support them.
We would like to thank the EPA for the proposed lead and copper rule improvement
(LCRI) that requires the vast majority of water systems, including Michigan and the City
of Detroit, to replace lead services lines within 10 years. We appreciate and support the
decision to move the compliance date to September 2024 to provide additional time for
inventory completion and would advise giving extra time as well for the States to
approve inventories and LSLR plans after system submission.
A huge part of our advocacy work at the Wisdom Institute focuses on reproductive
justice, birthing rights. One serious consequence of contaminated drinking water is
harm to reproductive health, a cost that is borne disproportionately by women of color
and their families. Lead based paint and lead in water are the primary sources of lead
exposure among infants and young children - driven largely by consumption of lead dust
and infant formula mixed with contaminated water. For children not living at home with
lead-based paint or pipes, lead-contaminated food is a major source. We urge the EPA
to strengthen the requirements, especially for schools, for filter distribution to obtain
compliance of local water systems with multiple Action Level Exceedances in 5 years.
Thank you for your time and we look forward to your action and responses.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0745 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: US EPA's Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water <drupal_admin@epa.gov>  
Sent: Monday, December 4, 2023 3:50 PM 
To: safewater <safewater@epa.gov> 
Subject: Public Inquiry from EPA's Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Website 
 
Submitted on December 4, 2023 3:50 pm EST Submitted by: Anonymous 
 
Submitted values are: 
Name: James Hewett 
Email Address: jhewett@greatfallsmt.net 
Comments: 
Homeowners own water service lines from the water main to the home. Who is responsible for 
replacing lead service lines? The homeowner or Municipality? The lines are private but the Municipality 
owns the mains. 
 
EPA Website: Ground water and drinking water City and State: Great Falls, Montana Telephone Number: 
406-455-8146

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0867 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Credit:  CDC.gov
Lead in Faucets
Though neurotoxic effects for lead are found in both adults and young children, the 
developing brain is particularly susceptible to lead-induced harm, effects which can 
include the death of cells necessary for an organism's growth or development and 
nerve cells suffer damage or death
In 2014 high levels of lead contaminated the drinking water of Flint, Michigan, and caused serious health 
problems.  Because of this, “lead in drinking water” is now recognized as a serious nationwide issue. It varies 
across states depending on the condition of the water delivery system and how the water is treated to prevent 
corrosion. In many cities the main source of the problem is lead in “lead service lines”, the pipes that connect 
city water mains to homes. If effective corrosion control is not used by a city or if it suddenly switches to more 
corrosive water, levels of lead in drinking water can rise above EPA’s Action Level of 15 ppb.
The Environmental Defense Fund (EDF), concerned about lead in the drinking water of childcare facilities, 
conducted water testing in 11 childcare facilities serving over 1,000 children primarily from low-income families 
in Illinois, Michigan, Mississippi, and Ohio.  https://www.edf.org/health/tackling-lead-water-child-care-facilities.  
A major finding was that that lead was being released from faucets sold as “lead free”. Children were being 
exposed to lead. 
The Center for Disease Control (CDC) says no level of lead is safe for children. Cities 
that do not have lead service lines can also have this problem because it is legal to 
make and sell household faucets and pipes, called premise plumbing, that contain 
lead.
The American Academy of Pediatrics has recommended that water fountains in schools should not exceed 
lead concentrations of 1 microgram per liter (µg/L).  EDF, Environmental Working Group (EWG) and the 
National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) and were invited to join a task group of the NSF Joint Committee 
responsible for revising standard that regulates drinking water contact materials. They ultimately revised the 
standard to reduce the amount of lead allowed.   In January 2021 the national consensus standard for 
plumbing devices -NSF/ANSI/CAN 61 , required that manufacturers of faucets and fountains that dispense 
drinking water meet a limit of 1 µg/L , a limit five times more protective for lead leaching than the previous 
standard
http://blogs.edf.org/health/2020/06/18/revised-lead-leaching-limits-drinking-water-fixtures/
These industries have been given until Jan. 2024 to implement this new limit.   There are serious concerns that 
implementation should be much sooner because of children’s exposures. Many children spend half their day in 
in schools and day care centers.  EPA regulations in this area are weak.  It has been recommended that the 

Sierra Club National
2101 Webster St, Suite 1300
Oakland, CA 94612
(415) 977-5500
Sierra Club Legislative
50 F St NW, Eighth Floor
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 547-1141
sierraclub.org
facebook.com/SierraClub
twitter.com/SierraClub
Environmental Protection Agency should consider revising its 3Ts guidance for schools and child care facilities 
to reflect the tighter standards. 
https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/3ts-reducing-lead-drinking-water
One state is not waiting for the federal limits to take effect.  In 2021 California enacted AB 100, the nation’s 
strictest limit on lead leaching from faucets - ensuring faucets and fixtures sold will be practically lead-free.  
https://smartwatermagazine.com/news/environmental-working-group-ewg/california-enacts-nations-strictest-
limit-lead-leaching-faucets “The legislation, authored by Assemblymember Chris Holden (D-Pasadena), 
requires all faucets and fixtures with potable water sold in California beginning in 2023 to leach no more than 
one microgram of lead -five times less lead than the current industry certification standard allows.
Even though brass and bronze-based plumbing materials can release dangerous levels of lead, very few 
states have enacted comprehensive regulations requiring testing and remediation of drinking water in schools.   
Fortunately, knowing that lead can be leaching from faucets and drinking fountains even in cities that do not 
have lead service lines, Washington state now requires schools to test for lead in their drinking water outlets."  
In 2021 the Governor signed HB 1139 which requires that schools test drinking water outlets for lead and 
adopt action plans if results find lead contamination exceeds 5 parts per billion.  Required remedies can 
include replacement of drinking water fixtures. Opportunities to purchase “lead free” fixture should come 
sooner rather than later.  Hopefully the new requirements in California will convince the manufacturers of 
drinking fountains and other fixtures to switch to “lead free” much sooner than the federal law requires.
Take Action

Urge your state to regulate lead in drinking water at 1 ug/L as recommended by the American 
Academy of Pediatrics.

Urge your state to require testing of drinking water in all schools and day care facilities and to require 
remediation if levels exceed 1 ug/L

When you or your children’s school buys new water faucets ask for ones that meet NSF/ANSI/CAN 61, 
the new stronger lead standard for plumbing devices  

Urge EPA to update its 3Ts guidance for schools and child care facilities to reflect the new standard.
Contact:
Doris Cellarius
dorisc@cellarius.org 
Water Sentinels Facebook page

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0785 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead 
and Copper: Improvements. 
Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0726
To U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
As a nurse I’ve witnessed how Social Determinants of health can 
in6luence people’s health and quality of life. Besides economic 
instability and limited access to healthcare; environmental factors 
such as lead contaminated water can have an adverse impact on 
overall health and well-being. 
Lead is a non-biodegradable metal that is toxic to body systems.
Infants, young children, and pregnant women are vulnerable to the 
harmful effects of lead. Despite improvements in water treatment 
standards and The Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), lead exposure 
remains a concern for vulnerable populations. Therefore, it is 
reasonable to reduce lead Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) from 
current action Level of 0.015 mg/L to 0.010 mg/L, with the 
Maximum Contaminant Level Goals (MCLGs) of zero.
Lead found in tap water usually comes from corrosion or decay of 
older 6ixtures or from the solder that connects pipes. While 
individuals can avoid drinking lead contaminated water by using 
6ilters or purchasing drinking water from certi6ied sources, these are 
not always attainable to every household especially in low-income
families. Primary prevention in lead exposure is to remove lead 
hazards from the environment by proposing the required water 
systems to replace lead service lines.

Since a blood test is the only way to determine exposure to lead. 
Having blood lead level testing and follow-up care are secondary 
prevention. Both primary and secondary preventions can be 
implemented through public education and increase consumer 
awareness.
In conclusion, lead poisoning is preventable. Everyone drinks water 
and the interventions to ensure safe drinking water for everyone 
should be feasible. Lead MCL should be as close to zero as possible. 
Special funds should be given for total lead service line 
replacements, especially for disadvantaged communities.
Sincerely,
Gongngerntong, T.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0966 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
January 26, 2024 
  
Mr. Michael S. Regan  
Administrator  
Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
  
RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, Docket 
No. EPA–HQ–OW-2022-0801  
 
Dear Administrator Regan,  
 
On behalf of the National Association of County and City Health Officials (NACCHO), I appreciate the 
opportunity to submit comments regarding the proposed revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulation (NPDWR) for lead and copper under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA); 
(Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801). NACCHO represents the more than 3,300 local health departments 
across the country, many of which develop, promote, and engage in lead poisoning prevention efforts. 
NACCHO promotes primary prevention and works toward the removal of lead sources from the 
environment prior to exposure, particularly in water and housing, in order to prevent the potential for 
adverse effects, especially in children.  
 
NACCHO’s comments on the proposed revision are as follows:  
 
NACCHO supports EPA’s mandatory full replacement of lead services lines.  
NACCHO supports EPA’s efforts to focus on the need to identify and remove sources of lead in community 
infrastructure prior to an exposure occurring. According to EPA, an estimated 9.2 million lead service lines 
serve water to properties in communities across the U.S.1 While NACCHO is pleased to see EPA moving in 
the right direction by lowering the lead action level, as noted by EPA, there is no known safe level of lead 
exposure. Furthermore, as noted in the proposed rule, the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law appropriated $15 
billion for lead service line replacement project and associated activities. NACCHO was pleased to see the 
“Lead Service Line Replacement Accelerators” initiative, however barriers remain to access this 
opportunity. Small and low-capacity jurisdictions need grant and technical support in order to apply for and 
access the funding and resources provided by EPA. While the Federal Thriving Communities Initiative and 
Environmental Justice Thriving Communities Technical Assistance Centers Program are an important step 
towards holistic government-wide technical assistance and capacity building for all communities, more is 
needed to reach these jurisdictions equitably.   
 
Urgent and swift action must be taken to remove lead for all people in all communities. Full replacement of 
lead service lines would make the 10 ppb threshold for replacement, an arbitrary value, irrelevant. . 
NACCHO also recommends that EPA consider additional ways to lower the cost burden full lead service 
line replacement will have on local governments and homeowners and continue to invest in ongoing 
funding to ensure timely action without diverting resources from other public health priorities.   
 

 
 
 
NACCHO recommends EPA increase sampling requirements for schools and childcare facilities.  
NACCHO recommends all taps in schools and childcare facilities be tested for lead. In the U.S., children are 
particularly vulnerable to the effects of lead, which can cause permanent adverse health outcomes, 
including damage to the brain and nervous systems, slowed growth and development, learning behavior 
problems, and hearing and speech problems.2 In addition, the burden of lead poisoning falls 
disproportionately on low-income families and communities of color, with African American children more 
than two times more likely to experience lead poisoning than white children.3 The proposed revisions to the 
rule again neglects to prevent exposures by omitting a requirement to act on sampling results from schools 
and childcare facilities. NACCHO recommends that the 10 ppb action level proposed for lead in public 
drinking water also be applied to lead in drinking water at schools and childcare facilities. NACCHO also 
recommends that EPA consider the cost burden full lead service line replacement will have on local 
governments, schools, and childcare centers and develop and sustain funding sources to ensure timely 
action and prioritize the prevention of lead exposure to children.    
  
NACCHO strongly encourages EPA to explore collaborations between EPA and local health departments 
to identify optimal community engagement practices.  
NACCHO is encouraged by EPA’s public education efforts. In addition to including the contact information 
of local health departments on education materials, NACCHO recommends that EPA review established 
connections between the agency and local health departments to determine successes and areas that need 
to be improved. As more communities are notified about lead service lines, local health departments can 
play a key role in education and reinforcing related messages from national and federal partners, including 
EPA. In addition, there should be continuous opportunities for collaborations among EPA and local health 
departments to not only effectively spread messaging around lead exposure, but to also to ensure EPA has 
timely feedback about the priorities and concerns of local communities. As consumers and homeowners 
become more educated about lead service lines in their community, there will be an increased need for 
public education and response to inquiries about the health impacts of lead and how to prevent lead 
exposure.  
 
NACCHO appreciates this opportunity to comment on EPA’s efforts to improve processes and tools needed 
for a safer future. We look forward to continuing to work with you to protect the public from lead 
exposure. If you have any questions, please contact Adriane Casalotti, Chief of Government and Public 
Affairs, at acasalotti@naccho.org.   
 
Sincerely,   
  
 
Lori Tremmel Freeman, MBA  
CEO

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1380 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
Ms. Jennifer McLain 
Director 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE: Proposed Rule: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements, Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
Dear Ms. McLain: 
 
As members of WaterNow Alliance (WaterNow) and National League of Cities (NLC) we 
appreciate this opportunity to provide input on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s 
(EPA) proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) to protect public health by 
reducing lead in drinking water. WaterNow is a nonprofit network of 700+ local water leaders in 
43 states nationwide advancing sustainable, affordable, equitable, and climate resilient water 
strategies. NLC is the voice of America’s cities, towns and villages, representing more than 200 
million people nationwide.  
 
As the proposed rule states, “There is no known safe level of lead exposure.”1 Eliminating all 
lead service lines nationwide—whether publicly or privately owned—is a laudable goal, both of 
the LCRI and the Biden Administration.2 Some local governments have achieved this goal. A 
growing number are working towards it. For example, Madison, Wisconsin, was the first city to 
eliminate all lead service lines, including on both public and private property.3 Newark, New 
Jersey, completed replacement of all lead service lines in 2022.4 Denver Water has successfully 
accelerated the pace of its program to replace 64,000-84,000 lead service lines, primarily on 
private properties within its service area, at no additional cost to those property owners through 
bond financing.5  
 
Local leaders, including those that have documented successes, are confronted with a variety of 
challenges that must be overcome, such as financial constraints, affordability concerns for low-
income households, staff capacity, workforce shortages and supply chain limitations. To support 
the ability of cities to overcome these challenges, protect the health and welfare of their 
populations, and meet the LCRI requirements, we urge the federal government to provide 
sufficient funding, particularly in the form of grants, to local governments to enable them to 
 
1 LCRI, 88 FR 84879. 
2 Fact Sheet: The Biden-Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-lead-pipe-and-paint-action-plan/ 
3 WaterNow Alliance, Madison: Leading the national charge on lead line replacement, 
https://tapin.waternow.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2019/02/WaterNow_Madison_CaseStudy_FINAL.pdf (2019).  
4 Newark Completes Lead Service Line Replacement Program, https://www.globenewswire.com/en/news-
release/2022/02/14/2384689/0/en/Newark-Completes-Lead-Service-Line-Replacement-Program.html.  
5 WaterNow Alliance, Denver Water: Large-scale Lead Line Replacements, https://tapin.waternow.org/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2022/11/2022.11.18_TIR_Denver_Water_Case-Study_Final.pdf (2022). 

 
WaterNow & NLC 
LCRI Comments 
Page 2 of 7 
 
expand and accelerate lead service line replacements (LSLRs).  
 
We also urge EPA to establish a clear and implementable replacement requirement. Local 
leaders are committed to protecting public health and eliminating lead service lines. While the 
goal of achieving 100 percent lead pipe replacement is important, without a clear framework and 
definition, we could fall well short of the goal as a nation. This is because, as proposed, the LCRI 
only requires public water systems to replace lead service lines that are “under the control of the 
water system … .”6 The rule further specifies that:  
 
Where a water system has access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full service 
line replacement, the service line is under its control, and the water system must replace the 
service line. Where a water system does not have access to conduct full service line 
replacement, the water system is not required by this rule to replace the line…7 
A great many lead lines, possibly most of them, may fall outside of this definition. The proposed 
rule does not establish criteria for determining whether a public water system has access to 
service lines,8 leaving that decision to states and local water systems. Given the disparate needs 
and challenges facing communities, we appreciate the interest in providing flexibility for state 
and local governments. However, without additional clarity, the rule is likely to create 
implementation and compliance challenges, such as lack of understanding of which service lines 
must be replaced and when a utility has met the requirement to replace “all” service lines. 
Furthermore, requiring each locality to develop its own definition of “control” and “access” 
without additional clarity from EPA could generate a complex patchwork of differing definitions 
for when lead lines fall within the federal rule and when they do not. These varying definitions 
could lead to differing levels of public health protections in communities nationwide.  
EPA’s 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment conducted in 2021 and 
published in September 2023 considered three categories of lead service lines to estimate that 
there are 9.2 million lead service lines in the U.S.9 Our understanding is that service lines solely 
owned by the utility and service lines solely owned by the customer occur but are uncommon, 
and that the service lines over which utilities and customers share ownership is by far the most 
common. Utilities obviously have “access” to service lines that they own.  
 
The LCRI, as proposed, is unclear on whether utilities would be responsible for removing lead 
lines that are not solely owned by the utility. Put differently, because most lead service lines are 
at least partly owned by customers, and because the proposed LCRI leaves what it means to have 
“access to conduct a full service line replacement” undefined, the proposed rule may be open to 
the interpretation that many, if not most, lead service lines are exempt from the replacement 
requirement. This is a particularly acute challenge since privately owned lead lines occur more 
often in disadvantaged, environmental justice communities.10  
 
6 LCRI, 88 FR 85064 (emphasis added). 
7 LCRI, 88 FR 84064 (emphasis added).  
8 “This rule does not establish the criteria for determining whether a system has access to conduct full service line 
replacement.” LCRI, 88 FR 85064. 
9 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment, 17-27, 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-09/Seventh%20DWINSA_September2023_Final.pdf (2023). 
10 FACT SHEET: Biden-⁠Harris Administration Announces New Action to Protect Communities from 
Lead Exposure, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/11/30/fact-sheet-biden-harris-
administration-announces-new-action-to-protect-communities-from-lead-exposure/ (2023). 

 
WaterNow & NLC 
LCRI Comments 
Page 3 of 7 
 
Relying on state and local governments for a definition of “control” does not provide the needed 
clarity since most states and local governments simply do not have rules governing this issue. 
Where state and local governments have adopted these rules, they do not always require that 
local water systems replace lead service lines that are partially, or completely, privately owned.11 
Thus, the proposed rule would leave a significant regulatory gap in the replacement requirement.  
To close this gap, we recommend that EPA revise the LCRI to clearly indicate that the 
replacement requirement includes replacement of lead service lines located on private property to 
the maximum extent feasible. Replacing private-side lead lines is an important component to 
meeting the goal to replace 100 percent of lead service lines nationwide. Recognizing that the 
“access” requirement may pose legal and safety concerns for local governments, as well as that 
some private property owners might not permit the access necessary for private-side service line 
replacement, we recommend that the rule establish a specific procedure to address such 
situations while maintaining flexibility to implement those procedures for local jurisdictions.   
Providing additional clarity in the LCRI about which lead service lines must be replaced will 
also help ensure that funds required to pay for public and private-side lead service line 
replacements are allocated to address this public health issue.12 Estimates for replacing lead lines 
nationwide range from $45 to $100 billion.13 These estimates far exceed the $15 billion 
investment provided by the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the majority of which will be in the 
form of loans to local governments.  
 
Thank you for considering our comments and the local government perspective. Protecting the 
health, well-being and safety of residents and communities are top priorities for local leaders. As 
the Agency moves forward with finalizing the LCRI, further clarification and additional direct 
funding to local governments are needed to help meet the intended goal of replacing all lead 
service lines. Please reach out to Cynthia Koehler at ck@waternow.org or Carolyn Berndt at 
Berndt@nlc.org with any questions.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Cynthia Koehler  
 
 
Clarence E. Anthony 
Executive Director  
 
 
CEO and Executive Director 
WaterNow Alliance  
 
National League of Cities
 
 
 
11 As of April 2019 (the most recent date of available information), 17 states and 115 municipalities have policies 
requiring lead service line replacements. See Recognizing efforts to replace lead service lines, Environmental 
Defense Fund, https://www.edf.org/health/recognizing-efforts-replace-lead-service-lines.  
12 As Congress has explained, effective protection of public health and providing safe drinking water requires “a 
Federal commitment to set priorities that will allow scarce Federal, State, and local resources to be targeted toward 
the drinking water problems of greatest public health concern.” Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996, 
1996 Enacted S. 1316, 104 Enacted S. 1316, 110 Stat. 1613, 1615. 
13 Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Lead Service Line Replacement Stakeholders Gather at Chicago Fed to Share 
Funding and Financing Strategies, https://www.chicagofed.org/research/content-areas/lead/lead-service-line-
replacement-funding-and-financing-strategies (December 2022). 

 
WaterNow & NLC 
LCRI Comments 
Page 4 of 7 
 
Andreas Addison 
Councilmember 
City of Richmond, VA 
  
Pious Ali 
Councilmember 
City of Portland, ME 
  
Jay Arnold 
Deputy Mayor 
City of Kirkland, WA 
  
Jason Ashmore 
Mayor Ashmore 
City of Sesser, IL 
  
Veronica Bandy-Freeman 
Councilmember 
City of Tarrant, AL 
  
Ben Bartlett 
Councilmember 
City of Berkeley, CA 
  
Juliana Bennett 
Alderperson 
City of Madison, WI 
  
Chad Birgenheier 
Treatment and Operations Manager 
City of Loveland, CO 
  
Angela Birney 
Mayor 
City of Redmond, WA 
 
Neal Black 
Councilmember 
City of Kirkland, WA 
  
Alex Bollin 
Planner 
City of Southfield, MI 
  
Art Brown 
Councilman 
City of Buena Park, CA 
  
Austin Calaman 
General Manager, Board of Public Works 
City of Lewes, DE 
  
Deb Calvert 
Councilmember 
City of Minnetonka, MN 
  
Wally Campbell 
Councilwoman 
City of Goodyear, AZ 
  
David Cantu 
Alderperson 
City of San Elizario, TX 
  
Martha Castex-Tatum 
Mayor Pro Tem 
City of Houston, TX 
  
Vincent Cavaleri 
Councilmember 
City of Mill Creek, WA 
  
TJ Cawley 
Mayor 
Town of Morrisville, NC 
  
TJ Clarke II 
Councilman 
City of Hartford, CT 
  
Chance Cutrano 
Councilmember 
Town of Fairfax, CA 
  
Kelli Curtis 
Mayor 
City of Kirkland, WA 
 

 
WaterNow & NLC 
LCRI Comments 
Page 5 of 7 
 
Frank Dallahan 
Borough Council Representative 
Borough of Stone Harbor, NJ 
  
Janet Diaz 
Councilmember 
City of Lancaster, PA 
  
Nate Duckett 
Mayor 
City of Farmington, NM 
  
Lisa Feltner 
Councilmember 
City of Watertown, MA 
  
Karen K. Goh 
Mayor 
City of Bakersfield, CA 
  
Thomas J. Good 
Commissioner 
City of Pembroke Pines, FL 
  
Dontario Hardy 
Mayor 
City of Kinston, NC 
  
David Harshbarger 
Councilmember 
City of Morgantown, WV 
  
Joseph Hawkes 
Water Division Manager 
City of Logan, UT 
 
Sarah Hellekson 
City Administrator 
City of Jamestown, ND 
  
Stephanie A. Henrick 
Mayor 
Borough of Pottstown, PA 
  
Lamar A. Hernandez Thorpe 
Mayor 
City of Antioch, CA 
  
Alan Y. Hew 
Councilmember 
City of College Park, MD 
  
Sam Hindi 
Councilmember 
City of Foster City, CA 
  
Michele Hirsch 
Alderwoman 
City of Kinston, NY 
  
Brian Hunke 
Councilmember 
City of Hopkins, MN 
  
April R. Jackson 
Councilwoman 
City of Salisbury, MD 
  
J. Allen Joines  
Mayor 
City of Winston Salem, NC 
 
Emmett V. Jordan 
Mayor 
City of Greenbelt, MD 
  
Abbie Kamin 
Councilmember 
City of Houston, TX 
  
Wm. A. Kawecki 
Councilmember 
City of Morgantown, WV 
  
John Kmiec 
Director 
Tucson Water, AZ 
  

 
WaterNow & NLC 
LCRI Comments 
Page 6 of 7 
 
Gary Knight 
Yuma City Council/State Transportation 
Board 
City of Yuma, AZ 
  
Pete Laybourn 
Councilmember 
City of Cheyenne, WY 
  
Paul Leger 
Former Board Chair, PWSA, (Retired) 
Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority, PA 
 
Vi Lyles 
Mayor 
City of Charlotte, NC 
  
Terry Lynne 
Mayor 
City of Farmers Branch, TX 
  
Bill Madsen 
Mayor 
Town of Snowmass Village, CO 
  
Woody McEvers 
Mayor Pro Tem 
City of Coeur d'Alene, ID 
  
Richard Montgomery 
Mayor 
City of Manhattan Beach, CA 
  
Patricia M. Mulvihill 
Executive Director 
League of Oregon Cities, OR 
  
Eve Niedergang 
Councilwoman 
City of Princeton, NJ 
  
Kim Norton 
Mayor 
City of Rochester, MN 
Billy Pearson 
Councilmember 
City of Lincoln, AL 
  
Hattie Portis-Jones 
Councilmember 
City of Fairburn, GA 
  
Thomas Renner 
Deputy Mayor 
City of Winooski, VT 
  
Richard Rigoglioso 
Mayor 
City of Garfield, NJ 
  
Karyn Rittenhouse 
Water System Manager, 
City of West Allis, WI 
  
Leo Robinson 
Councilmember 
City of Chelsea, MA 
  
Tracy Rodes 
Mayor 
Town of Webster, NC 
  
Esther C. Sanchez 
Mayor 
City of Oceanside, CA 
  
Francisco Santiago 
Alderman 
City of New Britain, CT 
  
Shane R. Saum 
Councilman 
City of Lago Vista, TX 
  
Julie Sayers 
Mayor 
City of Lenexa, KS 
 

 
WaterNow & NLC 
LCRI Comments 
Page 7 of 7 
 
Kaleem Shabazz 
Council Vice President 
City of Atlantic City, NJ 
  
Emma Sharif 
Mayor 
City of Compton, CA 
  
Kathy Sheehan 
Mayor 
City of Albany, NY 
  
Mark R. Shepherd 
Mayor 
City of Clearfield, UT 
  
E. Denise Simmons 
Mayor  
City of Cambridge, MA 
  
Margo Sommerville 
Council President 
City of Akron, OH 
  
Erika Strassburger 
Councilmember 
City of Pittsburgh, PA 
  
Penny Sweet 
Councilmember, 
City of Kirkland, WA 
  
Keith Sydnor 
Mayor 
City of Laurel, MD 
 
Juan Tejeda 
Regulatory Affairs Manager 
City of Turlock, CA 
  
Jon Thompson 
Mayor 
City of Coolidge, AZ 
  
Ronnie Thompson 
Mayor 
City of Morganton, NC 
  
Katrina Thompson 
Mayor 
Village of Broadview, IL 
  
Kerry Thomson 
Mayor 
City of Bloomington, IN 
  
Pieter Van Ry 
Director 
South Platte Renew & City of Englewood 
Utilities, CO 
  
Joyce E. Watterman 
Council President 
City of Jersey City, NJ 
  
Randy L. Wright 
City Manager 
City of Portland, TX

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0916 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Water and Sewer Department
1001 11th Ave, Second Floor
Greeley, Colorado 80631
February 2, 2024
Comments on U.S. EPA’s Proposed Leand and Copper Rule Improvements:
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
The City of Greeley submits the following comments on U.S. EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI).
The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) have 
introduced significant changes aimed at reducing lead exposure in drinking water, particularly through the 
identification and replacement of lead service lines (LSLs) and galvanized requiring replacement lines 
(GRRs). While these regulations mark a pivotal step towards safeguarding public health, certain aspects of 
their implementation raise critical feasibility concerns for water systems, especially regarding the 
calculation of annual replacement rates and the requirements for non-lead validation.
A notable challenge arises in the method used to calculate the annual replacement rate. Water systems, 
like the City of Greeley, that prioritize the removal of known LSLs and GRRs may face difficulties in 
meeting the replacement rate once only lines classified as "unknown" remain.  This method inadvertently 
penalizes systems that have been proactive in eliminating known sources of lead, giving greater weight to 
the identification of unknown lines, which may not contain lead at all. 
To address this, a revised approach should be considered. For example, the EPA could introduce a 
“verification rate” for systems that have removed all known LSLs and GRRs. Under this model, a portion of 
unknown lines must be verified annually, and LSLs or GRRs that are discovered from the “unknown” pool 
must be replaced within a year. This alternative calculation would adjust compliance metrics to incentivize 
prioritizing the removal of known sources of lead to protect public health, while also pushing systems to 
continue identifying the material of unknowns in the inventory. 
The LCRI's requirements for validating non-lead service lines present another area of concern. For 
systems employing machine learning or alternative methods for final material determination, the 
requirement for non-lead validation is logical and likely beneficial to ensure assumptions made by these 
methods are supported with visually verified data. However, systems like the City of Greeley that are 
primarily relying on historical records and visual inspections of the customer-owned portion to determine 
service line materials face a different reality. Historical records, if also corroborated by a sample verified 
through visual inspection, offer a reliable basis for identifying service line materials without the need for 
further validation. For systems that utilize historical records, mechanical excavation, and visual verification 
to identify service line material, the requirement to re-validate non-lead lines identified through historical 

records review can be costly and divert resources from addressing unknown lines and lines that contain lead. 
This is particularly true given the 7-year compliance deadline for the non-lead validation, which puts this 
requirement in direct competition for resources with addressing known sources of lead.
To ensure that systems are not burdened with multiple rounds of costly validation steps for low-risk 
properties, the EPA should consider an exemption from the non-lead validation requirements. For systems 
that do not use alternative methods alone for non-lead determination and can validate the accuracy of their 
historical records with a sample of visually verified data, an exemption from this requirement would allow 
water systems to choose the best combination of material verification methods to fit their system and offer 
more system-specific flexibility while maximizing benefits. This exemption would recognize the reliability 
of verified historical documentation, where records and physical evidence can confidently exclude the 
presence of lead.
The City of Greeley supports the EPA’s critical effort to eliminate lead exposure from drinking water 
through the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. However, refining the rule to address the practical 
challenges faced by water systems—particularly regarding the calculation for annual replacement rates and 
non-lead validation requirements—could enhance its effectiveness and fairness. By adjusting these aspects, 
the EPA would not only facilitate compliance but also ensure that efforts are optimally directed towards 
reducing lead exposure in communities nationwide.
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on water system feasibility considerations in development of 
the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements.
Sincerely,
Michaela Jackson
Water Quality and Regulatory Compliance Manager
City of Greeley, Water and Sewer Department

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0770 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Dear EPA, 
 
 
The EPA has stated that there is no safe level of lead in drinking water. A goal of the LCRI is to 
conclusively identify and replace all LSLs in the US by 2037. I applaud this effort and wish to comment on 
some of the particulars of these pending regulations.  
 
Accurate identification of lead service lines is a crucial step of this process. I am concerned that 
the current approach to identify unknown service lines could cause many service lines to be 
misidentified and left in place. Historical records can provide a useful starting place for identification of 
service lines; however many records have been lost or are inconclusive. Millions of service lines are of 
unknown material. Excavation is the gold standard for service line identification, but the costs to unearth 
non-lead service lines are prohibitively expensive and should be avoided. A two-point visual inspection 
of the service line at the meter pit would not identify lead connectors, or LSLs where the meter connects 
with a tail of another material.1 A flushed water sample measuring 2.5 ppb or higher is used in the UK 
and France to identify potential LSLs, with high positive identification rates. I propose that a two-step 
verification process be required for unknown service line identification, where both a two-point visual 
inspection and flushed sample lead is measured. In cases where the lead concentration is above 2.5 ppb 
and/or a two-point visual inspection confirms lead, the service line should be labelled as a LSL. In cases 
where the water sample is below 2.5 ppb and the two-point visual inspection returns a negative 
identification, the line should be considered non-lead. To achieve maximum effectiveness and negate 
entry into customers’ homes, the property’s hose bib could be used for water sampling. Additionally, I 
propose that a significant proportion of pre 1986 built homes with non-lead lines be tested with this 
method to achieve 95 percent confidence in the identification of non-lead service lines through records 
alone. 
I encourage the EPA to make room for new technologies to aid in water sampling. Portable, 
affordable, and easy to use water sensors with sufficient LOD could alleviate some of the burden placed 
on labs to complete water testing. New technologies are under development to this end. I would 
welcome the approval of New EPA Certified Methods as an Alternate Test Procedures for use in the field 
opposed to the requirement for all lead and copper samples to be processed in EPA certified labs. The 
new three day turnaround time will overwhelm these strapped labs. A fast track for verification and 
approval of new methods could lower costs while maintaining a high standard for positive identification 
of lead in water samples.  
Regards, 
Nick Halverson 
 
[1] Hensley K, Bosscher V, Triantafyllidou S, Lytle DA. Lead service line identification: A review of 
strategies and approaches. AWWA Wat Sci. 2021;e1226. https:// doi.org/10.1002/aws2.122

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0763 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Dear EPA, 
 
 
The EPA has stated that there is no safe level of lead in drinking water. A goal of the LCRI is to 
conclusively identify and replace all LSLs in the US by 2037. I applaud this effort and wish to comment on 
some of the particulars of these pending regulations.  
 
Accurate identification of lead service lines is a crucial step of this process. I am concerned that 
the current approach to identify unknown service lines could cause many service lines to be 
misidentified and left in place. Historical records can provide a useful starting place for identification of 
service lines; however many records have been lost or are inconclusive. Millions of service lines are of 
unknown material. Excavation is the gold standard for service line identification, but the costs to unearth 
non-lead service lines are prohibitively expensive and should be avoided. A two-point visual inspection 
of the service line at the meter pit would not identify lead connectors, or LSLs where the meter connects 
with a tail of another material.1 A flushed water sample measuring 2.5 ppb or higher is used in the UK 
and France to identify potential LSLs, with high positive identification rates. I propose that a two-step 
verification process be required for unknown service line identification, where both a two-point visual 
inspection and flushed sample lead is measured. In cases where the lead concentration is above 2.5 ppb 
and/or a two-point visual inspection confirms lead, the service line should be labelled as a LSL. In cases 
where the water sample is below 2.5 ppb and the two-point visual inspection returns a negative 
identification, the line should be considered non-lead. To achieve maximum effectiveness and negate 
entry into customers’ homes, the property’s hose bib could be used for water sampling. Additionally, I 
propose that a significant proportion of pre 1986 built homes with non-lead lines be tested with this 
method to achieve 95 percent confidence in the identification of non-lead service lines through records 
alone. 
I encourage the EPA to make room for new technologies to aid in water sampling. Portable, 
affordable, and easy to use water sensors with sufficient LOD could alleviate some of the burden placed 
on labs to complete water testing. New technologies are under development to this end. I would 
welcome the approval of New EPA Certified Methods as an Alternate Test Procedures for use in the field 
opposed to the requirement for all lead and copper samples to be processed in EPA certified labs. The 
new three day turnaround time will overwhelm these strapped labs. A fast track for verification and 
approval of new methods could lower costs while maintaining a high standard for positive identification 
of lead in water samples.  
Regards, 
Nick Halverson 
 
[1] Hensley K, Bosscher V, Triantafyllidou S, Lytle DA. Lead service line identification: A review of 
strategies and approaches. AWWA Wat Sci. 2021;e1226. https:// doi.org/10.1002/aws2.122

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0774 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0835 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
Dr. Jennifer McClain, Director  
Office of Groundwater and Drinking Water 
Standards and Risk Management Division 
Environmental Protection Agency                                             Submitted via Regulations.gov 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Mail Code:  28221T 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
 
Dear Dr. McClain,  
 
Louisville Water appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on EPA’s proposed improvements 
to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper (LCRI). Louisville Water 
provides safe reliable drinking water to nearly a million customers in Louisville Metro and the 
surrounding counties.  Louisville Water is committed to providing the highest quality water possible; 
our water quality consistently surpasses regulatory requirements. 
 
Lead is a well-recognized national public-health concern, and we need to continue to make progress 
in eliminating lead exposure. Eliminating lead from distribution systems is a shared responsibility that 
requires collaborative efforts by water utilities and their customers as well as a cross-section of local, 
state, and federal agencies. Louisville Water serves as an active partner with state and local agencies, 
as well as other utilities and organizations to enhance lead awareness and to identify solutions to 
reducing exposure to lead in our communities, including via drinking water. As of March 2020, 
Louisville Water had removed all known utility-owned lead service lines and began the work to 
systematically investigate unknown service-line materials. In addition, Louisville Water also 
administers a program to replace customer-owned lead and galvanized service lines at no cost to the 
customer.  
 
In finalizing the LCRI, EPA has the opportunity to revise the current proposal so that it enhances the 
protection of public health, builds public confidence in tap water, allows for efficient oversight and 
enforcement, and comports with the text of the Safe Drinking Water Act. The public is best served by 
a lead and copper regulation that is practical to implement and legally sound. Water systems are ill-
served by shifting and uncertain legal requirements, which can cause systems to spend limited 
resources inefficiently. 
 
Louisville Water supports the agency’s decision to continue with a treatment technique (TT) 
approach (cf., MCL) for addressing lead contamination. While no regulatory approach is ever perfect, 
by using a TT approach EPA can provide a variety of risk-reduction strategies that more holistically 
address this complex issue.  
 
Louisville Water offers the following comments highlighting the major concerns that we would like 
EPA to address in the final rule.   

 
 
EPA must act immediately (prior to the intended promulgation of the final LCRI) to extend the 
compliance dates for the provisions of the LCRR that EPA does not intend to continue under the LCRI. 
Louisville Water and other utilities are expending significant resources to prepare to comply with the 
LCRR by October of this year, while EPA is proposing to dramatically change both the substance and 
deadlines for all but three of the LCRR requirements. Water systems have a duty to comply with 
applicable regulations and have no assurance EPA will meet its promulgation timeline nor that 
enforcement discretion will be employed should EPA not publish the final rule prior to the LCRR 
compliance dates. 
 
Louisville Water supports EPA’s efforts to prioritize lead service-line replacements. However. 
Louisville Water recommends the agency consider suspending Tier sampling requirements during the 
mandatory replacement schedule to allow systems to prioritize replacements rather than completing 
standard monitoring. Sampling resources would be better used to identify unknowns and assist 
customers with the investigation of lead sources post-replacement or post-disturbance.  
 
Louisville Water recommends the Rule provide for systems that have replaced all service lines (or 
documented refusals) in a given Tier: 1) be able to forgo monitoring requirements for that Tier; and 
2) be allowed to request reduced monitoring. 
 
Louisville Water requests that systems be provided 30 days to complete all customer notifications 
following receipt of lab results. The three-day requirement for customer notification of all sample 
results is infeasible and provides no meaningful risk-reduction benefit.  
 
Louisville Water requests more flexibility in calculating replacement rates. Flexibility should be given 
to states to work with water systems to develop a feasible rate and schedule. Additional flexibility 
should be given to water systems with large numbers of documented refusals. Based on our LSLR 
experience, systems will have a significant number of lead service lines remaining on their inventories 
beyond the ten-year replacement deadline as a result of direct customer refusals and documented 
refusals for non-responsive customers. EPA must clarify the requirements for systems that have 
significant remaining lead service lines due to refusals. Louisville Water requests that if a customer 
refuses to replace the service line after all required attempts, water systems be allowed to remove 
that site from the replacement plan and exclude the site from replacement-rate calculations.  
 
Louisville Water recommends that EPA decouple unknowns from the replacement-rate calculation to 
allow flexibility for water systems because the management of identifying unknowns is very different 
than managing the replacement of known lead service lines.  In that regard, Louisville Water requests 
that the rule include two metrics: 1) for the rate of identification of unknowns; and 2) the rate of 
replacement of lead service lines. Louisville Water recognizes that it will take years to identify all 
private-side unknowns, making it infeasible to plan and conduct full service-line replacement within 
the same timeframe. As unknowns are identified as lead service lines or galvanized requiring 
replacement (GRR) these sites would be added to the replacement rate formula. 
 
Louisville Water also recommends decoupling GRR from the replacement rate calculation since 1) the 
lead risks from GRRs are much less than the risks from lead service lines; and 2) targeted replacement 
of galvanized service lines can be very challenging to coordinate. Louisville Water suggests allowing a 

 
longer timeframe to replace GRRs (e.g., 20 years) in order that replacements can be coordinated with 
main replacement projects and more carefully managed by construction crews and inspectors.   
 
The agency must recognize that the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) is not the appropriate law for 
managing all lead in drinking water issues. EPA should remove from the Rule all requirements related 
to premise plumbing. Including premise plumbing in service-line inventories and tier sampling pools 
overly complicates the Rule and increases the likelihood of non-compliance. Requiring water systems 
to sample from sites with lead or galvanized premise materials, where there is no (or limited) access 
or control of premise plumbing is beyond the scope of the SDWA.  
 
EPA’s proposed definition of “control” and “access” is not supported by the SDWA statutory text. The 
SDWA regulates public water systems but does not provide EPA authority to regulate other entities, 
such as businesses, landlords, or private residences. Similarly, the SDWA does not give EPA authority 
over private property or other persons, and therefore cannot be used to compel removal of privately-
owned service lines or plumbing fixtures. By requiring public water systems to inventory and conduct 
service line replacements on property that is not part of the public water system, the LCRI exceeds 
the scope of EPA’s authority under the SDWA and is therefore contrary to law. 
 
Louisville Water does not support the proposed requirement to provide pitcher filters to all 
customers in the event of three consecutive Action Level exceedances. This proposed requirement 
does very little to mitigate risks or change customer behavior regarding service line replacement, 
creates more confusion around lead risk communication, and is overly burdensome and unnecessary 
considering the costs and outcome benefits of such an approach. 
 
Louisville Water generally concurs with AWWA’s comments on the draft LCRI, except where our 
perspectives differ as reflected in this letter and the attached table. 
 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Peter Goodmann, Director 
Water Quality and Research

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0868 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
ASSOCIATION OF  
MISSOURI CLEANWATER AGENCIES 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
By Electronic Submission: Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC  20460 
 
Dear Mr. Michael Goldberg: 
 
The Association of Missouri Cleanwater Agencies (AMCA) appreciates the opportunity to 
comment on USEPA’s proposed revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation 
(NPDWR) for lead and copper. On December 6, 2023, EPA issued for public comment further 
proposed revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR), found in 40 C.F.R. § 141.80.91), known 
as the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). Although AMCA supports a robust Lead and 
Copper Rule, we have significant concerns, summarized below, about several of the proposed 
changes.  
 
AMCA comprises public water and sewer statewide. Our members are dedicated to protecting 
public health and the environment – this includes reducing the amount of lead and copper present 
in our finished drinking water. We never seek to avoid necessary and appropriate requirements. 
Instead, we embrace such requirements and work to prioritize them and obtain the funding 
necessary to comply from the public that we serve. That said, as public utilities we must provide 
public water service in an affordable and cost-effective manner.  
 
With that perspective, we are compelled to submit these comments because the proposed LCRI 
requirements create a massive regulatory and economic obligation for both public water systems 
and their ratepayers. Adding these distribution system obligations is especially burdensome on 
top of the PFAS-related treatment obligations anticipated with EPA’s pending MCLs. Lead Service 
Line (LSL) removal is particularly challenging given the need for significant public outreach and 
interaction in relation to private laterals. US EPA estimates that there are around 9.2 million LSLs 
in the United States, which the AWWA estimates could cost over $90 billion to replace. Below we 
explain why we believe that the inventory obligation and removal of any LSLs that are found may 
be a major challenge both administratively and financially and will lead to significant conflict 

AMCA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 2  
 
 
2 
 
between EPA, the States, and water utilities as they struggle to define the universe of LSLs and 
complete the mandated replacements. 
I. 
Achieving 100% Lead Pipe Replacement Within 10 Years is Both Financially and 
Practically Impossible.  A Phased-In Deadline Based Upon System Lead Levels is 
Both Necessary and Appropriate 
 
The 10-Year Timeline 
 
The proposed LCRI would require water utilities to complete 100% lead service line replacement 
(LSLR) within 10 years. 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84882 (Dec. 6, 2023).  While there are alternative 
timelines for (1) systems with a high proportion of lead and GRR service lines in their distribution 
system relative to their total number of households served and (2) systems that would otherwise 
be required to replace greater than 10,000 service lines per year under the proposed 10-year 
replacement requirement, Id. at 84913, the ten-year timeframe is woefully inadequate.   
 
Anytime we talk in terms of “all” in relation to 50,000 water systems, spread across the country, 
we should pause for a reality check.  We should especially pause when a significant number of 
the LSLs to be replaced have not even been identified.  We should further pause when faced with 
a potential price tag of upwards of $100 billion dollars. 
 
EPA estimates that there are more than 50,000 water systems nationwide.  It is simply impractical 
for such a large number of systems to make significant distribution system changes in a ten-year 
period.  This is especially the case given the (1) fact that many/most of the LSLs have not been 
identified, (2) cost of such replacements, (3) need for public outreach around utility-owned LSL 
replacement, and (4) need for outreach and coordination with homeowners across the country 
regarding replacement of their customer-owned LSLs.  Such an historic and unprecedented effort 
would come during the worst period in modern history for trying to plan, finance, bid, and deliver 
projects.  There is simply not enough engineering or construction talent available to do the work 
- even if we could fund it. 
 
Many of our water systems are struggling right now with basic water availability, especially during 
the winter months.  Cold weather each of the last several winters has taken a major toll on water 
systems leading to numerous water main breaks and boil water advisories.  These have been 
especially prevalent across the southern United States and into the mid-Atlantic.  For example, 
much of the District of Columbia had a boil water notice in January of 2024 due to cold weather-
related line breaks. 
 
US EPA has for several decades made a priority of imposing incredibly expensive (and in many 
ways, counter-productive) sewer system improvement mandates on local governments 
nationwide.  As a result of this sewer-first enforcement approach, local resources have been 
forced to the sewer side, often at the expense of water utilities’ ability to raise revenue.  Those 
deferred investments are now coming home to roost for water systems.  On top of general system 
needs, thousands of water systems face historically expensive PFAS-related capital upgrades 
and incredible annual operation and maintenance costs for those facilities.  Adding a LSL 
replacement obligation over the next 10 years on top of these historic financial challenges is a 
bridge too far financially and from a project delivery perspective. 
 

AMCA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 3  
 
 
3 
 
A one-size-fits-all LSL removal period will have water systems with low lead levels vying for the 
same funding and engineering/contracting resources as water systems with much higher lead 
levels.  This makes no sense whatsoever. 
 
A more logical approach to LSL replacement, is for USEPA to adopt a phased approach where 
utilities with higher P90 lead levels have earlier deadlines to replace their LSLs while utilities with 
lower P90 numbers defer their replacements.  Such an approach will allow EPA, the States, and 
utilities to prioritize available federal and State grant/loan resources as well as engineering and 
construction resources to water systems with higher lead levels.    
 
We specifically recommend that the final rule authorize the states to establish phased-in deadlines 
for their water systems.  Any water system above the 10 ppb lead action level must remove their 
LSLs within 10 years of the effective date of the rule.  Utilities with P90 values below the 10 ppt 
would be prioritized based upon their levels for LSL removal, generally not to exceed a 20-year 
compliance period.   We believe that 20 years is a more realistic (albeit, still very challenging) 
compliance period.  Significantly, such an implementation period will allow water utilities to 
coordinate LSL removal with other system upgrades both getting and giving economies of scale 
to water system projects.  This will reduce the financial burden and system planning disruption 
that will otherwise result from a crude, 10-year LSL removal deadline. 
 
This phased approach, coupled with a one-third reduction in the lead action level, will ensure 
additional protection going forward for all Americans who receive public drinking water, from day 
one of the Rule’s effective date. 
 
II. 
Lead Service Line Replacement Must Only Include Public Lead Service Lines. 
 
The concept of LSL replacement must be revised to include replacement of only utility-owned 
LSLs. EPA lacks the authority to require public water utilities to replace privately-owned water 
infrastructure located on private property.  There are significant legal questions about whether 
public entities can even spend public funds for this private purpose.   
 
EPA cannot withhold credit for a public side lead service line replacement unless water systems 
undertake illegally impermissible action on private property.  EPA needs to address the legality of 
requiring public water systems to replace private lead service lines before imposing such a 
requirement in the LCRI. 
 
Rather than illegally seeking to force public water systems to make improvements to private 
indoor plumbing, EPA should give water utilities a benefit for each full LSL replacement that is 
performed.  For example, a utility could be given more time to complete LSL removals (within our 
suggested 20 year from the rule effective date compliance period) if they meet certain private side 
LSL removal goals (such as 30 or 40 percent associated with public LSL removal). 
 
We also question whether EPA’s assumed cost to implement the proposed rule has included 
private side LSL replacement costs.  If “yes,” we would like to know what EPA estimates those 
private costs to be and the basis for those estimates.   
 
Revise the Definition of “Under the Control of the Water System” to Exclude Customer-Owned 
LSLs 
 

AMCA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 4  
 
 
4 
 
Relatedly, we disagree with the proposed LCRI rule requirement that full LSL replacement is 
required when lines are “under the control” of the water system. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84882. The term 
“under the control” of the water system is defined as wherever a water system has adequate 
access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full-service line replacement or 
replacement of the lead connector. Id. at 84920.  
 
This definition is impermissibly overbroad.  The definition must clarify that water utilities are not 
obligated to replace customer-owned LSLs as EPA cannot legally require public utilities to make 
changes to private property. The key aspect should be ownership. The present proposed 
incentives are written for a complete replacement (with customer agreement) so that water 
systems do not get credit for LSL replacement if it doesn’t include the customer’s side. We believe 
this is an illegal provision and although we support full replacements, our members cannot be 
required to go on private property and replace indoor plumbing. Those private side replacements 
should instead be driven by federal funding efforts and partial replacements should be given the 
credit they are due, considering they take great effort and expense to identify and accomplish.  
Instead, and as noted above, water utilities should be given a benefit if they achieve a certain 
goal for customer-owned LSL replacement as part of LSL replacement of publicly-owned water 
distribution lines. 
 
Lining and Coating Service Lines Should Qualify for Extended Removal Deadlines 
 
As noted above, removing “all” LSLs in the country in ten years is a shocking financial and 
practical proposition.  Rather than requiring removal, we believe EPA should allow a range of 
effective lead reduction approaches, such as lining or coating technologies to count equally as 
LSL replacements.  At a minimum, lined or coated service lines should qualify for deferred removal 
schedules.  
 
Lined or coated service lines immediately control lead from entering drinking water. EPA’s 
inventory and full service line replacement requirements in the LCRI will impose substantial costs 
on water systems that must simultaneously investigate unknown lead status service lines and 
connectors, finance capital projects associated with replacing known or discovered lead and GRR 
service lines and lead connectors and assemble the resources and personnel to replace all the 
service lines requiring replacement. 
 
Granting water systems an additional period to complete the replacements of coated or lined 
service lines, e.g. for the service life of the coating or lining product, will lower the personnel and 
financial burdens of the LCRI on water systems while immediately reducing lead from drinking 
water as water systems will dedicate resources to those services lines most likely posing a risk of 
lead exposure. 
 
III. 
Galvanized Replacement Service Lines. 
 
Definition of “Galvanized Requiring Replacements” 
 
Under the proposed LCRI, galvanized service lines that have ever been downstream of LSL 
require replacement (GRR). 88 Fed. Reg. at 84882. The EPA defines galvanized requiring 
replacement service lines as a “galvanized service line that currently is or ever was downstream 
of a lead service line or is currently downstream in the direction of flow of a lead status unknown 

AMCA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 5  
 
 
5 
 
service line.” Id. 85054 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.2). If the water system cannot demonstrate the 
galvanized service line was never downstream of a lead line, the line is a galvanized requiring 
replacement service line. Id. 
 
The EPA’s proposed definition of GRRs is unreasonable and counterproductive.  The definition 
will likely result in water systems having to replace all galvanized service lines within the same 
10-year period they must replace LSLs.  We think the presumption that a galvanized line requires 
replacement is too strong.  Rather than requiring the water system to know that there was never 
a LSL above the galvanized line, a water utility should be able to conclude, based upon available 
information, that there is no information that there was ever a LSL above the galvanized line.  In 
those cases, the water system should be able to prioritize the lining/coating/removal of galvanized  
lines over a longer compliance period – say 20 years.  Again, the longer period is absolutely 
critical if water systems are to see economies of scale with other water distribution system work 
in conjunction with LSL and galvanized line removal.  This is especially the case for water utilities 
with P90 numbers that are well below the proposed 10 ppb action level.  We continue to believe 
that the states should be given the authority to prioritize LSL (and GRR) removal. 
 
The Lead Connector Threshold Should be 36 Inches and Unknown Connectors Assumed to Be 
36 Inches or Smaller 
 
We disagree that lead connectors greater than two feet in length should be considered service 
lines. See 88 id. at 84919, 85083. Connectors greater than 24 inches have been sold to utilities 
and the EPA does not present evidence suggesting significantly higher lead concentrations 
resulting from a lead connector that is 36 inches as opposed to 24 inches in length. If EPA is 
going to impose an arbitrary connector length, it should be at least 36 inches.  Moreover, there 
should be a presumption that connectors of unknown size and composition are less than three 
feet in length. 
 
IV. 
Locating Legacy Lead Pipes Remains a Monumental Task for Utilities. 
 
It might be one thing for EPA to impose a 10-year LSL removal requirement if we already 
understood how many LSLs there were and where they are located.  That would allow us to better 
estimate the cost of removal and time needed.  Instead, EPA is shooting blind in that they don’t 
even have the benefit of the existing LSL inventories that won’t come due until October 16, 2024.  
Almost all of those inventories will be derived using predictive tools with only a small percentage 
of LSLs actually having been ground-truthed. 
 
The fact remains that it is a spring for most water systems to meet October 16, 2024 initial 
inventory deadline.  We suspect that hundreds, if not thousands of water systems will miss the 
deadline.  It will take many years following the development of the initial deadlines to ground truth 
where LSLs actually are in each water system.   
 
Accordingly, we request that EPA clarify what, if any, inventory update requirements are 
contemplated between the initial inventory under the LCRI and baseline inventories in the 
proposed LCRI. We suggest the EPA suspend inventory updates between the two deadlines to 
allow water systems an opportunity to develop a complete and accurate baseline inventory in light 
of the substantial difficulty most water systems will have categorizing the material composition 
and location of their service lines and connectors. Alternatively, the EPA should consider 
eliminating the initial inventory requirement and allow water systems to dedicate all of their 

AMCA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 6  
 
 
6 
 
resources into developing complete and accurate baseline inventories available to the public by 
2027. 
 
Baseline Inventory Requirements 
 
We request the EPA to reconsider requiring water systems to investigate connector locations and 
composition in its baseline inventory. The proposed rule would require water systems to remove 
lead connectors upon discovery. 88 Fed. Reg. at 85066 (Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(e)). The 
EPA’s justification for not requiring water systems to find and replace all lead connectors as part 
of the full-service line replacement requirement is that “regular progress towards lead connector 
replacement is made in coordination with other activities, such as planned infrastructure work, 
while resources are prioritized for replacement of all LSLs and GRR service lines as quickly as 
feasible.” Id. at 84919.  
 
EPA noted that most lead connectors will be replaced under the proposed rule because “all lead 
connectors that are attached to a lead or GRR service line would be replaced by the end of the 
mandatory service line replacement program.” Id. In addition, EPA “also expects that many lead 
connectors may be connected to aging water mains and likely to undergo replacement with 
routine main replacement activities in coming years,” especially because EPA estimates that any 
given lead connector “is expected to be a minimum of 41 years old by the LCRI compliance date 
in 2027” and the “average service life of cast iron, ductile iron, and asbestos-cement pipe is 40 
years.” Id. EPA thus acknowledged that water systems will encounter and replace the vast majority 
of lead connectors during routine maintenance as a result of aging infrastructure or as a result of 
its mandatory service line replacement requirements. 
 
At the same time, EPA acknowledges that short lead connectors pose a lower lead exposure risk 
than LSL and GRR service lines that are significantly longer. Id. at 84919 (“EPA expects that 
galvanized lines downstream of lead connectors may contribute less lead into drinking water than 
those that were downstream of much longer LSLs”). EPA therefore prioritized service line 
replacement. Because EPA accepts that its requirement for water systems to replace lead 
connectors upon discovery will address the vast majority of lead connectors in a water system 
and acknowledges that lead connectors pose less of a health risk than lead service lines, we 
request EPA to reconsider its decision to include connectors in the baseline inventory. 
 
Removing the investigation of connectors from the baseline inventory removes expensive and 
laborious investigations into the location and composition of connectors when those resources 
are best spent identifying, locating, and removing lead and GRR service lines. Water systems 
reporting the composition and location of encountered connectors and the number of replaced 
lead connectors will still provide valuable information to the water system and the public about 
the location and composition of connectors in a water system and the probability that lead 
connectors are present. 
 
Validation Pool Requirements 
 
The proposed regulation instructs water systems to develop a “validation pool” consisting of all 
lines categorized as non-lead minus the non-lead lines that already replaced LSL or GRR lines, 

AMCA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 7  
 
 
7 
 
non-lead lines already visually inspected at two points along the line, or non-lead lines with 
documentation demonstrating their composition. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84935, 85063 (proposed 40 
C.F.R. § 141.84(b)(5)). The rule would require water systems to randomly and visually inspect as 
many service lines in the validation pool as necessary to ensure a “95% confidence level” that the 
observed proportion of non-lead lines validated is representative of the larger validation pool 
within ten years of the rule’s publication and seven years of submitting baseline inventories. Id.; 
Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, EPA 815-
R-23-003 at 24-25 (Nov. 2023). 
 
The timing of this LSL/GRR inventory requirement reinforces the impracticality of the ten-year 
LSL/GRR removal requirement. 
 
EPA is currently calculating the number of visual inspections of lines necessary to ensure that 
lines categorized as non-lead are in fact non-lead by assuming a standard normal distribution and 
an “expected sample proportion” of 0.5. EPA assumed the expected sample proportion “to be 50 
percent, meaning that 50 percent of the non-lead service lines investigated are expected to be 
confirmed as non-lead.” Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements, EPA 815-R-23-003 at 25 (Nov. 2023). EPA acknowledged “this proportion will most 
likely be much higher since most non-lead lines will end up being confirmed as nonlead.” Id. EPA 
nonetheless maintained the proportion at 0.5 because, “an assumption of 0.50 provides the most 
conservative (or largest) sample size…meaning that any system validating this number of lines 
will be guaranteed to have met or exceeded the minimum number for statistical significance 
regardless of the true sample proportion.” Id. 
 
We question why EPA does not simply stick with the 95% confidence and allow each water utility’s 
consultant to develop a testing program that will achieve that level of confidence for the utility’s 
list.  Why does EPA pick a very aggressive 95th percent confidence level and then structure the 
rule to force an even higher level of confidence? 
 
The method for determining the number of visual inspections necessary is also not particularly 
well explained. At a minimum, EPA should clarify its validation calculations, e.g. what data it used, 
if any, to determine the expected sample proportion, what the relevant comparison EPA is making 
between the validated lines and the validation pool and what that significance of that comparison 
is, and where EPA derived its formulas for determining the appropriate sample size and provide 
citations. 
 
EPA should also assume in its sample proportion that water systems will correctly assess line 
status more than 50% of the time given its concurrent requirements to investigate lead status 
unknown lines. As EPA has explained the sample proportion, EPA is essentially assuming water 
systems will be no better at determining service line composition than flipping a coin. In light of 
the other significant investigation costs imposed by the rule, EPA should reconsider this 
assumption because it should significantly lower the number of validations water systems must 
make.  
 
We support EPA’s decision to exclude service lines which water systems have confirmed as non-
lead through records investigations from the validation pool. Id. at 84935, 85063.  

AMCA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 8  
 
 
8 
 
We also request the EPA to consider delaying the date the inventory validation must be submitted 
to better align with the categorization of lead status unknown service lines. Water systems must 
identify the material of all lead status unknown service lines within ten years from the compliance 
date. Id. at 85063. Conversely, the validation study must be submitted no later than ten years 
from the rule’s publication date or seven years from the compliance date. Id. at 85063. If water 
systems submit inventory validations before all unknown lines are categorized, then the validation 
pool will not include some lines categorized as “non-lead.” Allowing the validation to occur at least 
after all lead status unknown lines have been categorized will create a validation pool 
representative of all of the non-lead categorized service lines and provide water systems three 
more years to validate their inventories. 
 
Public Disclosure of LSL Addresses In Service Line Inventory 
 
The LCRI, like the LCRR, continues to require that a water system’s annual inventory updates be 
publicly accessible. Although the LCRR includes location identifiers (street, intersection, 
landmark, etc.) served by each LSL, the LCRI states utilities must include a street address with 
each service line and connector. Id. at 84936. We continue to disagree with the need to publicly 
publish a list of homes served by LSLs. Each home will get an annual reminder of this fact. Any 
home that tests for lead will receive its results – there is no need or clear authority for the EPA to 
mandate that this specific information must be made publicly available.  We especially think it is 
irresponsible to include unknown LSL in these lists. 
 
V. 
Lowering the Lead Action Level will be significant in many states. 
 
EPA is proposing to lower the lead action level from 15 µg/L to 10 µg/L. 88 Fed. Reg. 84880 while 
eliminating the lead trigger level that was introduced under the 2021 LCRR. If the AL is exceeded, 
the system must inform the public (Tier 1 public notification within 24 hrs of learning of 
exceedance) and reduce lead exposure while concurrently working to replace all lead pipes (for 
example, installing/adjusting corrosion control treatment). Id. 
 
Lowering the Action Level from 15 ug/L to 10 ug/L will be a big deal in some states with some 
states asserting that the number of systems exceeding the new action level could double.  This 
is likely to be the case for a number of smaller systems.   
 
We take no position on the reduction in the action level.  However, we do believe that P90 
numbers should be a basis for phasing in LSL/GRR removal requirements and that the states are 
in the best position to prioritize LSL/GRR removal.  States are also in the best position to work 
with water systems to mitigate lead levels pending LSL removal.   
 
VI. 
We Disagree With the Requirement to Make Point-of-Use Filters/Pitchers Available 
to All Households After Three Action Level Exceedances.    
 
Under the LCRI, water systems with three lead action level exceedances would be required to 
conduct additional outreach to consumers and make pitcher filters or point-of-use devices certified 
to reduce lead available to all consumers. See id. at 84954.  
 
Providing such filters/pitchers will be overkill in that it will scare many residents not served by 
LSL/GRRs into thinking their tap water is not safe.  That loss of confidence can be difficult, if not 
impossible, to overcome to the long-term detriment of the residents and the utility.   

AMCA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 9  
 
 
9 
 
Moreover, distributing filters/pitchers will be a massive administrative and financial task.  The 
filters/pitchers would have to be provided to each residential and non-residential location served 
by the public water supply.   
 
We are also very concerned that residents would not properly replace the filters and could end up 
concentrating lead and copper beyond what would otherwise be present in their drinking water. 
 
VII. 
Utilities Must Be Allowed to Invalidate a Homeowner Sample That Does not Follow 
Proper Collection Procedures. 
 
Under the proposed rule, a water utility could not invalidate a homeowner’s sample even if the 
sample was not taken in accordance with LCRI requirements.  This is unacceptable.  All data 
must meet applicable QA/QC/Sampling requirements.  At a minimum, the rule should give the 
water utility the discretion to use a non-conforming sample but should not mandate the use of 
such samples. 
 
VIII. 
Water Systems Must Be Able to Select Homes From Lower Tiers Where Not Enough 
Tier 1 Homeowners Are Willing to Participate. 
 
The LCRI must clarify that water systems which, despite best, good faith efforts, cannot attract 
enough Tier 1 homeowners to participate in sampling, can use lower tier homes. 
 
Otherwise, the water system will be in non-compliance due to causes (lack of homeowner 
willingness to participate) which are beyond its control. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Our member utilities work tirelessly to provide high quality finished drinking water for our 
customers in an affordable and cost-effective manner.  We appreciate EPA’s consideration of our 
concerns about the practicality and affordability of the requirements we object to above.  We also 
appreciate EPA’s consideration of our suggested improvements to the proposed rule. In 
particular, we strongly believe that a final rule needs to provide additional time for LSL/GRR 
removal and that a state-directed phased approach over twenty years from the rule’s effective 
date, is warranted. 
Sincerely, 
       
 
F. Paul Calamita  
General Counsel 
  
  
C: AMCA Members

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0812 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 2, 2024 
 
 
Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave, N.W. 
Mail Code: 1101A 
Washington, DC 
Docket number EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
 
 
RE: Greater Cincinnati Water Works’ (GCWW) Comments on Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI), Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
The Greater Cincinnati Water Works, a department of the City of Cincinnati, serves drinking water to 
about 1.1 million people in the Greater Cincinnati region. GCWW has an old distribution system (over 
200 years old) and has lead service lines and other sources of lead in plumbing systems that are typical 
of a system of our size and age.  
 
We appreciate the opportunity to comment on the proposed LCRI regulation. The comments that 
accompany this letter are brought forward from the perspective of a large utility that is a progressive 
leader in protecting public health, including addressing the issue of lead in water. Our comments also 
speak to our environmental and social justice concerns when implementing community solutions and to 
the known challenges that small and medium utilities face that make it harder for them to secure 
funding and implement solutions.  
 
We have experienced first-hand the cost, time, and effort that is needed to engage in full lead service 
line replacement in a meaningful way. We are extremely fortunate that we have the personnel, initial 
funding, and support from our elected officials and public that is needed to implement a lead line 
removal and public engagement program. Unfortunately, many large utilities will not have the support 
to implement such a program, and smaller and more disadvantaged systems will not have the ability to 
comply with the LCRI as proposed, leading to serious questions of environmental justice.  
 
We agree that the issue of lead in drinking water can only be solved by removing the sources of lead, 
mainly lead pipes. Doing that takes a partnership between the utility and private property owners. To 
that end we have developed an aggressive public education program about lead in the water and a 
program to remove lead service lines (LSL) that includes GCWW paying for full removals, both on the 

2 
 
public and private side. Our program has been recognized by many organizations including the 
Government Accountability Office as best in class for public water systems. In 2018 our program caught 
the attention of former EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt who visited us and spent time learning about the 
program. More information about our program can be found at our website www.lead.mygcww.org.  
 
GCWW agrees that a goal needs to be set to achieve lead line replacements. However, the required rate 
of replacement, whether in 10, 15, or 20 years, should also consider the total cost and the impact on 
water and wastewater rates. In recent years, utility bill affordability has been affecting a broader range 
of households leaving them vulnerable to shutoff and loss of water access. While we understand the 
sense of urgency and the benefits of replacing lead services lines within 10 years, a 15-year replacement 
pace would enable utilities to maintain more affordable rates than with a 10-year pace while still 
achieving complete line removal. Like our situation, many water systems will have significant challenges 
obtaining approval for the multi-year, double-digit rate increases to complete this work in 10 years.  
 
Likewise, while we agree that more lead communication is needed, significant communications 
resources need to be targeted towards encouraging customers to remove their lead service lines.  
The required broad, untargeted communications—such as costly direct mailing to the entire customer 
base—on the one hand tend to be ignored, and on the other hand run the risk of undermining public 
trust in the water utility and the water that it produces. This public confidence is critical to supporting 
rate increases needed to cover costs of the lead replacement program, utility operation, and 
investments to maintain the infrastructure into the future. Limiting messaging requirements to 
customers directly affected by a risk of lead would better target efforts and reduce the risk of excessive, 
unnecessary messaging and alarming the entire community.  
 
GCWW is concerned for small and medium size water utilities and how they will meet these 
requirements. As a large utility, we have significant concerns with completing this work in 10 years and 
we have more funding, resources, technology, and experience in strategizing, resolving large problems, 
and implementing system-wide solutions. Small and medium size utilities often do not have this same 
expertise and bonuses. In many cases, smaller systems may look to larger systems for assistance or even 
spark conversations of more regionalism to address this. More guidance and understanding of these 
additional challenges should be provided, and solutions for this should be considered and handled in a 
timeframe that extends beyond 10 years.  
 
Lastly, we are frustrated that the rule is silent on assisting utilities to address affordability and social 
justice issues. The rule acknowledges that they exist yet is silent on solutions for these problems and 
leaves it up to utilities and cities to address them on their own. The topic of service line replacement 
requirements raises several very serious questions about affordability, especially in low income and 
disadvantaged areas such as those found in many older cities such as Cincinnati. The Country has known 
for decades the differences in public health dangers for families in disadvantaged communities versus 
those living in other communities that have had more opportunities to flourish. While EPA continues to 
speak to assistance to disadvantaged communities and the need to address water system challenges in 
communities already suffering from ongoing inequities; it’s not enough to expect water systems, that do 
not have the appropriate staffing or history of community relationships, to figure this out on their own 
and act in a manner to resolve these long-lasting injustices.  It would be more helpful if guidance, 

3 
 
templates, examples, messaging, and models of how this can be achieved are made available to utilities 
to adapt in their communities to then build trust and implement solutions to directly impact social and 
environmental issues and injustices in disadvantaged communities.  
 
Thank you and please contact me if you have any questions about the attached detailed comments. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cathy Bernardino Bailey
Executive Director
Greater Cincinnati Water Works

4 
 
Greater Cincinnati Water Work’s Comments on the Proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements 
 
 
 
1) Utilities need assurances of delay in LCRR requirements. 
We must stress the need for the agency to take immediate action to stay or delay the requirements 
contained in the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) except for the inventory and public notice 
requirements as proposed in this LCRI. While the intention of the Agency may be to delay most LCRR 
requirements to allow utilities to focus on getting the inventory correct, utilities need assurances that 
these requirements will actually be delayed. Absent an action from the agency, utilities must still assume 
the October 16, 2024, compliance deadline stands. Failing to meet the LCRR requirements, if they still 
stand, will result in violations which undermine the trust in both the utility and the EPA. 
 
2) A 15-year replacement rate would be more affordable and achievable. 
In the proposed LCRI, the agency proposes a 10-year replacement mandate for all water systems except 
for systems which have an extreme number or proportion of lead lines. While we agree that there needs 
to be a mandate for complete replacement, a 15-year mandate would be much more affordable for 
most systems with even a moderate number of lead lines. For GCWW, we have approximately 37,000 
lines left that are either full or partial lead lines. To replace those lines within 10 years would cost an 
estimated $200M over this time period not accounting for inflation of labor and material costs. 
Absorbing that cost in such a short time period would lead to a significant rate. Federal and state 
assistance, although appreciated, fall woefully short of this need. For example, over the five-year period 
of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, Ohio will receive $355M in total for lead service line replacement. 
About half of that funding is in the form of loans, the rest in grants. So, in total only $177M will be 
available for water system grants. This is less than the need for Cincinnati alone. When one considers 
the needs of Cleveland, Columbus, Toledo, Akron, Dayton and the numerous other medium and small 
systems in the state, the assistance fails to meet the need. The remainder of this expense will need to 
come from water rates. Stretching this cost over a 15-year period would spread the cost over a longer 
period and reduce the rate increase per year needed to cover this cost.  
As proposed, GCWW estimates achieving full compliance by 12/31/2037 would cost approx. $16.9 
million annually in addition to our current lead line replacement program. This amount represents 
approx. 9.5% of our annual revenues. The utility is already working to increase rates for significant new 
costs such as power, wage inflation, and aging infrastructure. A 15-year compliance program would 
extend the deadline to 12/31/2042 and would lower the City’s estimated annual cost increase to $11.8 
million. In addition, scheduled rate increases from the sewer utility and other charges such as 
stormwater and trash/recycling put additional strains on the affordability of the local “water bill.” 
The additional revenue needs mentioned above only address increases for lead line replacements. Over 
the past several years utilities across the country have also experienced steep increases in chemicals, 
power, materials, and labor as well. In addition, sewer and stormwater increases continue to outpace 

5 
 
inflation and they are also reflected on the same bill as drinking water services making these bills 
unaffordable for many Americans.  
 
The EPA should also consider that these costs will be borne by utility rate payers at the same time as the 
very costly PFAS regulation will require a similar level of spending to install and operate new treatment. 
This will drive rates up even further which will make basic water and wastewater services unaffordable 
to many as well as decreasing utilities’ capacity to make the normal investments into maintaining the 
systems, resulting in a decreased reliability and increased failures in drinking water systems.  
 
In several places in the rule’s preamble, the Agency makes references to cities like Flint, Benton Harbor 
and Newark which have been able to replace lead lines at a very accelerated rate to show that 
aggressive replacement rate is possible. However, it is also worth noting that these communities 
received significant state and federal financial as well as technical assistance to accomplish their removal 
goals. This level of assistance will not be available to other utilities during the LCRI so comparisons to 
those cases are not fully applicable.  
 
GCWW is also very concerned about the availability of contractors and plumbers because of our recent 
experiences. In 2016 through 2019 we held multiple plumber and contractor outreach events, and we 
continually tried to recruit contractors to bid on our jobs. In the current one-off lead replacement 
program (single household replacement), we perform about 500 replacements per year. Even with this 
amount of work, we are only able to attract six qualified contractors to submit bids for the various 
projects in this program. In addition, we also remove lead lines as part of our robust water main 
replacement program in which we perform around 700 replacements per year. In the water main 
replacement program, we also typically see six contractors, many of which are the same as the one-off 
program. This lack of contractor capacity is a limiting factor to us being able to do more than the total 
1,200 replacements per year. Despite our recruitment efforts we have not been able to influence more 
contractors to join our program. In speaking with other utilities in Ohio and across the country, this 
experience is common. With a 10-year replacement program, we will need to perform 3,700 
replacements per year, which is more than triple our current rate. This work greatly surpasses the 
capacity of our bidding contractors.  
 
3) Customer refusals should be reduced from the inventory for all regulatory requirements if 
replacement is offered every year. 
GCWW appreciates that the Agency recognizes that some customers will refuse offers from a utility to 
replace the customer-owned portion of lead service lines even when the utility completely covers 
replacement cost. In our system, we frequently experience 30 to 50 percent of our customers are either 
unresponsive or refuse to allow us to replace their lead line even though we pay all the cost for 
replacement. We have a communications program consisting of many points of contact with the 
customer, and we handle all contracting and logistics with the replacement.  Customers only need to 
give us a right of entry to allow us access to their property and into their homes to allow us to do the 
work. We continue to look for ways to overcome this opposition, but it is clear that we will not get 100 
percent of those lead lines replaced if the customers will not cooperate.  
 

6 
 
The LCRI does recognize this limitation and does have provisions to allow customer refusals. However, it 
is not clear in the rule how those will be treated with respect to achieving the replacements over 10 
years and also in the case where utilities can avoid studying and changing corrosion control treatment if 
all replacements are accomplished in 5 years. GCWW suggests that in the situation of refusals, after so 
many attempts, the refusal is counted in another/new category and not still considered as part of the 
active inventory nor considered in the decision to change corrosion control treatment. The utility would 
continue to make annual outreach efforts after the 10-year period and offer to replace the lead service 
line when the water account is switched to a different person.  
 
4) 24 Hour notice of action level exceedance should be carefully targeted to affected customers only. 
GCWW is extremely concerned that the notice required within 24 hours of a lead action level 
exceedance will cause public concern and loss of confidence in the water if the message including the 
mode of delivery is not well targeted. It is believed that it was the intent of Congress for EPA to 
determine a level of lead “that has the potential to have serious adverse effects on human health as a 
result of short-term exposure.”  However, the 10 or 15 ppb 90th percentile is not a health-based 
standard, and this measurement is even further complicated by the fact that the Agency may change the 
calculation to include a different pool of homes than has been historically used for sampling. The 90th 
percentile level was set as a metric considering what a well operated system could achieve given a 
sample pool defined by locations with half of the locations being served by a lead service line, and half of 
the locations having leaded solder.  The Agency has not presented any data, that we are aware of, 
demonstrating that action level is a level that presents significant risk for short-term exposure. 
 
Therefore, it is imperative that the language and mode of delivery be carefully crafted to be informative, 
but not cause public panic. This is especially important in the first few years where an action level 
exceedance could more likely be caused by the change in the sampling pool than an actual change in the 
water quality.  
 
When crafting the notice and delivery requirements, we are aware and believe the Agency recognizes 
that most Tier 1 notice requirements for other contaminants are made to warn about risks that are of 
immediate, acute health consequences such as microbial pathogens or chemicals at levels that pose 
immediate public health concerns for the entire population or sub populations.  In the case of lead, 
exposure is limited to certain situations which can be defined and are not applicable to all or most of the 
population especially if sampling is performed only at locations served by lead service lines. Targeted 
notice requirements would be more effective in encouraging the affected audience to take action to 
reduce risks of lead exposure and reduce unnecessary loss of confidence in unaffected households. 
 
5) Filter distribution targeted to affected consumers avoids excessive cost and filter shortages. 
GCWW agrees that providing pitchers and filters certified to the ANSI/NSF 53 standard for lead removal 
is an appropriate precaution to protect affected consumers after a disruption in the water line such as a 
partial or full lead service line replacement. GCWW has provided certified pitcher filters for many years 
in these situations and was one of the first utilities in the country to do so. Pitcher filters are very easy 
for the consumer to use, and they are implementable in most situations.  
 

7 
 
It has also been our experience that there are a very limited number of companies that sell pitchers 
certified to remove lead (we only know of three) and we have found these filters to be difficult to 
procure in quantities that we need for some water main projects. For example, in the Fall of 2023, our 
inventory of filters was extremely low because our contracted supplier (Protect Plus with the DuPont 
filter) no longer provided filters. We then put a contract out to bid for filters and only one company 
supplied a bid. We awarded the contract to that company and even with the new contract, the bidder 
was unable to provide the quantity that we needed for several months. Because of our experience we 
are extremely concerned about the availability of filters when water utilities across the country are also 
purchasing them in large quantities under the LCRI.  
 
We have also been very frustrated that we cannot find a pitcher filter that is manufactured in the United 
States. 
 
Although we support filters for line disturbances, it is very wasteful and ineffective to provide filters to 
everyone in the event of several action level exceedances. The Agency clearly states that 10 ppb is not a 
health-related standard, rather it is a trigger to further examine corrosion control treatment. In addition, 
page 84952 of the LCRI preamble, the Agency states “EPA expects that a recommendation that all or a 
subset of consumers use a filter would lead to inconsistencies, confusion, and possibly a reduction in 
confidence in tap water even where lead is not present or remains very low.”   
 
The cost of making filters available and providing filters to everyone is exorbitant and can even exceed 
the cost-of-service line replacements. As discussed earlier, GCWW estimates achieving full compliance in 
10 years or by 12/31/2037 would cost approx. $16.9 million annually in addition to our current program. 
Under our current assumptions, the cost of pitchers and filters alone represents approximately $6.6 
million or 40% of the total program cost annually. 
 
The following table outlines the costs for supplying filters and replacement cartridges in our system with 
240,000 connections.  
 
Shown in the table, the cost of the filters and cartridges is equivalent to the cost of replacing 3,460 lead 
lines which is extraordinary considering that we estimate that we would be required to replace 3,700 
lead lines with the annual 10% removal requirement. These costs consider 1) cost of the filters and 
replacement cartridges only at near current pricing, 2) a broad assumption of administrative costs such 
as postage to mail the filters or staff time to deliver, 3) staff time administering the program and keeping 
track of the program, 4) storage/warehousing of the stock, 5) providing multiple filters and cartridges to 
apartment buildings, etc.   Considering the cost of those items, the cost of providing filters will exceed 
the cost-of-service line replacements yet provide little if any public health benefit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
Estimated Cost of Giving a Filter to Every Connection 
 
Number of connections 
 
240,000 
Cost per pitcher filter with one cartridge 
 
$40 
Cost of one six-month replacement 
cartridge 
 
$30 
Est. annual program admin cost 
 
$500,000 
 
First year costs 
 
 
 
One pitcher per connection 
$9,600,000 
 
One replacement cartridge 
$7,200,000 
 
Est. Annual Admin Cost 
$500,000 
 
Total first year cost 
$17,300,000 
 
Subsequent years’ costs 
 
 
 
Two 6-month replacement 
cartridges per connection per 
year 
$14,400,000 
 
Est. Annual Admin Cost 
$500,000 
 
Total subsequent year cost 
$14,900,000 
 
Equivalent number of lead lines that can 
be removed  
 
 
Est. Cost of One Lead Line Replacement 
 
$5,000 
 
First year  
3,460 
 
Subsequent years 
2,980 
 
Even if we were to only provide the filters/cartridges upon request, if half of our customers requested 
filters, then that would be equivalent to 1,730 lead line replacements. If a quarter of our customers 
requested filters, then that would be the equivalent of 865 lead lines replaced, etc.  
 
Clearly, the cost of this requirement greatly exceeds any health benefit and will reduce the funds that 
could otherwise be spent on service line replacement or other programs to actually improve public 
health.   
 
6) Grandfather school and childcare sampling needs to be expanded to recognize past efforts. 
In 2016, as part of our overall lead program, GCWW began an outreach and assistance program and 
offered free testing for schools and childcare facilities in our system. In our school program, we offer to 
individually meet with the school, develop a sampling plan, provide bottles for the school staff to 
sample, provide the school with the results in writing along with suggested follow-up actions and post 
the data on our website for complete transparency. The sampling plan consists of sampling every water 
outlet in the school, not just five outlets as required in the LCRI. This occurred after tours of the schools 
revealed dishes, cups, utensils, and other personal items were near many sinks, indicating regular use of 
sinks for food preparation and consumption. In our program we have worked with 109 schools. Much of 
the historic sampling at our schools was done in partnership with the State of Ohio’s Facility Commission 

9 
 
which offered a grant for schools to replace fixtures at sample locations that tested above 15 ppb and 
follow up sampling was offered after the fixture replacement.  
 
Likewise, GCWW has also reached out to licensed childcare facilities in our service area and has offered 
similar services. For childcare facility testing, GCWW encourages but does not require posting of the 
results on our website to avoid any discouragement of the facility owner to participate for fear of losing 
current or future business. Like the school sampling, we encouraged sampling out of every outlet in the 
facility, not just two as required in the LCRI. Much of this program was also performed in partnership 
with the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (OEPA) and the Ohio Department of Jobs and Family 
Services (ODJFS) which received a WINN grant to replace fixtures that tested high for lead. Follow up 
sampling is performed after the fixtures are replaced.  
 
Because our sampling was performed at all locations in schools and childcare facilities and grants were 
available to remove problem fixtures, these schools and childcare facilities that sampled should be 
grandfathered for the purposes of the five-year testing in the LCRI. This would be an action-based 
approach to grandfathering in addition to the assumed subjective 2021 date listed in the proposed rule.  
 
GCWW is also aware of some states like Massachusetts which also performed some aggressive sampling 
in their schools proactively before even the LCRR was proposed.  
 
With respect to the grandfathering, GCWW suggests that the 2021 date be kept as a default, but that 
the states be able to grandfather back to 2014 when the Lead Contamination Control Act (LCCA) was in 
effect whenever a more active sampling was performed to identify individual fixtures that could 
contribute to lead, not just five locations per school and two per childcare facility.  It should also be 
noted that the older sampling was more likely to detect lead since the lead may not yet have been 
pacified in the fixtures that were made and installed prior to LCCA. The LCRI does not need to specify the 
exact requirements but could be left to the state to decide the criteria with some guidance that may 
suggest sampling programs that went beyond the LCRI requirements should qualify for grandfathering. 
 
7) Clearly define the service lines to exclude utility responsibility for privately owned and operated 
distribution systems.  
The definition of service lines in the LCRI reads “means a portion of a pipe which connects the water 
main to the building inlet. Where a building is not present, the service line connects the water main to 
the outlet.”  GCWW agrees that this appropriately covers both the situation where the building is 
connected directly to the water system’s main and also cases such that a water fountain in a park, etc. is 
connected to the water main. However, this definition may also open the water system’s responsibility 
to include every building on a college campus, mobile home park, apartment and condominium 
complex, some military bases etc. which is far outside of the control or access of a water system. Water 
systems do not have authority, access, control, or responsibility beyond the handoff point of where the 
utility’s main is connected to the private main. GCWW suggests that the definition also includes the idea 
that the water utility’s responsibility ends where the utility’s system connects to a private water main. 
This would still put the responsibility of the individual service line connected directly to the building or 
outlet for inventory and possible replacement, but still keep the utility out of situations that are clearly 
beyond its control and where it does not have access. 

10 
 
8) The Agency should provide health-based data for changing the action level. 
 Changing the Action Level from 15 ppb to 10 ppb is not warranted given that the rule requires the 
complete removal of all lead and GRR lines, so there is no longer a need for a trigger to require 
replacements. Further, 10 or even 15 ppb at the 90th percentile is not a health-based standard, and this 
measurement is even further complicated by the fact that the rule is making changes to the sampling 
pool and not using the higher of the 1st and 5th liter sample. The 90th percentile level was set as a metric 
considering what a well operated system could achieve given a sample pool defined by Tier 1 locations 
with half of the locations being served by a lead service line, and half of the locations having leaded 
solder. The Agency should present data demonstrating that 10 or 15 ppb is a level that presents 
significant risk for short-term exposure and data showing that the action level is achievable by drinking 
water systems practicing good corrosion control treatment. With the information and considerations 
provided to date, reducing the action level to 10 ppb with the new sampling scenario appears arbitrary 
and can have some significant impacts and costs for communities. 
 
9) Changing corrosion control treatment requirements will have high costs to industrial customers 
and will have severe impacts on wastewater treatment facilities too. 
 Given that this rule requires replacements of all lead service lines, the requirement to change corrosion 
control treatment is not necessary and will negatively impact environmental water quality by increasing 
phosphorus loading into rivers, lakes, and streams. Currently, GCWW uses pH passivation as our 
corrosion control method. This method is quite successful in minimizing lead as our 90th percentile is 
below 5 ppb. However, with the new sampling methods and the natural variability inherent with lead 
sampling and analyses, we are concerned that our 90th percentile could exceed 10 ppb at some point in 
the future until such time as we remove all our lead lines.  
 
If after the pipe loop studies and review of the data with our primacy agency we are still required to 
change to phosphate treatment, changing CCT will have high costs for GCWW customers, but will also 
severely impact our regional wastewater treatment system as the same time as the Ohio EPA has been 
ratcheting down the allowable phosphorus in their effluent.  In discussions with the Metropolitan Sewer 
District of Greater Cincinnati (MSDGC), they expect cost increases to make adjustments to their 
treatment systems and their operation to remove this excess phosphorus that we were required to add. 
Not only would this change impact MSDGC, but a change in our corrosion control would also impact a 
number of other sewer districts in our region receiving our drinking water. In addition to the changes 
that would be required by regional sewer districts, this change in chemistry will require numerous 
industries in our region to make costly changes to their own treatment and manufacturing processes in 
order to deal with the change in pH and the excess phosphate that may need to be added to the water.   
Food processors, pharmaceutical manufacturers and numerous other manufacturing facilities may be 
required to make changes to adjust the water chemistry to meet their needs.  
 
10) Certified mail is costly and ineffective as customers ignore it. 
The LCRI specifies that in the event of a utility not being able to meet its 10 percent replacement 
requirement, that the utility may have to use certified mail to communicate with customers with lead, 
GRR or unknown service lines. We agree that the customers should be mailed information, however 
sending letters by certified mail is extremely costly compared with regular mail. In addition, it has been 
our experience that certified mail is less likely to be accepted by customers. Early in our lead line 

11 
 
replacement program, GCWW would send information via certified mail to customers in our main 
replacement projects who had lead lines. The information we sent included information about lead, the 
fact that they had a lead line, and our offer of financial and project coordination assistance to remove 
their portion of the line. Many of the customers, seeing that it was a certified letter from the water 
utility, actually refused delivery presumably thinking that it was a letter compelling them to take some 
action or would result in a mandatory cost to them. Because of this, we no longer use certified mail in 
this instance.  
 
If the goal is to be able to track if a utility is sending information out, then certified mail can accomplish 
that. However, if the goal is to provide effective communication to the customer, then certified mail will 
actually reduce the effectiveness and outreach of that communication.  
 
11) Simplification of public outreach and state notifications would aid utility compliance. 
Throughout the rule, various interactions and communications are required with subsets of the public. 
The LCRI uses terms like property owners, consumers, residents, occupants, customers, etc. The use of 
so many similar terms that have similar but slightly different meanings is confusing and can lead to 
misunderstandings as to who exactly needs to be notified and when. GCWW suggests the EPA review 
the rule for consistency of terms and to find ways to reduce the number of different categories used 
throughout the document.   
 
Throughout the rule there are also many certifications and communications required from the utility to 
the state to attest that the utility accomplished various required activities. Some certifications are due 
within 24 hours, some within 30 days, some annually, some at the end of a sampling period. GCWW 
suggests that the EPA review the various required certifications and submittals and look for 
opportunities to require either fewer certifications or align the frequency of these certifications so that 
they can be combined into fewer submittals. Simplifying and combining these notifications will be of 
great assistance to both the water utilities and the state primacy agencies tasked with overseeing the 
LCRI and will reduce the administrative burden for both the primacy agencies and the utilities and will 
also reduce the number of inadvertent violations that will inevitably result from such a complex 
framework.  
 
12) Notice as property changes ownership is impractical because utilities are not aware of when 
properties change ownership. 
In 141.84(d)(3)(ii) the rule states that a utility must, as part of a “reasonable effort”, reach out to 
property owners within 6 months of change in ownership in instances where the previous owner 
refused a lead line replacement. GCWW believes that it is a good idea to reach out to new owners and it 
is common for utilities to have specific outreach when a new water account opens or a change in the 
water account owner occurs. However, utilities are not informed on property transfers and have no way 
to compel notifications except when the ownership of the water account is changed. Therefore, we 
suggest changing the notification upon ownership change to when the water account changes.  
 
End of Comments.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0928 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024  
  
Eric Burneson  
Director, Standards and Risk Management Division  
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water  
1200 Pennsylvania Ave, NW  
Mail Code: 28221T  
Washington, DC 20460  
  
Subject: RE: City of Hillsboro Water Department Lead and Copper Rules Improvements (LCRI) 
Comments, (Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801)  
 
Dear Mr. Burneson, 
 
The City of Hillsboro Water Department (Hillsboro Water) shares the Environmental Protection Agency’s 
(EPA’s) vision to provide more effective protection of public health by reducing exposure to lead and 
copper through drinking water. Hillsboro Water oversees three public water systems as it relates to Lead 
and Copper Rule compliance: Hillsboro (PWS 01513), Hillsboro-Butternut Creek (PWS 06274), and 
Hillsboro-Cherry Grove (PWS 00985). It is within this context that Hillsboro Water submits the following 
comments and concerns as they pertain to the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). 
Hillsboro Water supports the LCRI’s emphasis on proactive measures to reduce lead exposure. 
Specifically, the proposal to replace 100% of lead service lines within 10 years, the service line inventory 
validation requirement, and requiring utilities to include lead connectors in their inventories. Hillsboro 
Water also supports LCRI proposals that directly decrease the complexity of the LCRR such as removing 
the trigger level and setting the action level to 0.010 mg/L. Further, Hillsboro Water supports the 
proposal to decrease the small system threshold from 10,000 to 3,300 customers as this change will 
translate to greater protection of public health.  
Although Hillsboro Water supports the overall goals and specific aspects of the proposed LCRI 
mentioned above, there are several concerns about the improvements that should be addressed: 
1. Pertaining to the definition of Galvanized Requiring Replacement (GRR):  
Hillsboro Water urges EPA to provide specific guidance for states and utilities that do not 
currently, nor have any record of ever having, a lead service line in their distribution system but 
that do have galvanized service lines. Specifically, what counts as evidence that a galvanized 
service line was never downstream of a lead service line? If a system has no history of ever using 
lead would that suffice? Does absence of any record that a galvanized service line had been 
replaced count? While Hillsboro Water has very few galvanized lines, many of our customers do, 
and we feel it would be burdensome and unnecessary to require customers to replace their lines 
given we have no records of ever using lead service lines. This issue does not only pertain to 
correctly classifying service lines in the inventory but has many resource-heavy implications in 
other aspects of the rule such as establishing a replacement plan, additional public outreach, 
etc. We ask that EPA add specific language to guide the discernment between a galvanized line 
and a GRR line. This scenario is not unique to Hillsboro Water but applies to many utilities across 
the Unites States who have galvanized lines but no history of LSLs. 
 

2. Pertaining to individual notification of tap sample results: 
As currently written, the proposed LCRI states that utilities would have three calendar days to 
provide customers with tap sample results. Hillsboro Water feels this short timeframe does not 
allow for flexibility with holidays, staff shortages, and other unforeseen scenarios that could 
potentially put the utility out of compliance. Hillsboro Water suggests that EPA change this to 
either three business days or five calendar days. We feel this is a reasonable timeline that 
continues to prioritize public health and promote transparency but does not put undue stress on 
utilities. 
 
3. Pertaining to including lead connectors in inventory: 
While Hillsboro Water generally supports adding lead connectors to the inventory, we request 
specific verbiage in the rule for how to approach inventorying connector materials that aren’t 
known but unlikely lead due to the utility having no records of LSLs or other lead components. 
Alternatively, what do utilities put for connector material in the inventory if they have no 
records of connector materials? Additionally, Hillsboro Water would like to see stronger 
language in the final LCRI that the EPA is not expecting utilities to physically verify connector 
materials for the inventory and outline what exactly is expected of utilities regarding this topic.  
 
4. Regarding the proposal of requiring four attempts to engage a customer with an LSL, GRR, or 
unknown service line for replacement and if customer is unresponsive, the utility must try 
again if there is a change in home ownership: 
While Hillsboro Water understands the importance of engaging customers with LSLs or GRRs, 
tracking when home ownership changes would be very burdensome and potentially impossible 
depending on how many homes a utility would be required to track. If EPA keeps this change in 
the final LCRI, Hillsboro Water highly recommends that EPA provide specific guidance on how to 
track home ownership changes and/or develop tools to help utilities fulfill this expectation.  
 
5. Pertaining to service line replacement access and expectations: 
As the proposed LCRI is written, it states that systems must replace customer-owned LSLs/GRRs 
on private property if they have the legal and physical access based on state/local law, water 
tariff agreement, or customer consent. It also clarifies that systems are not required to replace 
LSLs/GRRs when a system does not have access as a matter of law, regulation, or tariff OR 
customer consent is required for access, and it cannot be obtained. Hillsboro Water does not 
support this change in the definition of “control” as it does not seem reasonable to make states, 
local municipalities, or utilities add clauses in local laws regarding this specific situation. 
Additionally, many utilities do not use water tariff agreements (as is the case with Hillsboro 
Water). Further, if a system has legal authority to conduct a service line replacement but the 
customer denies physical access it seems unsafe to require the utility to complete the 
replacement. Hillsboro Water requests that EPA further elaborates on its expectations for 
scenarios such as the one described above. Finally, as the LCRI is currently written, it is unclear 
how the utility would classify a service line in this scenario in their inventory. Would it count as a 
replacement or be added to another category that has yet to be defined?  
 
 

6. Pertaining to adding homes with galvanized premise plumbing to Tier 3: 
How does EPA suggest that utilities identify homes with galvanized premise plumbing? Is this 
based on the service line material? Also, if a galvanized line is downstream of a connector of 
unknown material would it be considered a Tier 3 home? There needs to be further clarification 
on this topic in the final rule. Hillsboro Water does not have any Tier 1 or Tier 2 homes, meaning 
our sample pool will come from Tier 3.  
 
7. Pertaining to acceptable methods for verifying unknowns: 
Hillsboro Water requests that EPA explicitly state that a statistical approach for verifying 
unknowns be acceptable in the initial and final LCRI inventory. Hillsboro Water is utilizing the 
statistical approach to verify and classify its unknown lines and would like to be certain that this 
approach is valid and acceptable in the final rule. 
 
8. Regarding whether public water utilities should make school and childcare facility sampling 
results publicly available and if so, how frequently and in what manner: 
Hillsboro Water supports increasing public transparency but believes schools and childcare 
facilities should be responsible for sharing their own lead results publicly. Viable options for this 
outreach could be a dedicated page on the school or childcare facilities website, bulletin board 
posting, handouts, letters to parents, social media, etc on an annual basis and, when applicable, 
within 30 days of receiving lead testing results. Hillsboro Water does however support including 
additional information about lead sampling in schools and childcare facilities in the CCR to 
increase public transparency. 
 
Finally, Hillsboro Water strongly requests that the EPA delay the LCRR compliance date of October 16, 
2024, due to concerns about the feasibility of promulgating the proposed LCRI before the LCRR 
compliance date. If the EPA is unable to publish the final LCRI rule before October 16, 2024, utilities will 
be forced to comply with many rules of the LCRR that are not present in the LCRI that would be a major 
investment of time and resources that are completely unnecessary. Pushing back the LCRR compliance 
date would allow the EPA enough time to publish the LCRI while not forcing systems to spend time 
potentially preparing LCRR materials (specifically, the LSLR) in the event the EPA is unable to meet its 
expected timeline, which has historically been an issue.  
Hillsboro Water hopes that our comments help EPA develop sound rule options that further reduce risks 
posed by lead, recognizing the reality of time and resource constraints as a direct result of these 
decisions. If EPA has any questions regarding these comments, please contact Hillsboro Water at 503-
615-6702 or leadtest@hillsboro-oregon.gov. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Jessica Dorsey 
Water Resources Senior Program Manager

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0740 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Noemi de la Puente <ndelapuente@trentonnj.org>  
Sent: Thursday, November 30, 2023 2:25 PM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Subject: two questions regarding the LCRI 
 
 
Dear EPA: 
 
Thank you for providing a way to ask questions about the LCRI. 
The water utility I work for covers Trenton, (which meets the NJ Affordability criteria) plus four 
additional municipalities. We span all demographics and income levels. The water utility is the Trenton 
Dept. of Water, a.k.a. Trenton Water Works (TWW).  
 
TWW have to interact with five paving jurisdictions plus the state and county (total of seven paving 
jurisdictions). The rate payers for our water are also the taxpayers that support road paving.  
 
Q1: Is it possible for the LCRI to consider scheduled road work/resurfacing/paving as planned 
infrastructure work? If our utility were allowed this flexibility, we could save a lot of money on road 
paving after LSL replacements, and we would avoid road work moratoria (no digging up a road for five 
years after paving).  
 
Q2: A meter replacement is considered a disturbance if the customer service line is lead or GRR. Is a 
meter replacement considered a disturbance if only the utility side line is lead or GRR? 
 
Please advise. Thank you very much. 
Noemi 
 
 
 
 
Noemi de la Puente 
Principal Engineer 
Trenton Water Works 
609‐989‐3149 
She/her/hers 
 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0764 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
SCIENCE | INNOVATION | COLLABORATION | COMPLIANCE     
1190 Saint Francis Drive, PO Box 5469, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87502-5469 | (505) 827-2855 | www.env.nm.gov 
MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM 
 
JAMES C. KENNEY 
GOVERNOR 
 
 
CABINET SECRETARY 
 
 
 
January 29, 2024 
 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 2822IT 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460 
 
Submitted electronically to: https://www.regulations.gov/  
 
RE: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI): Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
The New Mexico Environment Department (NMED) appreciates the opportunity to submit comments to 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
(LCRI) under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA). EPA published the proposed rules in 
the Federal Register on December 6, 2023, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801. 
 
NMED serves as a coregulator with the U.S. EPA for the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
(NPDWRs) and is responsible for overseeing their implementation across 1,064 active public water 
systems in New Mexico. Protecting New Mexico’s drinking water quality for present and future 
generations is fundamental to NMED’s mission. 
 
The proposed LCRI would revise the most recent lead and copper rule, the LCRR, which was promulgated 
on January 15, 2021. The U.S. EPA is proposing to require water systems to replace lead service lines, 
remove the lead trigger level, reduce the lead action level to 0.010 mg/L, and strengthen tap sampling 
procedures, among other changes that would improve public health protection and simplify the rule 
relative to the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR). The proposed LCRI also proposes 
improvements for corrosion control treatment, public education and consumer awareness, requirements 
for small systems, and sampling in schools and childcare facilities.   
 
As mentioned in our February 11, 2020, comment letter on the Proposed Revisions to the Lead and Copper 
Rule, protecting people from health impacts of lead and copper exposure in drinking water is a priority 
for NMED. In New Mexico, there are currently 691 public water systems that must comply with the 
requirements of the LCRR and the proposed LCRI. As a public health agency, NMED supports regulatory 
changes that tackle the daunting challenges of finding and replacing lead service lines and better protect 
children and other members of the public. 
 
New Mexico is a rural state and of the 691 community water systems subject to the LCRR and LCRI, 80% 
serve populations under 1,000. Many small systems face serious challenges associated with limited 
technical, managerial, and financial capacity. The proposed LCRI will also generate a significant increase 
in the workload for NMED staff that will be required to assist our community and non-transient, non-
community water systems with these proposed rules.  

 
 
As we mentioned in our comments to the LCRR, which we re-emphasize here, it is critical that the U.S. 
EPA not underestimate the resource implications, both time, money, and overall resources in 
implementing rules such as the LCRR and LCRI.  The U.S. EPA must continue to work closely with the 
Environmental Council of the States, the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators (ASDWA), 
individual states and other key stakeholders in developing the tools and guidance that states and 
communities will rely upon for rule implementation.  
 
Many of the public water systems that are impacted by these regulatory changes, especially those in small 
and disadvantaged communities, struggle to manage the day-to-day operations of their systems. Many 
will also struggle to fully understand and implement these complex and often expensive regulatory 
requirements. This increases the technical, regulatory, and compliance responsibilities of our limited 
agency staff. 
 
NMED reiterates that the LCRI will require our department to triple or quadruple our current staff 
resources devoted to LCR implementation. Long term and permanent federal funding for Public Water 
System Supervision (PWSS) and Drinking Water State Revolving Fund (DWSRF) for these rules is critical.  
State drinking water primacy staff are increasingly struggling to manage the frequency and broadness of 
federal regulatory changes while also trying to assist our community and non-community water systems 
with much needed compliance and capacity challenges.  Recent regulatory determinations for the Revised 
Lead and Copper Rule, Lead and Copper Improvement, PFAS, Consumer Confidence Reports, are just a 
few of the recent changes that are required to be managed without guaranteed and specific long-term 
funding for the staffing required to manage these regulations.  
 
NMED appreciates the additional effort that the U.S. EPA is taking to ensure the effective implementation 
of this complex drinking water regulation. NMED also values the opportunity to comment on this 
regulatory revision that will ensure a safe and reliable drinking water supply for New Mexico consumers. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
James C. Kenney 
Cabinet Secretary 
 
 
Cc:  
Courtney Kerster, Senior Advisor, Office of Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham  
Sydney Lienemann, Deputy Cabinet Secretary of Administration, NMED 
Zachary Ogaz, General Counsel, NMED 
John Rhoderick, Director, Water Protection Division, NMED 

 
1 
 
Attachment 1: 
Comments on EPA’s Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
December 6, 2023 
 
Introduction 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is proposing revisions to the National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulation (NPDWR) for lead and copper under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act 
(SDWA). In this document, EPA is proposing to require water systems to replace lead service lines, remove 
the lead trigger level, reduce the lead action level to 0.010 mg/L, and strengthen tap sampling procedures, 
among other changes that would improve public health protection and simplify the rule relative to the 
2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR). This proposed rule provides improvements in the additional 
following areas: corrosion control treatment, public education and consumer awareness, requirements 
for small systems, and sampling in schools and childcare facilities. EPA’s proposed rule aims to address 
potential disproportionate impacts of lead in drinking water in communities, including through proposed 
lead service line replacement and public education, among other areas of the proposed rule. 
 
The health effects of these contaminants are clear. Lead exposure causes damage to the brain and kidneys 
and can interfere with the production of red blood cells that carry oxygen to all parts of the body.  
Exposure to lead is known to present serious health risks to the brain and nervous system of children.  
Young children and infants are particularly vulnerable to the physical, cognitive, and behavioral effects of 
lead due to their sensitive developmental stages. There is no known safe level of exposure to lead.  
 
Key Concerns  
New Mexico is a rural state with 1,064 public water systems. Of the 691 community water systems subject 
to the LCRR and LCRI, 80% serve populations under 1,000. Many small systems face various challenges 
associated with limited capacity. Many of these communities are challenged with failing infrastructure 
and overall inability to effectively manage their day-to-day operations.  While the funding provided by the 
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) and other federal grant resources provide a mechanism for 
communities to pay for projects required by LCRR and LCRI, we anticipate that many of these communities 
may be forced to choose between funding a critical piece of infrastructure such as a drinking water supply 
well, storage tank, or other critical system improvements versus funding lead service line identification 
and replacement projects.  This is because many of these small and disadvantaged communities lack the 
capacity to take on multiple large-scale projects and engage in the significant effort needed to receive 
funding through these federal grant programs.    
 
While NMED and our third-party assistance providers work tirelessly to assist communities with 
understanding and complying with regulations such as the LCRR and the LCRI and assisting these 
communities with navigating the funding requirements, much of our time is taken up by assisting 
communities with the daily challenges of keeping clean drinking water flowing in their communities.  This 
leaves communities, and NMED, with very limited time and resources to develop strategies to assist with 
service line inventories and service line replacement programs as required by the LCRR and LCRI.    
 
State Staffing and Resource Implications 
Grants to states across EPA’s portfolio must include the required long term and permanent additional 
funding to address associated costs for compliance with this proposed regulation.  As an example, LCRI 
anticipates a 10-year window for lead service line replacements, which means that state primacy agencies 
like NMED will be required to ensure public water system compliance with lead service line replacements 

2 
 
over that 10-year timeline.  While NMED is pursuing additional staffing resources with our IIJA grant set-
asides, those grants are set to expire within the next four years, leaving NMED with an additional 6+ years 
of unfunded staffing resources to implement the LCRI.  NMED agrees that the replacement of lead service 
lines, reduction of the lead action level, the enhanced public education requirements are all worthwhile, 
many states, including New Mexico rely heavily on federal grant dollars to help implement our state 
drinking water regulatory programs, specifically, the federal Public Water System Supervision (PWSS). 
Grant dollars are being stretched more thinly with increasingly complex and demanding workloads 
resulting from implemented regulations such as the Revised Total Coliform Rule, Disinfection Byproduct 
rules, Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, proposed Consumer Confidence Rule revisions and now PFAS 
regulatory determinations.  The overall resources required to effectively implement these rules have 
increased over the years; however, the permanent federal grant dollars have not kept pace with those 
resource demands.   
 
State primacy agencies like NMED are managing a significant increase in overall workloads due to 
additional factors such as the tracking and reporting requirements of the IIJA and other complex 
compliance requirements while facing retirements of technical staff and trained operators, putting states 
in the unreasonable and unsustainable position of being forced to do more with less. Additionally, recent 
Congressionally Directed Spending (CDS) has been using DWSRF capitalization grants as a mechanism to 
fund CDS community projects, further reducing and negatively impacting long standing primacy agency 
grant funding sources.  NMED encourages EPA to review ASDWA’s white paper on the Hidden 
Consequences of Congressional Directed Spending Impacts on Drinking Water Programs.  Long-term and 
permanent federal grant funding is needed to fully implement a robust drinking water program to ensure 
safe and sustainable drinking water supplies for all New Mexicans.    
 
Small Systems 
Approximately 80% of public water systems in New Mexico subject to the LCRR and LCRI, serve 
populations under 1,000 people and often operate with volunteer boards, administrators, and in some 
cases, operators. Small system compliance with the proposed LCRI will be challenging. These small 
community water systems are often disadvantaged and require a significant amount of assistance from 
our drinking water program to achieve and maintain compliance with increasingly stringent drinking water 
regulations. NMED works tirelessly to provide as much assistance to these communities as possible 
through our IIJA set-aside grant funds, however, we anticipate that the need for assistance is going to 
outpace our resources and our ability to provide the needed hands-on assistance that these communities 
will require.     
 
On top of the overall challenges of achieving compliance with these proposed regulations, NMED 
anticipates that many of our small and rural communities may have outdated or nonexistent construction 
or plumbing records which will make complying with the LCRR and LCRI lead service line identification and 
replacement requirements significantly more challenging and will require much more hands on assistance 
form our limited staff or our assistance partners.    
 
Final Considerations 
In New Mexico, public water system compliance sampling is paid by Water Conservation Fund (WCF).  The 
WCF is a state specific fee required to be paid by every public water system to support compliance with 
federal Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) sampling and analysis.  This fund has a flat yearly revenue and is 

3 
 
insufficient to cover existing water sampling costs, let alone the increased costs of compliance with the 
proposed lead and copper revisions as well as the other proposed regulatory revisions being considered 
by EPA. Many small and disadvantaged communities in New Mexico have difficulties paying into this fund.  
As a result of the LCRR, LCRI, and other federal regulatory determinations, NMED will have no choice but 
to pursue a fee increase to ensure the long-term ability for this fund to pay for the increase in compliance 
sampling requirements.  While NMED understands that this is a state specific issue, we urge EPA to take 
these issues into consideration when making these types of regulatory determinations.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0716 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 
Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper 
Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
I am writing to express my strong support for the proposed rule, National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI), that was 
published on December 6, 2023. I am a concerned citizen and a parent, and I have 
witnessed the devastating effects of lead exposure on the health and development of 
children and communities. I applaud the EPA’s efforts to protect public health and the 
environment from the dangers of lead in drinking water. 
I support the changes that the EPA has proposed, and I am particularly supportive of 
the following aspects of the rule: 
• The reduction of the lead action level from 0.015 mg/L to 0.010 mg/L, which 
would align with the World Health Organization’s guideline value and prevent 
up to 9,000 cases of elevated blood lead levels in children per year, according 
to the EPA’s analysis. 
• The requirement for water systems to replace all lead service lines within 10 
years, regardless of the lead levels in the water. This would eliminate the main 
source of lead in drinking water and reduce the health disparities and 
environmental injustices associated with lead exposure. The EPA has also 
proposed to provide guidance, technical assistance, and funding opportunities 
to help water systems comply with the rule and address the challenges of lead 
service line replacement. 
• The simplification of the tap sampling procedures and requirements for water 
systems, and the enhancement of the public education and consumer awareness 
efforts. These changes would improve the reliability and representativeness of 
the tap samples, and ensure that customers receive timely and accurate 
information about their water quality and the actions they can take to reduce 
their exposure to lead. 
I want to emphasize the critical importance of sharing the lead service line inventory 
and address specific data with the public, as required by the proposed rule. I believe 
that this is a crucial step to increase the transparency and accountability of the water 
systems, and to empower the customers and the communities to make informed 
decisions and take action to protect themselves and their families from lead exposure.  
The public has a right to know if their water service lines are made of lead, and where 
they are located. This information can also help the EPA, the state and primacy 

 
2 
agencies, and other stakeholders to monitor and evaluate the progress and 
effectiveness of the lead service line replacement program, and to identify and address 
any gaps or challenges that may arise. 
But moreover, the public as a whole has a right to know where the lead service lines 
are located, to facilitate community efforts to focus attention and resources on getting 
these lines replaced before they can do still more harm. 
I strongly urge the EPA and the state and primacy agencies to make the inventory of 
lead service lines and of unknown service lines, and the addresses with lead service 
lines, and with unknown service lines, publicly available to the fullest extent possible, 
and to update it at least annually. I believe that having this information public will 
help get the problem addressed faster and more equitably, especially because this 
problem has festered in the dark far too long. Here are some of the reasons why I 
think public availability of this information is essential: 
• It will increase the public awareness and demand for lead service line 
replacement. Many customers and communities may not be aware of the 
presence and the risk of lead service lines, or may not have the resources or the 
motivation to request or participate in lead service line replacement. By making 
the inventory and the addresses public, the EPA and the state and primacy 
agencies can inform and educate the public about the issue, and encourage 
them to take action and seek assistance. This will also create a sense of urgency 
and pressure for the water systems to comply with the rule and to prioritize the 
most vulnerable and affected areas. It will help states, counties and cities to 
make informed decisions about their participation in addressing this problem. 
• It will enable the public oversight and participation in the lead service line 
replacement program. The public (and journalists and environmental 
advocates) can use the inventory and the addresses to monitor and track the 
progress and the performance of the water systems and the state and primacy 
agencies in replacing the lead service lines. It will also enhance the 
accountability and the responsiveness of the water systems and the state and 
primacy agencies, and improve the quality and the efficiency of the lead service 
line replacement program. 
• It will facilitate the public access and use of the information for various 
purposes and benefits. The public can use the inventory and the addresses for 
various purposes and benefits, such as research, advocacy, 
education, journalism, or personal decision making. For example, researchers 
can use the information to conduct studies and analyses on the impact and the 
outcome of the rule, and to generate new knowledge and insights on the issue 
of lead in drinking water. Advocates can use the information to raise awareness 

 
3 
and mobilize support for the rule, and to advocate for more resources and 
policies to address the issue. Educators can use the information to teach and 
inform students and the public about the issue, and to promote environmental 
literacy and civic engagement. Customers can use the information to make 
informed choices about their water consumption and treatment, and to protect 
their health and well-being. 
• Journalists and community advocates can use the information to report on the 
progress and the challenges of the lead service line replacement program, and 
to expose any violations or misconducts by the water systems or the state and 
primacy agencies. Journalists can also use the information to conduct 
investigative and data journalism on the situations like Flint, Michigan and 
other locations that were exposing residents to high levels of lead. Journalists 
can highlight the role of the news media in identifying and exposing these 
problems, and holding the responsible parties accountable, when the public 
health community or the water companies failed to do so. For example, in Flint, 
Michigan, local and national journalists, along with a pediatrician, an engineer, 
a resident, and an EPA official, uncovered the lead crisis and the cover-up by 
the state officials, and pressured the authorities to take action and provide relief 
to the affected residents. In Newark, New Jersey, journalists from NJ Advance 
Media and NorthJersey.com, along with the environmental group NRDC, 
revealed the extent and the severity of the lead contamination in the city’s water 
supply, and challenged the city’s claims that the water was safe to drink. In 
Chicago, Illinois, journalists from the Chicago Tribune, WBEZ, and the 
Guardian exposed the city’s failure to warn residents about the potential lead 
hazards from water main replacements, and documented the health impacts and 
the lawsuits filed by the residents. In many places, journalists and 
environmental advocates have played a vital role in bringing the issue of lead in 
drinking water to the public attention, and in holding the water systems and the 
state and primacy agencies accountable for their actions or inactions. 
I understand that some parties may cite security or privacy concerns that may prevent 
the disclosure of the exact address of each service line, or the locational identifier for 
“Lead Status Unknown” service lines. But there are no persuasive reasons why such 
crucial information should continue to be hidden from the public. Water providers 
have a history of concealing or downplaying the data, and of resisting or delaying the 
actions needed to address the lead problem. They may also pressure state agencies to 
limit the availability of the information on the pretext of infrastructure security. I urge 
the EPA and the state and primacy agencies to prioritize the public interest and the 
public health benefits of sharing the lead service line inventory and specific location 
data with the public, and to overcome any security concerns with appropriate 

 
4 
safeguards and measures. I also urge the EPA and the state and primacy agencies to 
ensure that the publicly accessible inventory is updated at least annually, and that the 
customers are notified of any changes in their service line material or lead levels in 
their water. 
I appreciate the EPA’s initiative and commitment to revise the Lead and Copper Rule 
and protect public health and the environment from the dangers of lead in drinking 
water, and I strongly support its adoption and implementation. 
 
 
Michael Ravnitzky 
Silver Spring, Maryland

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0921 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
OHIO CONFERENCE NAACP 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Serving Ohioans Since 1930 
PO Box 29014, Columbus, Ohio 43229 
 
February 5, 2024   
  
Michael S. Regan, Administrator    
US Environmental Protection Agency    
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW   
Washington, DC 20460   
   
Dear Administrator Regan,   
   
The NAACP State Conference of Ohio submits the following comments regarding  
the US Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary  
Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”).  
The Ohio NAACP State conference provides leadership for local branches, youth 
councils, and college chapters for environmental and climate justice needs in Ohio. 
The NAACP and its Center for Environmental and Climate Justice have a long- 
standing interest in ensuring that issues of community engagement and environ- 
mental justice center Black communities and frontline communities most impacted, 
including communities in Ohio.    
   
Ohio applauds EPA for proposing stronger regulations to protect communities from  
lead in drinking water. 
   
The Lead and Cooper rule, as it stands now, is wholly inadequate.  According to an 
article published by International Journal of Environmental Research and Public  
Health, found on the National Library of Medicine National Center for Bio- 
technology Information, researchers Deniz Yeter, Ellen Banks and Michael Aschner, 
concluded that there is a “significant nationwide racial disparity in blood Pb that has 
been documented among predominantly African-American Black children since while 
ethnic disparity for Hispanic children is no longer seen at the national level compared  
to White children since the 1990s.” Though I am aware that Hispanic children 
experience heightened blood lead levels when the neighborhood conditions and  
exposure levels are the same as Black communities.       
 
From my perusal of the articles and studies available, there seem to be an agreement  
that industrial waste and products and the lack of federal enforcement of prohibitions  
of lead product and paint use as the primary cause of lead exposure and poisoning, 
especially among Black children. In fact, Ohio is ranked second in the number of lead 
pipes.  With the available science, technology and resources in the US, a course 
correction is possible.  The modification of the lead and cooper rule is critically  
needed for this to happen.    
 
Tom Roberts 
President 
Dr. Derrick L. Foward 
1
st Vice President 
Andre Washington 
2
nd Vice President 
Annette McCoy 
3
rd Vice President 
Dr. Dora Bronston 
Secretary 
Oliver Warren 
Asst. Secretary 
Willie Perryman 
Treasurer 
Williann Moore 
Asst. Treasurer 
 
 
Ophelia Averitt 
President’s Advisor 
 
Sybil Edwards McNabb 
President Emeritus 
 
   
Email: 
statesenatortomroberts
@yahoo.com 
Website: 
www.naacp-ohio.net 

For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong elements of the 
proposed LCRI such as the requirement for the removal of all lead service lines in ten years, the 
requirements for water systems to sample both the first and fifth liter of water passing through lead 
pipes and a lower action level; but also ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes which 
undermine their goals and ensure that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened.   
Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule does not leave 
black communities in Ohio behind:   
 
 
Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it is a fundamental 
injustice that the communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed 40 or more years to 
fix this issue.   
 
Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines: Removal can 
cost thousands of dollars, and putting the financial burden on impacted communities will result in 
mostly wealthy and white neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced. Removal and replacement 
do not make up major proportions of utility budgets, and utilities should be expected to maximize the 
use of available federal water infrastructure funds and other non-ratepayer sources of funds to 
prioritize solving this crisis.   
 
 
Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who spend many hours there 
daily are not at risk of exposure: Black children face an increased risk of lead exposure when 
compared with white children. The proposal’s suggested testing program does not differ from past 
ineffective programs, and EPA should move towards incentivizing the installation of filters and 
protecting children.   
   
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components would allow for 
environmental injustice to persist. Black communities and frontline communities have long suffered 
from disinvestment and lack of resources. Past NAACP analysis has demonstrated that race, ethnicity, 
or language spoken had the strongest relationship to slow and inadequate enforcement of the SDWA 
of any sociodemographic characteristic analyzed. The final LCRI is a rare opportunity to make 
significant changes in the lives of millions of people in Ohio, and to provide a measure of 
environmental justice which these families are owed, and we encourage this administration to build on 
the progress made in the proposed rule by strengthening the final rule further.   
   
Sincerely,   
 
Tom Roberts 
 
 
Tom Roberts, President  
Ohio State Conference of NAACP Branches  
Former State Senator Tom Roberts  
  
Cc: Dr. Will Pinn, Environmental and Climate Justice, Chair   
Ohio Conference of NAACP Branches NAACP

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1330 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0779 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0862 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Comment Clerk: 
 
American Water Works Company, Inc. (American Water) appreciates the opportunity to provide comment 
to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) regarding its proposed revisions to the national 
primary drinking water regulation for lead and copper, known as the Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI), as described in the December 6, 2023, Federal Register (88 FR 84878). American 
Water provides drinking water and wastewater service to an estimated 14 million people in 24 states, 
including more than 300 public drinking water systems. In addition to our regulated operations, we also 
provide water and wastewater services to military installations across the country through our Military 
Services Group. We currently operate 50-year contracts at 18 military installations across the nation as 
part of the U.S. Government’s Utilities Privatization Program. Our comments are based on our extensive 
experience in designing, installing and operating treatment for groundwater and surface water, including 
treatment for lead and copper that allows us to meet state standards and implementing drinking water 
regulations across our footprint. 
 
American Water supports the U.S. EPA’s efforts to revise the Lead and Copper Rule to provide more 
effective protection of public health by further reducing the potential exposure to lead and copper in 
drinking water. The attached comments detail the areas of the proposed rule where American Water 
believes clarification or alternative approaches are needed to improve the likelihood of successful 
implementation. 
 
Although American Water consistently meets water quality lead standards across our footprint, we believe 
that removing the risk of lead service lines over time is the right thing to do for the health, safety and 
peace of mind of our customers. For this reason, for more than five years we have been implementing 
programs within our service territories to replace lead service lines across the American Water footprint. 
  
American Water supports the concept of a mandatory replacement program, rather than a triggered 
replacement program. Developing an accurate, comprehensive inventory, including identifying the 
material of service lines where the material is currently unknown, is an important first step in eliminating 
lead service lines. With respect to replacement, we believe the rule must differentiate access from control, 
and that water systems should perform full-service line replacement when they are granted access to do 
so. It is also our view that the U.S. EPA’s new rule should recognize that a lack of customer approval to 
replace a service line can lead to safety issues and additional regulatory and legal risks. We believe the 
rule should allow water systems to perform partial lead service line replacements when customers do not 
grant requested access to perform full-service line replacements.  
 

2 
 
 
As we stated in our comments related to the proposed PFAS rule, we believe all stakeholders must 
understand the costs associated with the suggested improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule. The 
cost to identify the material of all unknown service lines, validate the required subset of non-lead service 
lines, and replace all lead service lines and galvanized service lines requiring replacement within 10 years 
of the compliance date of the LCRI will require significant investment for all water systems. These costs 
will be dependent upon multiple factors, including the requirements in the final rule, and the number of 
unknown service lines identified as lead or galvanized requiring replacement (GRR).  
 
American Water appreciates the U.S. EPA’s attempt to simplify the rule. This includes retaining the 
treatment technique approach and eliminating the lead trigger level, which caused confusion when 
considered in tandem with the lead action level. However, the associated reduction in the lead action 
level from 15 ppb to 10 ppb will likely result in water systems needing to modify existing corrosion control 
treatment or install new treatment where it does not currently exist. We expect that this will create an 
additional financial burden on water systems and customers, above what is required for service line 
identification and replacement. These challenges would be significantly increased if the lead action level 
were reduced to 5 ppb. 
 
To realize the full health benefits, we believe that water systems should have the financial resources to 
help them sustain the ongoing costs that will arise from the replacement process in systems for the safety 
and benefit of customers. States should treat these expenditures for regulated utilities as federally 
mandated requirements that are recoverable in customer rates through expedited means. 
 
We believe that maintaining customer affordability is critical and the additional estimated cost of this rule 
underscores the importance of federal funding for lead service line replacement availability to all water 
systems, regardless of the type of ownership. 
 
Finally, we urge the U.S. EPA to act now to delay the compliance date for those portions of the Lead and 
Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) that are proposed to be extended by the LCRI, some of which are 
currently scheduled to take effect on October 16, 2024. Water systems are expending funds and 
resources because they cannot stop preparing to comply with the existing rule until there is certainty on 
the new, proposed changes and when they will take effect. To address this, we are requesting the U.S. 
EPA to delay the LCRR compliance date by one year for those aspects being impacted by the LCRI.  
 
In conclusion, providing safe, reliable, and affordable water service is American Water’s business, and we 
look forward to working cooperatively and collaboratively with the U.S. EPA, regulators, and policymakers 
so that the implementation of the final Lead and Copper Rule Improvements helps protect customers, 
communities, and the general public. 
 
Please direct any questions regarding these comments to my attention at 856-676-5799 or 
Lynda.DiMenna@amwater.com.  
 
Sincerely, 
Lynda DiMenna 
VP Chief Environmental and Safety Officer 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
Detailed American Water Comments on  
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 2, 2024 
 
 
American Water Works Company, Inc. (American Water) appreciates the opportunity to provide comment 
to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) regarding its proposed revisions to the national 
primary drinking water regulation for lead and copper, known as the Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI), as described in the December 6, 2023, Federal Register (88 FR 84878). American 
Water provides drinking water and wastewater service to an estimated 14 million people in 24 states, 
including more than 300 public drinking water systems. In addition to our regulated operations, we also 
provide water and wastewater services to military installations across the country through our Military 
Services Group. We currently operate 50-year contracts at 18 military installations across the nation as 
part of the U.S. Government’s Utilities Privatization Program. Our comments are based on our extensive 
experience in designing, installing and operating treatment for groundwater and surface water, including 
treatment for lead and copper that allows us to meet state standards and implementing drinking water 
regulations across our footprint. 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
 
American Water highlights the following overarching comments on the proposed rule. 
• 
Compliance date – We urge the U.S. EPA to act now to delay the compliance date for those 
portions of the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) that are proposed to be extended by the 
LCRI, some of which are currently scheduled to take effect on October 16, 2024. Water systems 
are expending funds and resources because they cannot stop preparing to comply with the 
existing rule until there is certainty on the new, proposed changes and when they will take effect. 
To address this, the U.S. EPA should issue a one-year delay in the LCRR compliance date for 
those aspects being impacted by the LCRI. 
• 
Mandatory replacement – American Water supports the concept of a mandatory replacement 
program, rather than a triggered replacement program. Developing an accurate, comprehensive 
inventory, including identifying the material of service lines where the material is currently 
unknown, is an important first step in eliminating lead service lines.  
• 
Access vs. control – With respect to replacement, we believe the rule must differentiate access 
from control, and that water systems should perform full-service line replacement when they are 
granted access to do so. It is also our view that the U.S. EPA’s new rule should recognize that a 
lack of customer approval to replace a service line can lead to safety issues and additional 
regulatory and legal risks. We believe the rule should allow water systems to perform partial lead 
service line replacements when customers do not grant access to perform full-service line 
replacements.  
• 
Cost – The cost to identify the material of all unknown service lines, validate the required subset 
of non-lead service lines, and replace all lead and GRR service lines within 10 years of the 
compliance date of the LCRI will require significant investment for all water systems. These costs 
will be dependent upon multiple factors, including the requirements in the final rule, and the 
number of unknown service lines identified as lead or GRR.  
• 
Affordability – We believe that maintaining customer affordability is critical and the additional 
estimated cost of this rule underscores the importance of federal funding for lead service line 
replacement availability to all water systems, regardless of the type of ownership. 
• 
Financial resources – To realize the full health benefits, we believe that water systems should 
have the financial resources to help them sustain the ongoing costs that will arise from the 
replacement process in systems for the safety and benefit of customers. States should treat these 
expenditures for regulated utilities as federally mandated requirements that are recoverable in 
customer rates through expedited means. All water utility providers, regardless of ownership, 
must have equal access to any and all Federal and State funding. In the absence of substantial 

4 
 
 
additional federal and state funding, water systems will likely be forced to defer important water 
infrastructure investments in other areas. 
• 
Rule simplification – American Water appreciates the U.S. EPA’s attempt to simplify the rule. This 
includes retaining the treatment technique approach and eliminating the lead trigger level, which 
caused confusion when considered in tandem with the lead action level. However, the associated 
reduction in the lead action level from 15 ppb to 10 ppb will likely result in water systems needing 
to modify existing corrosion control treatment or install new treatment where it does not currently 
exist. We expect that this will create an additional financial burden on water systems and 
customers, above what is required for service line identification and replacement. These 
challenges would be significantly increased if the lead action level were reduced to 5 ppb. 
• 
Sampling and compliance determinations – The LCRI should allow greater flexibility for the 
collection of 1st and 5th liter samples at sites with lead service lines beyond the current approach 
of five consecutive 1-liter bottles and ensure the final Tier definitions are clear and able to be 
implemented. 
• 
Customer outreach and communication – The LCRI provides an opportunity to educate 
customers and increase awareness about lead in drinking water. However, the U.S. EPA must be 
sensitive to the potential unintended consequences of overcommunication and the possibility of 
customers becoming indifferent to water system outreach. Public notification is a critical tool for 
customer communication and while water systems also appreciate the value of public education, 
there needs to be an appropriate balance between the two. 
• 
Reporting requirements – The U.S. EPA should look for opportunities to streamline recordkeeping 
and reporting requirements. This would include options such as combining the public education 
requirements not related to notification of a lead action level exceedance into a single public 
education plan where water systems would develop and submit the initial plan at the LCRI 
compliance date and then certify annually that that water system had complied with the plan as 
designed. This would reduce the amount of reporting, streamlining the process and reducing the 
potential for violations.  
• 
State regulator implementation – State regulators must be required to clearly articulate the criteria 
they will use to modify any requirements in the LCRI on a system-by-system basis to allow for 
understanding and consistent application across all water systems. 
 
 

5 
 
 
Detailed Comments 
 
 
Compliance Dates (141.80) 
 
The U.S. EPA must act now to delay the compliance date for those portions of the LCRR that are 
proposed to be extended by the LCRI, some of which are currently scheduled to take effect on October 
16, 2024. This would include all aspects other than those related to initial inventory, notification of service 
line material, associated reporting requirements, and the requirement for Tier 1 public notification for a 
lead action level exceedance. Water systems are expending funds and resources because they cannot 
stop preparing to comply with the existing rule until there is certainty on the new, proposed changes and 
when they will take effect. To address this, the U.S. EPA should issue a one-year delay in the LCRR 
compliance date for those aspects being impacted by the LCRI. This would allow water systems to cease 
efforts on those activities while the LCRI is finalized with a new compliance schedule. If this new 
compliance schedule extends the compliance dates as currently proposed, the LCRI would supersede the 
one-year delay; if the new compliance schedule does not extend the compliance dates as currently 
proposed, water systems would still have one year to prepare for implementation of any provisions that 
are not extended.  
 
Water systems need time to prepare for mandatory service line replacement requirements, including 
aligning technology, hiring additional skilled staff, soliciting bids for qualified contractors (who will also 
need to potentially obtain additional staff), securing grants or other types of funding, and continuing to 
improve inventories to ensure that they are better positioned to conduct mandatory service line 
replacement. Additional time would also allow the market to correct for potential shortages in resources or 
skilled workers. 
 
Water systems will need a clear understanding of any potential changes to the LCRR compliance dates 
before U.S. EPA is ready to make any such changes in the final LCRI. For example, water systems will 
need to prepare to submit Lead Service Line Replacement Plans by October 16, 2024, in case the final 
LCRI does not extend that deadline as proposed or final promulgation of the LCRI is delayed beyond that 
date. Water systems will also need to focus on other issues such as changes to compliance sampling, 
sampling in schools and licensed childcare facilities, etc. – water systems will need to prepare in case 
there are no changes to compliance date in the final LCRI. To be effective and preclude water systems 
from performing unnecessary work, the delay in compliance date needs to be finalized as soon as 
possible.  
 
More broadly, the proposed requirement to delay the compliance date for those aspects of the LCRR that 
are being changed under the LCRI is appropriate and necessary. Having time to directly transition from 
the current LCR to the LCRI, with the above exceptions, will allow water systems and state regulators to 
focus their resources on preparing, updating, and communicating on service line inventories while having 
adequate time to understand the final LCRI requirements and then develop and execute strategies to 
comply with those requirements. This would include time to prepare for mandatory service line 
replacement requirements, including hiring additional staff, soliciting bids for contractors, securing grants 
or other types of funding, and continuing to improve inventories to ensure that they are better positioned 
to conduct mandatory service line replacement. Additional time would also allow the market to correct for 
potential shortages in resources or workers. Any approach that would accelerate implementation of the 
LCRI requirements would divert valuable resources from other implementation activities currently 
underway. 
 
 
Locating and Removing Legacy Lead Pipes (141.84) 
 
The LCRI should include requirements related to mandatory identification and removal of lead service 
lines including galvanized service lines requiring replacement (GRR). This includes developing an 
accurate, comprehensive inventory, identifying the material of unknown service lines, and a validation 
step for unknowns that were identified through means other than records review or visual verification. 
However, the inventory should not include lead connectors (i.e., lead goosenecks). 

6 
 
 
 
Inventory 
 
The LCRI should retain the requirement for the initial inventory required under the LCRR and 
development of a more robust inventory by 2037. As described in greater detail elsewhere in our 
comments, the inventory requirements should not include lead connectors. 
 
The LCRI also provides the U.S. EPA with an opportunity to clarify the scope of the inventory. The U.S. 
EPA should clarify that the inventory only applies to potable water lines and does not apply to fire 
services or water mains and the associated service lines on private property, such as those on a college 
or university campus or on a large commercial property. The U.S. EPA should explore opportunities to 
address service lines on private properties, especially those that might serve children, being sure that the 
responsibilities associated with identification and replacement are appropriately distributed. 
 
Further, the U.S. EPA should provide clarity regarding the inventory process. Specifically, the LCRI 
should clearly convey that not every service line must be manually verified to be placed into inventory. 
The final rule must allow the use of predictive modeling and other methods that will allow water systems 
to list service line materials without requiring the level of scrutiny associated with the validation process. 
That level of effort should be reserved for a subset of service lines as proposed in the rule. 
 
Validation 
 
Water systems should only be required to validate a statistically relevant subset of non-lead service lines 
in water system inventories to remedy any discrepancies that may be discovered and provide added 
confidence in the accuracy of the inventory. Completing this within the proposed deadline of seven years 
would allow water systems time to address any concerns that are identified during the process before the 
deadline for identification and replacement of all lead and GRR service lines. Water systems would be 
challenged to complete validation in less time and a shorter timeframe would not allow water systems to 
take advantage of the information gained through the inventory development process. 
 
As proposed in the LCRI, validation should be limited to those locations where the water system does not 
have a record of the identification method or technique used for an individual non-lead categorization. 
The LCRI should allow visual inspections to include excavation (i.e., potholing), viewing in a meter pit or 
at the stop box, or entering the building. Customer-provided information should qualify as one point of 
visual inspection. The U.S. EPA should not put limits on information that can be used (e.g., records older 
than a certain number of years would not be eligible for use) for identification purposes. There is no 
support for setting such limitations and doing so may only make the rule more confusing. 
 
The proposed number of sites to be used for validation that allow for a 95 percent confidence level using 
20% for systems with a lower number of service lines requiring validation to a maximum of 384 appear to 
be appropriate. Water systems will need flexibility in the distribution of the validation pool. Field 
verification requires the cooperation of property owners. In some cases, this is feasible, but in other 
cases, access to a property may be denied or there may be unsafe conditions preventing verification.  
 
The LCRI needs to address identification of lead or GRR service lines during their validation process. 
Specifically, water systems should be required to perform additional validations to achieve the 95 percent 
confidence level. Water systems should not be required to repeat the validation process in its entirety.  
 
Lead Connectors 
 
Water systems should not be required to perform a record review for lead connectors and then add lead 
connectors to the water system inventory as this will not provide the value that the U.S. EPA envisions. 
Typically lead connectors are not well specified on older service records and water systems will expend 
significant effort and associated costs with an anticipated low number of known lead connectors identified 
through the process. The resources that would be spent performing the system-wide records review 
would be better spent on other activities such as service line inventory, identification of unknowns, and 
replacement of lead and GRR service lines. Lead connectors should be replaced when they are 
encountered in the field.  

7 
 
 
 
The LCRI should also not include any requirements for water systems to identify lead connectors in the 
field for the reasons listed in the preamble. Specifically, identification of lead connectors in the field would 
require water systems to excavate the connector to visually inspect the material. Excavation efforts to 
search for lead connectors would draw funding and staffing resources from the identification and 
replacement of lead and GRR service lines, likely delaying elimination of these service lines in the 
system. Because many connectors are likely to be under paved streets, excavation will incur costs 
associated with required markouts, road opening permits, work zone safety and vehicle traffic 
management plans (including rerouting school buses and emergency services vehicles, alternate traffic 
patterns and may require limited work hours including night work in high traffic areas) and potentially 
requiring utilities to fund significant street resurfacing. These activities can be better managed during 
scheduled water main replacement programs that are well coordinated with municipalities, other 
underground utilities and DOT entities. 
 
With respect to an individual location with a sample result over the lead action level, the presence of a 
lead connector at that location can be reviewed as part of the Distribution System and Site assessment at 
the time of the investigation. 
 
GRR 
 
The LCRI should not modify the approach to GRR. This includes the LCRR determination that a 
galvanized service line after a lead connector is not GRR. Any decision to the contrary could have a 
significant impact on the overall concept of identifying and replacing all lead and GRR service lines within 
10 years and would warrant further discussion. 
 
Full Service Line Replacement and Partial Service Line Replacement 
 
Full service line replacement should be the preferred approach for the reasons listed in the preamble. The 
LCRI must recognize that, in some instances, water systems will be forced to perform partial lead service 
line replacements (e.g., emergency repairs, when the property owner refuses to provide access or 
replace their portion of the service line, etc.). Further, permits, road reconstruction and repaving or 
roadway moratoriums are often a factor in the timing of upgrading underground infrastructure. In any such 
case, partial lead service line replacements may be unavoidable, and customers must be advised 
accordingly on the steps to take to reduce their potential exposure to lead. Written documentation from 
the customer (e.g., refusal to have work performed) will not always be possible as the water system does 
not have the authority to require this action of their customer. The inventory would be updated 
accordingly. 
 
The LCRI should not place a blanket prohibition on partial service line replacements including those 
solely performed for the purposes of lead or GRR service line replacement. Water systems must have the 
ability to upgrade their infrastructure networks (reduce leaks, breaks, improve fire protection, etc.) and 
cannot have non-viable limitations on their ability to perform this work. If the utility is prevented from 
replacing mains and services in streets due to customers refusing or ignoring lead service line 
replacement outreach, then area-wide upgrades could come to a halt, which could cause cascading 
affects such as impacts to property insurance costs, an increase in water main breaks, increased boil 
water notices, reduced resiliency, etc. Infrastructure upgrade projects are well coordinated to limit street 
openings and neighborhood inconvenience, are coordinated with other buried infrastructure, and can 
have significant impacts on transportation pathways (highways, roads, bridges, river crossings and similar 
infrastructure). These are not easily rescheduled when multiple entities are involved, especially when 
entities use multiple funding sources.  
 
The U.S. EPA must also recognize that not all water systems are municipal water systems and ensure 
that the provisions of the LCRI are able to be implemented by all water systems. For instance, privately 
owned water systems do not have the authority to enact local ordinances regarding service line 
replacement, so while this may be a viable option for municipally owned water systems, it will not work for 
privately-owned water systems. Likewise, privately owned water systems have limited impact and input 
on road openings, which will impact their ability to perform replacements even if the customer has 
replaced their side. 

8 
 
 
 
The LCRI should recognize physical disconnection of a lead service line as a full replacement in those 
instances where the service line will not be put back in service, such as vacant and abandoned 
properties. Water systems should not be required to have a policy documented in writing that prohibits 
disconnected LSLs and GRR service lines from being put back into service as this would add 
unnecessary administrative burden. Further, water systems need to be able to reconnect partials where 
the customer refused to replace their side or for work performed under an emergency.  
 
The LCRI should account for instances where the water system is able to replace the majority of the lead 
or GRR service line, but not able to replace into the building due to the structure being built on a concrete 
slab, the customer not allowing access, vacant property, or it is not safe for work to be performed at the 
location. While a small portion of lead or galvanized service line will remain in such cases, the risk to the 
customer has been reduced and mitigation measures have been provided to the customer such as 
flushing taps that have not been used, only using cold water for drinking and cooking, and routinely 
cleaning their aerator. 
 
Service Line Replacement Plan 
 
The approach proposed in the LCRI to require the development of a service line replacement plan due 3 
years after LCRI is finalized will allow water systems to continue to refine service line inventories and 
more refined data as well as time for meaningful plan development. 
 
The service line replacement plan should include provisions to communicate with both the bill payer and 
the resident, if they are different and addresses for both are known, to ensure that both tenants and their 
landlords at dwellings with lead or GRR have information about the program. The LCRI should not include 
requirements on the utility to contact the “owner” since water systems may not always have this 
information. 
 
Water systems that are proposing to perform full service line replacements should not be required to 
identify or cite any State and local laws and water tariff agreements relevant to the water system’s ability 
to gain access to conduct full lead and GRR service line replacement. Any specific State or local law or 
water tariff agreement provision that requires property owner consent for replacement or cost-sharing is 
not sufficient to support the safe replacement of full lead or GRR service lines over a property owner’s 
objection. Water systems attempting to perform service line replacements without approval from the 
property owner or customer with the authority to provide it can lead to safety issues, customer 
dissatisfaction, and complaints by the customer. 
 
The U.S. EPA should be balanced in the number of outreach attempts that constitute a “reasonable 
attempt” to engage the property owner about service line replacement. This includes recognizing that 
there are numerous other outreach requirements under this proposed rule and other existing regulations. 
As such, the U.S. EPA should confirm the current proposed requirement of four attempts using two 
different methods; any increase beyond that would not be appropriate. Further, as noted above, engaging 
the property owner should be deemed complete if the outreach attempts are made to the billpayer and 
resident (if they are different), in instances where the property owner is unknown. 
 
Any requirements related to water systems attempting to gain access for full replacement again upon any 
change in property ownership, even after the systems’ replacement deadline has passed, should be 
predicated on the water system becoming aware of change of ownership. 
 
Access to Replace 
 
The LCRI should not confuse control with access. Water systems need more than the authority to replace 
a service line, they also need access from the property owner or customer with the authority to provide it. 
Water systems should perform full service line replacements where they are granted access to do so, but 
the U.S. EPA must recognize that lack of property owner or customer approval to replace a service line 
can lead to safety issues, customer dissatisfaction, and complaints. Further, the LCRI cannot include any 
requirements that would place water systems in a position to take over full responsibility for customer-
owned service lines. 

9 
 
 
 
Schedule for Replacement and Determining Progress 
 
The proposed requirement in LCRI for removal of lead and GRR service lines within 10 years of the rule 
compliance date will help improve public health protection. However, the U.S. EPA should review the 
available data to confirm the maximum anticipated number of replacements per year, currently proposed 
at 10,000 per year or 0.039 average annual number of replacements served to ensure that the final rule 
includes appropriate deferred provision levels. The examples provided in the preamble of Flint, MI and 
Newark, NJ both were exceptions where significant financial assistance was provided and approval 
processes were streamlined. The typical water system will experience more difficult processes.  
 
Additionally, any water system that qualifies for the deferred provision should qualify by rule and not 
require state approval or assessment beyond confirmation of the determination. This would reduce 
burden and avoid any real or perceived arbitrary application of state discretion. 
 
State regulators should not have the authority to shorten the timeframe for replacement. If they are to be 
provided this authority, any such determinations must be made at the compliance date, not later in the 
process, and the criteria for such determinations must be clearly articulated. This is critical to ensure fair 
and consistent application across all water systems. 
 
Progress against replacement should be determined using one calculation for determining the material of 
unknown service lines and a separate calculation for removal of lead and GRR service lines. Further, 
water systems should report the number of service line refusals when they report removal statistics, 
providing these as a separate number but including them in the overall removal percentage to allow the 
water system to ultimately get to 100% removal. These calculations must also recognize customer 
refusals for any reason, including refusal to participate in service line material identification and refusal to 
replace their portion of the service line. 
 
Sharing of Inventory Information 
 
The LCRI should simplify sharing and reporting of inventory information to reduce burden while still 
providing valuable information to customers in a transparent manner. 
 
The U.S. EPA should review the data being requested to be reported and only require that information 
that is critical for oversight. This would include numbers required to understand service line identification 
and inventory but would not include location-specific information. It is more appropriate that information at 
that level would be made available to customers and water systems would certify that has occurred on an 
annual basis. 
 
Cost and Funding 
 
The cost to identify the material of all unknown service lines, validate the required subset of non-lead 
service lines, and replace all lead and GRR service lines within 10 years of the compliance date of the 
LCRI will require significant investment for all water systems. These costs will be dependent upon multiple 
factors, including the requirements in the final rule, and the number of unknown service lines identified as 
lead or galvanized requiring replacement. States should treat these expenditures for regulated utilities as 
federally mandated requirements that are recoverable in customer rates through expedited means. 
 
All water utility providers, regardless of ownership, must have equal access to any and all Federal and 
State funding. In the absence of substantial additional federal and state funding, water systems will likely 
be forced to defer important water infrastructure investments in other areas. 
 
Mitigation 
 
The U.S. EPA should limit pitcher filter distribution under LCRI to residential customers for work 
performed on potable service lines. Pitcher filters should not be required on non-potable lines, such as 
irrigation, fire services, or for non-residential customers. Non-residential customers should still receive 

10 
 
 
instructions on steps they can take to reduce their potential exposure to lead, but distributing a filter to a 
business or restaurant is not a feasible means of reducing potential exposure to lead.  
 
Following a partial service line replacement, steps should be taken to help to reduce the risk of galvanic 
corrosion between lead and other metallic pipes. While this might include installation of a dielectric 
coupling separating the remaining lead or GRR service line and the replaced service line unless the 
replaced service line is made of plastic, the U.S. EPA should be cautious about including a specific 
solution and would be better served providing a broader statement that would allow for use of new 
technologies that may be developed in the future without the need for a rule change.  
 
The LCRI should clearly state that sampling after a full service line replacement three to six months after 
the replacement is to consist of only a 1st liter sample and that water systems are not required to offer a 
5th liter sample. Collection of the additional sample is not warranted when the full service line has been 
replaced as the 5th liter sample is intended to be representative of water in the lead service line, which no 
longer exists in this instance. 
 
 
Reducing the Lead Action Level and Eliminating the Lead Trigger Level (141.80) 
 
Eliminating the lead trigger level, which caused confusion when considered in tandem with the lead action 
level, will likely improve understanding of the requirements. However, the associated reduction in the lead 
action level from 15 ppb to 10 ppb will likely result in water systems needing to modify existing corrosion 
control treatment or install new treatment where it does not currently exist. This will be an additional 
financial burden on water systems and customers, above what is required for service line identification 
and replacement. These challenges would be significantly increased if the lead action level were reduced 
to 5 ppb. 
 
American Water performed desktop treatment reviews of 55 higher risk systems to proactively address 
systems that may be challenged in meeting a lead action level of 10 ppb. It is important to note that this 
effort did not consider the additional change to include 5th liter samples from sites with lead service lines, 
which would be anticipated to increase the number of impacted systems. Of the 55 systems evaluated, 17 
had 10% of their samples over 10 ppb and 38 had 10% over 5 ppb. Recommendations were made to 
improve approaches to corrosion control at 24 systems, 18 to install new treatment and 6 to adjust 
existing treatment. These changes will require both initial capital costs as well as ongoing operation and 
maintenance costs, which are in addition to the costs for service line identification and replacement. 
 
 
Improved Tap Sampling (141.86) 
 
1st and 5th Liter Samples 
 
The LCRI should allow greater flexibility for the collection of 1st and 5th liter samples at sites with lead 
service lines beyond the current approach of five consecutive 1-liter bottles. Specifically, the rule should 
include multiple options, which would be selected at the discretion of the utility: 
• 
Sampling in five consecutive 1-liter bottles as included in the proposed LCRI. 
• 
Sampling using wide-mouth 1-liter bottles for the 1st and 5th liter samples to be analyzed for 
compliance purposes and 1-liter plastic collection bags for the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th liter samples. 
Using commercially available plastic bags in the same way as bottles will provide greater clarity 
around the samples of importance and create greater flexibility for providing sample materials to 
the customer. In addition, plastic bags take up less space in landfills than plastic bottles and could 
be beneficially reused as planters for growing small indoor plants, which would reduce the 
number of plastic bottles that could end up in waste streams or landfills.  
• 
Sampling in two wide-mouth 1-liter bottles using a timed approach where the first sample is taken 
when the faucet is turned on and the water remains running for one (1) minute before the second 
one-liter sample is collected. The average flow rate for kitchen faucets is 1.0 to 2.2 gpm, which is 
equal to 3.79 to 8.3 liters per minute. Given that instructions are to open the tap to an average 
flow, one would expect that the flow would not be at the upper end, so requiring a second sample 
collected after 1 minute would equate to a sample that is most likely between the 5th liter and the 

11 
 
 
7th or 8th liter depending on the flow from that particular tap. A sample collected between the 5th 
and 8th liter would be expected to be representative of the lead service line in an average home, 
which is the purpose of the second sample. Using a timed approach would be easier for the 
customer to understand and execute while reducing the waste associated with shipping as no 
additional materials would be required. 
 
The U.S. EPA must recognize the need for this additional flexibility in order to engage customers to 
collect compliance samples. Many water systems already need to provide financial incentives for 
customers to agree to collect one compliance sample. We anticipate needing to increase existing 
incentive amounts when we begin asking customers to collect multiple samples under the LCRI. 
 
Definition of Tier Sites 
 
The LCRI should not include sites with premise plumbing made of lead as Tier 1 or Tier 2 sites or 
galvanized premise plumbing that is or ever was downstream of lead as Tier 3. This would constitute a 
significant change to the sample tier structure with water systems needing to complete a full inventory of 
internal plumbing at the same time they are completing their service line material inventory or they would 
risk sampling from sites at a lower tier than required. Water systems do not track internal premise 
plumbing material as a typical course of business so adding this would be a significant burden at 
additional cost that would take resources away from other activities such as service line identification and 
replacement. There may also be some instances where customers may not provide access or information 
to the utility regarding the material of their premise plumbing.  
 
With respect to galvanized service lines, sites with a service line that is a combination of lead and 
galvanized should be considered a Tier 1 or Tier 2 site for sampling purposes.  
 
As indicated elsewhere in these comments, water systems should not be required to identify and include 
lead connectors in their inventories. However, if the U.S. EPA retains that requirement in the final LCRI, a 
galvanized service line following a lead connector should be a Tier 3 sampling location and with only a 1st 
liter sample required. 
 
Sampling Frequency 
 
Water systems monitoring annually should qualify for triennial monitoring if they do not exceed the lead 
and copper action levels for three consecutive years, instead of meeting the lead trigger level for three 
consecutive years. This should not only be reserved for medium and small systems; it should also apply 
to large systems. 
 
The final LCRI should retain the proposed requirement that all systems, regardless of size, can qualify for 
triennial monitoring if they measure 90th percentile levels at or below the practical quantitation limits of 
0.005 mg/L for lead and 0.65 mg/L for copper in two consecutive six-month monitoring periods. 
 
States should not have authority to specify sample locations when a system is on reduced monitoring. 
Water systems will need flexibility when developing their sampling pools, including gaining customer 
agreement to participate.  
 
Further, if state regulators are granted the authority to require more frequent monitoring than is required 
by the rule, the state should be required to have a documented process that applies equally to all water 
systems. The process should outline when additional monitoring will be required and the criteria for a 
water system to return to routine or reduced monitoring. 
 
Determining Compliance 
 
Water systems should only use results from samples collected at sample sites in their compliance pool 
when determining compliance. Results from samples collected at other locations that might meet different 
tier locations should not be used in compliance calculations since there will not necessarily be the same 
level of understanding about the sampling that would be known with a compliance sample. Providing 
flexibility in sample volume for samples collected for purposes other than determining compliance would 

12 
 
 
be one way to avoid potential confusion and unintended impacts. Water systems would need to focus 
additional resources if additional samples outside the identified compliance sampling pool were to be 
used to determine compliance, reducing the resources available for other activities such as service line 
identification and replacement. 
 
Water systems that have attempted but were not successful in engaging customers at Tier 1 and Tier 2 
sample sites should be allowed to use lower tier sample sites to meet sampling requirements. This will 
increase in importance as water systems replace lead service lines and the Tier 1 and Tier 2 sample pool 
reduces in size. 
 
Invalidation of Samples 
 
The final LCRI should allow state regulators to invalidate samples if they are determined to be from a 
location that does not meet the sample collection criteria, such as being collected from a hose bib rather 
than from a kitchen or bathroom sink tap.  
 
Initial Sampling Requirements 
 
The final LCRI compliance schedule should include a phased-in approach to allow states, water systems, 
and laboratories to focus their efforts accordingly and not be overwhelmed with all systems performing 
monitoring at the same time. This might include an approach that the U.S. EPA has used in previous 
rules where large systems monitor in Year 1, medium systems monitor in Year 2, and small systems and 
non-community systems monitor in Year 3.  
 
 
Corrosion Control Treatment (141.81 and 141.82) 
 
Section 141.81 requires large systems that meet the proposed lower lead action level but have P90 lead 
values that exceed 5 ppb and do not employ corrosion control treatment (CCT) to perform a pipe loop 
study to assess optimal corrosion control treatment (OCCT). Large systems that do employ CCT and 
meet the lead action level but exceed 5 ppb may also be required to conduct a pipe loop study at the 
State’s discretion. Only water systems that have exceeded the lead or copper action level should be 
required to optimize or re-optimize their corrosion control treatment since results of pipe loop studies can 
be difficult to interpret when trying to discriminate between CCT alternatives that produce results that 
meet the lead action level. Further, water systems that have already re-optimized due to exceeding the 
lead action level and continuously meeting optimal water quality parameters should not be required to re-
optimize again if there are subsequent action level exceedances for the reasons listed in the preamble. 
This should include studies performed prior to promulgation of the LCRI such as those water systems 
have taken to prepare for the LCRR.  
 
Water systems, especially small systems, may be able to determine the appropriate CCT based on a 
desktop evaluation and not need to spend the additional time and money on a more intensive evaluation. 
Water systems should only be required to perform pipe loop studies in those instances where the results 
would provide meaningful information in determining the appropriate path forward; otherwise, water 
systems should be able to work with their state regulator to make an informed decision in a timely, cost-
effective manner, which will accelerate our customers receiving the benefit of the proposed change to 
corrosion control treatment. This should not be limited based on system size or the state regulator 
assessment of a water system’s technical ability to perform different types of analyses as this will result in 
unfair and inconsistent application of these requirements across all water systems. 
 
The LCRI should retain the option for water systems to defer the corrosion control treatment steps, 
including costly and complex pipe loop optimization/re-optimization studies if they can replace all lead and 
GRR service lines in their system within five years. This would allow resources to be better directed to the 
removal of lead and GRR service lines than activities related to a pipe loop study and design, 
construction, and implementation of corrosion control treatment that will take approximately the same time 
to complete. The U.S. EPA should allow some flexibility around replacement rates as the proposed rate of 
a strict 20% per year does not allow these systems time to develop and ramp up their replacement plan. 

13 
 
 
This option should also recognize customer refusals similar to refusals in the overall service line 
replacement program described previously. 
 
 
Water Quality Parameters 
 
Only water systems that have exceeded the lead action level should be required to develop and maintain 
water quality parameters. Water systems may already be performing water quality monitoring as part of 
their corrosion control strategy, but including regulatory requirements would increase the resources 
necessary to complete the activity because any missed samples or deviations from developed ranges 
would carry regulatory repercussions. Water systems should maintain the current flexibility provided 
through proactive use of water quality parameters.  
 
The U.S. EPA needs to be cognizant of the potential impact including a requirement for all medium 
systems to develop and maintain water quality parameters. This would include the amount of additional 
monitoring that would be required and the additional reporting to state regulators, which provide 
opportunities for administrative violations. The U.S. EPA should also be sure the consequence of failure 
to monitor or failure to meet established water quality parameters is commensurate with the issue. Water 
systems should be required to perform additional monitoring or make changes to bring parameters back 
within range, but water systems should not be required to increase lead and copper tap sampling unless 
there are significant concerns with water quality parameter results. 
 
With respect to Distribution System and Site Assessments, collection of water quality parameters 
provides value as part of the site assessment process, but routine monitoring at those same locations 
does not necessarily provide long-term value. Water systems choose routine monitoring locations based 
on several aspects including representativeness of the location and accessibility. Locations used for a site 
assessment may have limitations, such as only being able to access a limited number of times since it is 
another customer’s home. Requiring mandatory water quality parameter sites may drive water systems to 
use hydrants as sample locations, which are not ideal for collecting samples. 
 
 
Compliance Alternatives for a Lead Action Level Exceedance for Small Community Water Systems 
and Non-Transient Non-Community Water Systems 
 
The U.S. EPA needs to ensure equal public health protection at all systems and to all persons, regardless 
of the size of the system. All systems need to have the technical, financial, and managerial capability to 
design, install, and operate corrosion control treatment or explore alternatives that allow them to meet 
these responsibilities (e.g., partnerships, consolidation, etc.). 
 
Regardless of any compliance alternatives that are offered to small community water systems or non-
transient water systems, all systems should be required to remove lead service lines under LCRI. 
 
 
Public Education (141.85) 
 
Overarching 
 
The LCRI provides an opportunity to educate customers and increase awareness about lead in drinking 
water. However, the U.S. EPA must be sensitive to the potential unintended consequences of 
overcommunication and the possibility of customers becoming indifferent to water system outreach. 
Public notification is a critical tool for customer communication and while water systems also appreciate 
the value of public education, there needs to be an appropriate balance between the two.  
 
The U.S. EPA needs to be cautious on the use of different terms intended to mean people who receive, 
pay for, and drink water provided by water systems. This includes terms such as “customer,” “consumer,” 
“resident,” “landlord,” and “owner.” The U.S. EPA should clearly define these terms with consideration of 
the impact of the definitions. For instance, while the U.S. EPA may intend “consumer” to mean a tenant in 
an apartment, the word “consumer” would also include someone traveling through a town that drinks 

14 
 
 
water or a restaurant in the town. Water systems would be challenged to have any communication with 
the former and any requirements to communicate with the latter would need to be different than outreach 
to residential customers, increasing the complexity of the rule. Further, while the U.S. EPA may be using 
“owner” to differentiate between the person who is responsible for the water bill and the person living at 
the location that is drinking the water, the “owner” is not always the person who is paying the bill, which 
would mean that water systems may not have this information.  The “owner” may not even be the person 
living at the location.  The U.S. EPA should carefully consider who the rule intends to address and limit 
definitions to those categories that are clearly defined in §141.80. 
 
The U.S. EPA should review regulatory language and guidance to ensure that mandatory and 
recommended language reflects steps that customers can take to reduce their potential exposure to lead, 
not minimize their potential exposure since there could be additional steps that the customer could take 
that were not identified.  
 
The LCRI should combine the public education requirements not related to notification of a lead action 
level exceedance into a single public education plan. Water systems should be required to develop and 
submit the initial plan at the LCRI compliance date and then certify annually that that water system had 
complied with the plan as designed. This would reduce the amount of reporting, streamlining the process 
and reducing the potential for violations.  
 
Delivery of Compliance Sample Results 
 
Expedited delivery of sample results to the persons served at the tap should be reserved for those 
samples that are over the lead action level. These results should be delivered in three business days 
rather than three calendar days to account for results that are received on a Friday, especially before a 
holiday weekend. Samples that are equal to or below the lead action level should be delivered in a timely 
manner, but no later than 30 days from receipt of the results since there is no immediate action needed 
by the customer or water system. Requiring all results to be communicated within three calendar days 
would force water systems to focus resources on this activity and away from other activities required 
under LCRI or other drinking water regulations. Water systems should have the flexibility to deliver results 
to customers as described in the proposed rule including electronic delivery via e-mail, phone, hand 
delivery, and mail (based on postmarked date). 
 
Water systems should use the same communication to provide both lead and copper results if both 
analytes were sampled at the location.  
 
 
Timing of Public Education 
 
As described in the preamble, water systems that exceed the lead action level need the 60 days after the 
end of the tap sampling period to develop public education materials, consult with the state regulator and 
identify the organizations that they need to share these materials with. The final LCRI should not reduce 
this time frame. 
 
Failure to Meet Service Line Replacement Requirements 
 
Water systems that are not able to meet service line replacement requirements will need flexibility for the 
best methods for engaging their customers based on the specific communities they serve. The final LCRI 
should provide a toolbox approach that allows water systems to choose from a list of options without 
limiting larger systems by having to choose from different lists. The U.S. EPA should provide flexibility to 
water systems that is simple and easy to understand and implement to achieve the desired outcome of 
public education and engagement and avoids water systems needing to focus more on the regulatory 
requirements in order to avoid an administrative violation.  
 
Water systems should include information on their service line replacement program in the CCR 
regardless of their progress in replacing service lines. The CCR presents an opportunity to engage 
customers and increase their awareness of service line replacement. 
 

15 
 
 
Notification of Service Line Material 
 
Water systems should provide notification to customers with lead, GRR, and lead status unknown service 
lines, including steps customers can take to reduce their risk. Water systems should have the flexibility to 
use a single communication to these customers as opposed to being required to send separate letters for 
each type of service as this may be more efficient for some water systems. Water systems should provide 
instructions and contact information for customers to use if they think their service line material is 
misidentified. Water systems should not be required to include lead connectors in their inventories, so 
notification to customers with lead connectors would be a moot point.  
 
Advising customers with lead service lines, GRR service lines, or service lines of unknown material about 
the value of lead sampling would be effective at helping those customers get a better understanding of 
their water quality. Water systems should have the flexibility of working with the customer to collect the 
sample or providing the customer with a list of certified laboratories that can perform the analysis. Water 
systems that are involved in the sampling should have flexibility to determine how to collect these 
samples, especially with consideration for the potential impact on compliance sampling since there will 
not necessarily be the same level of understanding about the sampling that would be known with a 
compliance sample. Some water systems may opt to mirror the same process they use for sampling after 
a lead service line replacement while others may choose to use a different sample volume to avoid 
potential confusion and unintended impacts. Results should be delivered to customers within three 
business days for results over the action level and 30 days for all other results, which is the same 
approach that should be used for delivery of all samples. 
 
Notification about Disturbances 
 
Water systems should be required to notify customers about the disturbance related to identification of 
service line material through potholing. However, water systems should only be required to provide a 
pitcher filter designed to remove lead if the U.S. EPA is able to provide data showing that the increased 
exposure to lead warrants such activity. Pitcher filters would only be appropriate if the exposure is 
expected to be significant or long-term and is not mitigated with flushing.  
 
Other Public Education Materials 
 
Water systems with a consecutive lead action level exceedance performing public education within 60 
days of the end of the monitoring period, as opposed to within 12 months of the last education as allowed 
under the current rule, will help to ensure communities receive materials in a timely manner following 
every lead action level exceedance. 
 
Sending public education materials to both the bill-paying customer address and service connection 
address, if different, would better ensure that renters receive this important information so that they can 
decide to take any needed steps to reduce their potential exposure to lead in drinking water. The U.S. 
EPA should refrain from including requirements from providing information to the “owner” since water 
systems may not have this information. 
 
Requirements for Language Updates and Accessibility 
 
The revised mandatory health effects language captures the U.S. EPA’s effort to emphasize health risks 
to all age groups (especially fetuses, formula-fed infants, and young children), include pregnant people to 
ensure that those through which the exposure is occurring to the developing fetus are highlighted so they 
can easily identify themselves as an at-risk group, simplify the language so that it is easier for consumers 
to understand, and make the language gender neutral for greater inclusivity. The U.S. EPA should revise 
the mandatory health effects language as shown below because an adjective describing the health effects 
is not necessary [emphasis added for clarity] 
 
There is no safe level of lead in drinking water. Exposure to lead in drinking water can cause 
serious health effects in all age groups, especially pregnant people, infants (both formula-fed and 
breastfed), and young children. Some of the health effects to infants and children include 
decreases in IQ and attention span. Lead exposure can also result in new or worsened learning 

16 
 
 
and behavior problems. The children of persons who are exposed to lead before or during 
pregnancy may be at increased risk of these harmful health effects. Adults have increased risks 
of heart disease, high blood pressure, kidney or nervous system problems. Contact your health 
care provider for more information about your risks. 
 
Water systems serving a large proportion of customers with limited English proficiency need the flexibility 
of providing an informational statement in public education materials regarding the importance of the 
materials that include contact information where the customer can obtain either a translated version of the 
materials or assistance in the appropriate language. Alternatively, water systems could provide materials 
in the appropriate language directly. As indicated in the preamble, some water systems may need 
assistance from their state regulator in developing translated materials. The U.S. EPA should develop a 
compendium of these resources for water systems to use. 
 
 
Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances (141.85(j)) 
 
Water systems that exceed the lead action level are required to take specific actions including performing 
public education to their customers. Systems are required to repeat these actions until they are in 
compliance with the requirements of the rule and are required to perform them again upon a subsequent 
exceedance. The LCRI does not need to include requirements for water systems with multiple action level 
exceedances over a specific timeframe since this would be duplicative, add confusion, and unnecessarily 
cause water systems to focus resources away from other activities such as lead service line replacement. 
 
The proposed requirement that water systems make pitcher filters available would also raise concerns 
and confusion. Making pitcher filters available implies that water systems are not responsible for the cost 
of the filters, which is likely to cause confusion and dissatisfaction with customers while requiring filters for 
all customers could lead to unnecessary additional work at additional cost without providing additional 
public health protection. System-wide filter distribution can be challenging from the logistics standpoint of 
securing the necessary filters (will not be able to be stored on site), distributing (either directly or making 
available for pickup), and having the resources to plan and execute (taking away from other activities). 
Further, the rule needs to exempt distribution to non-residential customers such as fast-food restaurants 
and department stores. 
 
If the U.S. EPA retains any requirements related to making pitcher filters available to customers in this 
section, development of a filter plan after the first multiple exceedances would be appropriate but said 
water systems should not be required to submit the plan for review and approval. Additionally, the LCRI 
must include language regarding when a water system would be able to cease the additional 
requirements that were triggered by multiple exceedances of the lead action level. Otherwise, water 
systems risk not knowing when they are able to stop the additional activities. 
 
 
Schools and Licensed Childcare Facilities (141.92) 
 
Proposed LCRI Requirements 
 
The LCRI should provide schools and licensed childcare facilities with the opportunity to be sampled for 
lead, to learn about the importance of lead testing in schools and licensed childcare facilities and take 
additional actions if they choose. The U.S. EPA should include requirements to conduct public outreach 
to schools and sample in schools and licensed childcare facilities. However, the LCRI should not include 
requirements for schools, licensed childcare facilities or water systems to remediate lead based on the 
results of sampling. Further, an action level for schools and licensed childcare facilities is not necessary 
or appropriate for the reasons listed in the preamble and the existing 3Ts guidance is appropriate for 
these facilities to use for addressing lead in their facilities. 
 
Specifically, the U.S. EPA should not require water systems take remediation actions because larger 
buildings, such as schools and licensed childcare facilities, can have a higher potential for elevated lead 
levels due to complex plumbing arrangements, the presence of lead in premise plumbing, and 
inconsistent water use patterns that can result in long stagnation times. Additionally, as described in the 

17 
 
 
preamble, sampling at schools and licensed childcare facilities is a component of the treatment technique 
rule for public education and not a reflection of the water system’s corrosion control treatment. 
 
The U.S. EPA should continue to look for opportunities to clarify rule requirements and ease interpretation 
and implementation. This includes providing exclusions for newer construction and facilities that have 
undergone full plumbing replacement. It also includes separating the requirements for public education to 
all schools and licensed childcare facilities, sampling frequency for elementary schools and licensed 
childcare facilities, and sampling frequency for secondary schools, to clarify the different requirements, 
reduce cross-references, and ease implementation.  
 
The LCRI should also recognize that water systems will often need to coordinate with school districts as 
opposed to specific schools and decisions to sample will likely be at the district level. Requiring 
responses from individual schools in those instances would not be an effective approach to rule 
implementation and would likely cause confusion and customer dissatisfaction. 
 
Proposed Waivers Requirements 
 
Results from samples collected between January 1, 2021, and the LCRI compliance date should be 
acceptable to fulfill the requirements of lead and licensed childcare sampling as required under LCRI. 
This should be allowed by rule and not require a waiver from the state regulator. 
 
Sampling should not be required in a school or licensed childcare facility that installs and maintains point-
of-use devices certified to reduce lead in drinking water at all outlets used to provide water for human 
consumption (e.g. state requirements for schools to “filter-first”). This should be allowed by the rule and 
not require a waiver from the state regulator. Further, the final LCRI should not include a filter-first 
provision because filters may not be properly maintained as described in the preamble. We also agree 
with U.S. EPA’s decision to not propose that water systems be required to provide filters to schools and 
licensed childcare facilities for the same reasons that U.S. EPA is not proposing water systems to take 
other types of lead remediation requirements. 
 
Public Information About Lead Sampling in Schools and Licensed Childcare Facilities 
 
The Consumer Confidence Report provides an opportunity for water systems to provide a statement 
indicating that schools and licensed childcare facilities are eligible to be sampled for lead and direct 
interested members of the public to contact their local school or licensed childcare facility for more 
information. Water systems should not be required to make the sampling results publicly available for the 
reasons listed in the preamble including that water systems are not in a position to discuss next steps. 
Including a statement about the eligibility of sampling will increase public transparency while directing 
interested members of the public to the appropriate people to respond to any questions. 
 
Providing results from sampling at schools and licensed childcare facilities within 30 days would be 
consistent with typical water quality reporting and also meet the U.S. EPA’s goal to get data to public 
quicker and address concerns in a timely manner.  
 
 
Other Proposed Revisions to 40 CFR Part 141  
 
Consumer Confidence Report (CCR) 
 
The Consumer Confidence Report presents an opportunity to educate customers and increase 
awareness about lead in drinking water. Including an informational statement on lead as proposed would 
be more appropriate than including the mandatory health effects language that is used in public education 
materials given the different messages that are being sent (information vs. notification of a lead action 
level exceedance). 
 
Water systems should only be required to include the mandatory lead health effects language in the CCR 
for exceedance of the lead action level. Inclusion of the lead health effects language for other reasons 
such as failing to complete required public education nor failing to sample in schools and licensed 

18 
 
 
childcare facilities is not appropriate as these events are not indicative of additional risk from lead and 
therefore do not warrant the addition of health effects language in the CCR or elsewhere. 
 
Water systems that are required to include the mandatory health effects language due to exceeding the 
lead action level or failing to meet regulatory requirements related to LCRI should not be required to also 
include the CCR information statement. Including both statements will be redundant and lead to customer 
confusion as to the reason for two similar statements. 
 
As indicated elsewhere in these comments, CCRs provide an opportunity for water systems to include: 
• 
Information about their service line replacement program 
• 
A statement in their Consumer Confidence Report indicating that schools and licensed childcare 
facilities are eligible to be sampled for lead and direct interested members of the public to contact 
their local school or licensed childcare facility for more information. Water systems should not be 
required to make the sampling results publicly available for the reasons listed in the preamble 
including that water systems are not in a position to discuss next steps. Including a statement 
about the eligibility of sampling will increase public transparency while directing interested 
members of the public to the appropriate people to respond to any questions. 
 
Public Notification Rule 
 
Tier 1 public notification should be reserved for system exceedances of the lead action level as required 
by the American Water Infrastructure Act.  
 
Definitions 
• 
Distribution system and site assessment  
o 
Revising the name from Find and Fix to Distribution System and Site Assessment more 
accurately portrays the activities that will be performed and gives recognition to the fact 
that water systems will not always find something within their control to fix for every 
elevated lead sample result. 
• 
Wide mouth bottle 
o 
The definition of wide mouth bottle should be revised to specify the inner diameter to be 
at least 40 mm. This will greatly increase the variety of wide mouth bottles available to 
purchase while maintaining the advantage of sampling into a wide mouth container.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2266 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 8, 2024
The Honorable Michael S. Regan
Administrator
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, D.C. 20460
Dear Administrator Regan:
Thank you for your bold leadership working to address and eliminate lead in drinking water 
across our nation. In particular, the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements (LCRI) proposal in December 2023 represents a critical step forward that 
will protect public health, create jobs and ensure a better future for our children. 
As you know, lead service lines (LSLs) pose an unacceptable health threat and 
disproportionately impact lower-income neighborhoods and communities of color. Black 
children especially are more likely to live in communities with LSLs and therefore have higher 
blood lead levels and are more likely to be poisoned by lead than white children. Given that 
disadvantaged low-income communities and communities of color are at greater cumulative risk 
from lead, they must be the top funding priority. This urgent public health crisis requires 
immediate action at all levels of government, which is why we strongly support the LCRI’s 
commitment to fully replace almost all of the nation’s lead pipes within 10 years.
We also appreciate that EPA is proposing to reduce the lead action level from 15 parts per billion
(ppb) to 10 ppb. This will ensure that communities across the nation are quickly detecting and 
taking action to address lead where it poses the greatest threat to public safety. However, as we 
know, there is no safe level of lead in drinking water and we recommend that you consider 
further lowering the threshold to the lowest practicable level.  
In order to further strengthen the LCRI proposal, we urge the agency to consider some additional
important changes to the final rule. Specifically, we recommend that the agency reconsider its 
proposed provisions that would enable some water systems to drag out the process of replacing 
their lead pipes over multiple decades. While we recognize the challenges for some 
municipalities to remove thousands of lead pipes in 10 years, the proposed rule could allow 
another generation of children in many communities to be exposed to lead from their tap water. 
Some cities have been able to replace tens of thousands of lead pipes in just a few years, creating
jobs while providing enormous benefits to their communities. Recent studies show that the health
and economic benefits of removing lead pipes and reducing lead levels in tap water are more 
than 10-fold larger than the costs, and that this work can create hundreds of thousands of good-
paying jobs.  

 
As part of the replacement provisions, the final rule should clearly ensure that individual 
property owners do not have to pay for lead service line replacement. These costs should be 
covered by federal, state and local government funds intended for lead service line replacement, 
including but not limited to, public-private partnerships and funds provided in the State 
Revolving Funds, EPA grant programs and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. Some water 
systems and states required, installed, encouraged and approved lead pipe use for generations, 
with no input from homeowners. When utilities charge individual property owners for lead 
service line removal, low-income homeowners are often unable to pay and the landlords of low-
income renters often refuse to pay. This particularly exposes renters, low-income people and 
people of color to higher levels of lead in their drinking water. 
There are substantial new federal funds available to assist with the replacement of lead pipes, 
including $15 billion in dedicated funding for lead pipe replacement and an additional $11.7 
billion in grants, loans and principal forgiveness through the Drinking Water State Revolving 
Fund (DWSRF) included in the Drinking Water and Wastewater Act that passed as part of the 
2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. There are additional funds provided under the Small, 
Underserved, and Disadvantaged Communities and the Reducing Lead in Drinking Water grants 
programs. 
Billions of dollars remain in many state and local coffers from the 2021 American Rescue Plan 
Act that are explicitly available for full lead pipe replacement. Other federal funds that may be 
used for lead pipe replacement are provided through the existing annual DWSRF appropriations 
and the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act. We would be pleased to work with 
you on improving access to these federal investments in replacing lead pipes and addressing 
drinking water infrastructure needs. 
We also recommend that the LCRI proposal require comprehensive testing for lead in schools 
and childcare facilities, including tribal educational centers, with incentives for water utilities 
and non-profits to install filtration stations at these facilities that can provide immediate safe 
water while taking steps to remove and replace any lead plumbing, faucets and fixtures. This 
could work in coordination with the existing Voluntary School and Child Care Lead Testing and 
Reduction Grant Program created in 2016 and further improved by the Bipartisan Infrastructure 
Law in 2021. 
 
The agency’s proposed strengthening of provisions for reporting, public education and 
notification requirements are welcome, though even more could be done to ensure the public 
receives straightforward and honest information about the risk of lead in their tap water. We 
particularly urge EPA to expand lead testing and education programs in Native American and 
Tribal communities in consultation with leaders, experts and stakeholders. EPA also should work
with other relevant agencies, including the Department of Health and Human Services, the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Department of Agriculture, the Department
of Veterans Affairs and the Department of Defense to provide guidance and prioritization for the 
removal of lead pipes in government or government-subsidized housing, including transparent 
notification of lead presence for occupants. It is inexcusable for federally funded housing to 
poison its own residents.

In addition to these improvements, the existing Lead and Copper Rule must be better enforced. 
According to EPA’s own data, there are widespread – and often underreported – violations. To 
truly improve the Lead and Copper Rule, EPA must do more to ensure that these violations are 
taken seriously and addressed. 
 
We want to thank you Administrator Regan, Assistant Administrator Fox and EPA for your 
strong and consistent dedication to tackling this important problem. We believe that together, we 
can end the lead in drinking water crisis so future generations in this country will not have to 
question the safety of the water flowing from their taps.
Sincerely,
Cory A. Booker
United States Senator
Tammy Duckworth
United States Senator
Debbie Dingell
Member of Congress
Rashida Tlaib
Member of Congress
Richard J. Durbin
United States Senator
Eleanor Holmes Norton
Member of Congress
Jerrold Nadler
Member of Congress
Robin L. Kelly
Member of Congress

Troy A. Carter, Sr.
Member of Congress
Summer Lee
Member of Congress
Lauren Underwood
Member of Congress
Sylvia R. Garcia
Member of Congress
Alma S. Adams, Ph.D.
Member of Congress
John Garamendi
Member of Congress
Katie Porter
Member of Congress
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez
Member of Congress
Jennifer L. McClellan
Member of Congress
Raúl M. Grijalva
Member of Congress
Laphonza Butler
United States Senator
Gwen S. Moore
Member of Congress

Julia Brownley
Member of Congress
Steve Cohen
Member of Congress
Adam B. Schiff
Member of Congress
Seth Magaziner
Member of Congress
Jesús G. "Chuy" García
Member of Congress
Richard Blumenthal
United States Senator
Dina Titus
Member of Congress
James P. McGovern
Member of Congress
Haley M. Stevens
Member of Congress
Debbie Stabenow
United States Senator
Edward J. Markey
United States Senator
Chris Van Hollen
United States Senator

Nanette Diaz Barragán
Member of Congress
Jamaal Bowman, Ed.D.
Member of Congress
Jan Schakowsky
Member of Congress
Benjamin L. Cardin
United States Senator
Dwight Evans
Member of Congress
Suzanne Bonamici
Member of Congress
Pramila Jayapal
Member of Congress
Dan Goldman 
Member of Congress
Elissa Slotkin
Member of Congress
Gary C. Peters
United States Senator
Sheldon Whitehouse
United States Senator
Henry C. "Hank" Johnson, Jr.
Member of Congress

Shri Thanedar
Member of Congress
Greg Casar
Member of Congress
Donald M. Payne, Jr.
Member of Congress
Maxine Waters
Member of Congress
Gerald E. Connolly
Member of Congress
Tammy Baldwin
United States Senator
Daniel T. Kildee
Member of Congress
Delia C. Ramirez
Member of Congress
Darren Soto
Member of Congress
Bill Foster
Member of Congress
Patrick Ryan
Member of Congress
Zoe Lofgren
Member of Congress

Andrea Salinas
Member of Congress
Maxwell Alejandro Frost
Member of Congress
Becca Balint
Member of Congress
Robert C. "Bobby" Scott
Member of Congress
Barbara Lee
Member of Congress
Nydia M. Velázquez
Member of Congress
Glenn Ivey
Member of Congress
Juan Vargas
Member of Congress
Ted W. Lieu
Member of Congress
Mark Pocan
Member of Congress
Nikki Budzinski
Member of Congress
Sara Jacobs
Member of Congress

Sheila Cherfilus-McCormick
Member of Congress
Jamie Raskin
Member of Congress
Alex Padilla
Chair, Subcommittee on 
Fisheries, Water, and Wildlife
Judy Chu
Member of Congress
Ro Khanna
Member of Congress
Linda T. Sánchez
Member of Congress
Frederica S. Wilson
Member of Congress
Lucy McBath
Member of Congress
Kirsten Gillibrand
United States Senator
Kevin Mullin
Member of Congress

Ritchie Torres
Member of Congress
Raja Krishnamoorthi
Member of Congress
Elizabeth Warren
United States Senator
Salud Carbajal
Member of Congress
Jack Reed
United States Senator
Joyce Beatty
Member of Congress
Gabe Amo
Member of Congress
Bradley Scott Schneider
Member of Congress
Peter Welch
United States Senator
Bernard Sanders
United States Senator
Jeffrey A. Merkley
United States Senator
Sherrod Brown
United States Senator

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1106 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2270 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Sergio Rangel <sergiorangelgonzalez.sr@gmail.com>  
Sent: Wednesday, February 14, 2024 5:14 PM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Subject: DRINKING WATER 
 
 
Hello, my name Sergio Rangel Gonzalez. I´m Civil Enginner and I want to be a part of 
the solution obout this problem, so I think that the existence of lead should be 
considered in addition to household intakes in the conduction and distribution lines of 
drinking water, as well as in storage tanks, what is your opinion?  
even at the source of supply. 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0855 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 of 17
 
February 5, 2024 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460  
 
Re: Comments on EPA's Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI) put forward by U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Elevate respectfully 
submits these comments with attention to the State of Illinois and City of Chicago, which best estimates 
suggest are home to more lead service lines (LSLs) than any other state and city in the nation, 
respectively.  
 
Elevate is a Chicago-based nonprofit that advances safe, lead-free, affordable water for all with a focus 
on childcare and facilities and environmental justice communities. Elevate’s team of project managers, 
construction crews, and problem solvers work directly with the City of Chicago, as well as Cook County 
and State of Illinois, to prioritize equity in lead service line replacement both through direct 
implementation efforts and provision of technical assistance. In addition to research, analysis, and policy 
development, Elevate is the administrator of a three-pronged program to address lead in water:  
1. LeadCare Illinois1 works in collaboration with the Illinois Department of Public Health and Illinois 
EPA to engage childcare facilities across the state to test their water for lead, and support 
childcare providers in addressing sources of lead, including navigating the LSLR process. This 
program is funded through a non-competitive WIIN grant to the state.  
2. LeadCare Cook County2 goes a step further, offering free lead service line replacement (LSLR) to 
childcare providers in suburban Cook County, including the costs of restoration (e.g. repairing 
damage to floors, walls, and lawns where necessary).    
3. LeadCare Complete3 complements the City of Chicago’s LSLR program for childcare facilities by 
offering free premise plumbing assessment, upgrades, and follow-up evaluation to ensure lead 
levels remain below 2.01 parts per billion (ppb). This program is funded through a competitive 
WIIN grant for lead-in-water mitigation at childcare facilities.      
 
We share and appreciate EPA’s commitment to protecting public health by reducing the risk of exposure 
to lead, a known neurotoxin, through drinking water. We offer the following comments on the proposed 
 
1 More information available online: https://leadcareillinois.org/ 
2 https://leadcareillinois.org/cookcounty/ 
3 https://leadcareillinois.org/complete/ 

 
 
 
 
2 of 17
 
LCRI, including discussion of positive developments in the proposed rule, areas we believe need further 
improvement, as well as additional considerations important to implementation but which may be 
beyond the scope of the rulemaking process. 
 
I. Positive developments in the LCRI  
The proposed rule changes put forward by EPA mark significant, positive improvements to the Lead and 
Copper Rule. We believe the following provisions, in particular, represent movement in the right 
direction and offer these comments and recommendations with a focus on the areas in which EPA is 
seeking input: 
 
The inclusion of both first- and fifth-liter samples in water testing is more comprehensive and 
should be conducted through sampling processes as well as after LSLR. 
By adopting the Michigan model requiring both first draw and fifth-liter sampling, the proposed LCRI will 
help ensure that testing captures water from both premise plumbing, and water that has been sitting in 
service lines. This is an improvement to both the 1991 LCR and the 2021 LCRR, each of which overlooked 
potential sources of lead in water.  
➢ We applaud EPA’s decision to adopt this sampling protocol, and to retain and strengthen the 
LCRR provision requiring ANSI certified point-of-use filtration devices following full or partial 
LSLR.4  
➢ We encourage EPA to require testing following full and partial service line replacement, not 
merely offer this service to customers.5  
 
The lower action level, reduced from 15 to 10 ppb, and a simplified rule are important steps. 
We support the LCRI provisions that reduce and simplify the lead action level, removing the confusing 
“trigger level” construct from LCRR of 2021.6 As well documented, there is no safe level of lead 
exposure. While reducing the action level from 15 ppb is a step in the right direction, 10 ppb is not 
sufficiently protective from a health standpoint, and we believe EPA’s own analysis suggests 5ppb is 
feasible, which we elaborate on in the following section.  
➢ While we recognize the practical challenges of lowering the action level, we encourage EPA to 
set an action level at ≤ 5ppb or as close to zero as possible, to the extent feasible.  
 
Increased transparency in LSL inventories and LSLR plans, and improved community 
education requirements are important developments. EPA should provide model language 
and materials to support implementation and incentivize CWS actions to meet broader policy 
goals. 
 
4 USEPA, Proposed Rule, Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI), 88 Fed. Reg. 84924 (proposed December 6, 
2023) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 141, 142) 
 
5 Ibid. 
6 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84902 (2023) 

 
 
 
 
3 of 17
 
We support the requirement for communities to complete initial service line material inventories, or 
“baseline inventories,” according to the original October 16, 2024 deadline, update their inventories 
regularly, and verify pipe materials.  
➢ While we broadly support the revisions to § 141.84, we would recommend that inventory 
information should be accessible to all residents online, regardless of system size, and updates 
should be regularly communicated. This could be accomplished by further revising §141.84 
(5)(ii) to specify that water systems of any size must make the publicly accessible inventory 
available online.7  
We were pleased to see that the LCRI requires more robust LSLR plans, including identification of state 
and local laws and water tariff agreements that affect the issue of access to service lines, defining which 
lines are “under control” of water systems and therefore subject to LSLR requirements under the LCRI.8 
We appreciate that EPA does not believe that it has explicit authority to dictate control or access to 
service lines and recognize the agency’s deferral to state and local law regarding the matter of 
ownership and cost-sharing.9 Our hope is that the identification of relevant legal barriers will offer an 
important road map for decision-makers and advocates in aligning laws and policies to support 
expanded access and swift, equitable LSLR.  
➢ EPA and its technical assistance (TA) provider partners should provide model language and 
policies that support expanded access to LSLs and thorough implementation of LCRI 
replacement goals. For example, EPA and TA providers could offer model ordinances employed 
in Newark, NJ and Benton Harbor, MI, enabling state statutes, and other best practices 
referenced in the LCRI rule.10 11 12 
➢ We are pleased to see EPA encourage customer-side replacement at no direct cost to customers 
and would encourage EPA to further incentivize this practice through provision of technical 
assistance, and guidance to state SRF administrators to prioritize principal forgiveness for this 
and other equity-focused financing and implementation strategies.13 
➢ Additionally, we appreciate that LSLR plans must be made publicly available by all water 
systems, however the requirement to post plans online should be extended to all communities, 
 
7 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84933 (2023) 
8 As described in section V.B.8. on the service line replacement plan. LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84920 (2023) 
9 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84923 (2023) 
10 City of Newark. (2019). Mandatory Replacement of Lead Service Line. Title XVI Health, Sanitation and Air 
Pollution. Chapter 16:23. Ordinance 6PSF–M, 9–18–2019. New Jersey. Retrieved from https://ecode360.com/ 
36709572. 
11 The State of New Jersey passed two laws facilitating full LSLR financially and with respect to private property 
access, as described in LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84926 (2023). State of New Jersey. (2020, January 9). Governor Murphy 
Signs Legislation Allowing Municipalities to Enter Properties to Perform Lead Service Line Replacements. Retrieved 
February 2, 2024, from https://www.nj.gov/ governor/ news/ news/ 562020/ approved/ 20200109d.shtml. 
 
12 In 2023, the state of Rhode Island passed LSLR legislation that includes equity provisions, including incentives for 
the Rhode Island Infrastructure Bank to prioritize allocation of funding for customer-side service line replacement, 
referenced in LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84927 (2023). State of Rhode Island. (2023). Lead Poisoning Prevention Act. 
General Assembly. H5007. Retrieved February 2, 2024, from https://legiscan.com/ RI/ bill/ H5007/ 2023. 
13 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84923 (2023) 

 
 
 
 
4 of 17
 
not only water systems serving 50,000 people or more.14 This would ensure that residents of 
small communities and people served by water systems of all types and scales benefit equitably 
from the LCRI advancements in transparent reporting. We believe that this is attainable and 
technologically feasible for systems of all sizes.  
 
In the same vein of transparency and public communication, we support the move toward health-based 
messaging and improved community outreach and education requirements, including in the case of 
action level exceedances (ALEs) or failure to meet replacement rates. We applaud the LCRI updates to 
EPA’s definition of “reasonable effort” to obtain property owner consent, including a minimum of four 
outreach attempts using at least two different methods.15 This should be paired with support, resources 
and model state and local laws that expand a water system’s access, which could limit the 
administrative costs and timeline associated with outreach efforts. 
➢ Public education and communication requirements should be strengthened to ensure even 
water systems in compliance with the LCR are regularly communicating health risks and best 
practices to their residents.  
➢ We appreciate EPA’s inclusion of updated, health-based language for use in public education 
materials in its proposed revisions to §141.85.16 To help water systems disseminate this 
message, EPA and EPA-funded TA providers should provide ready-to-use communications 
materials to ensure water systems of all sizes and degrees of communication capacity can 
effectively share information with the residents they serve.  
 
Expedited timeline for full LSLR within 10 years for most water systems.  
We appreciate that EPA’s proposal includes a strong emphasis on full LSL replacement, prohibiting 
partial replacement with few exceptions, and clarifying that only full replacement counts toward overall 
replacement rate. We are also pleased to see the ambitious target timeline for full, system wide LSLR 
within 10 years, which will apply to most water systems. It is essential that communities move swiftly to 
eliminate this public health threat and ensure that future generations of children can enjoy lead-free 
water.  
 
However, as further discussed in the next section, our hometown, Chicago, is one of a handful of cities 
that would be eligible for a significantly deferred replacement timeline under the current proposal. 
Under the LCRI, Chicago could be allowed more than five decades to remove all LSLs. Despite advances 
in LSLR know-how, new federal funding, and technical assistance, the LCRI would offer virtually no 
improvement on the existing requirement that Chicago replace all LSLs by 2027 under Illinois’ existing 
Lead Service Line and Notification Act of 2021. By allowing today’s feasibility analysis to dictate decades-
long deferral timelines, EPA misses the opportunity to advance more protective LSLR rules for 
Chicagoans and residents of other lead-burdened cities that would be eligible for deferred LSLR 
deadlines under the proposed LCRI. This leaves millions at risk unnecessarily and presents significant 
environmental justice and public health concerns.  
 
14 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84925 (2023) 
15 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84923 (2023) 
16 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85068 (2023) 

 
 
 
 
5 of 17
 
➢ EPA’s initial feasibility analysis and deferral eligibility thresholds should be viewed as a starting 
point, and the resulting replacement requirements for deferral-eligible communities should be 
treated as a minimum starting rate of replacement, subject to increase upon review by EPA. We 
recommend EPA conduct periodic reviews of the LCRI’s feasibility analysis regarding rate of 
replacement and alternate deadlines to incorporate new learnings and identify opportunities for 
accelerated replacement in deferral-eligible communities, or to delist water systems from the 
deferral-eligible category. We further elaborate on this in the following section. 
 
II. Provisions in need of further improvement 
While the proposed LCRI offers important improvements on the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
and the 1991 rule, there are several areas that require further attention and improvements to meet the 
policy goals of safeguarding public health from the threat of lead in drinking water. The proposed rule 
should be strengthened in the following areas: 
 
Testing and mitigation requirements for schools and childcare facilities must be expanded 
and improved.  
Regardless of building type – residential or commercial – testing should be required, not merely 
“offered” following lead service line replacement. This should be paired with education efforts, 
provision of lead-rated water filters, and aerator cleaning following replacement. For example, Elevate’s 
childcare programs follow the American Water Works Association guidelines, which include filtration 
and testing activities for a duration of six months post-replacement. The LCRI should close gaps in water 
testing requirements for childcare facilities: 
➢ EPA is seeking comment on whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or 
sample more frequently in schools and child care facilities.17 Water testing should be required at 
all cooking and drinking water sources within home- and facility-based childcares and schools, 
as opposed to only five at elementary schools and two sources at childcares.18 The presence of 
high lead levels can vary greatly from fixture to fixture and sampling only a few can result in 
missing the problematic outlets.  This is clearly demonstrated by the fact that when Chicago 
tested every cooking and drinking water source in its public elementary schools, only 2.9% of 
fixtures exceeded the 15ppb standard then utilized, but these were spread out amongst 34.6% 
of school buildings.19 Probabilistically, selecting only five fixtures to test would have missed most 
schools with a high-lead fixture. 
➢ Where the LCRI states that testing be “offered” to secondary schools, the language should be 
amended to “require” testing. While young children may be at greater risk, lead exposure is 
harmful from childhood through adolescence and adulthood. Furthermore, secondary schools 
also often serve as community hubs. Drinking water fixtures in these facilities often serve 
 
17 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84957 (2023) 
18 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84956 (2023) 
19 Maudlyne Ihejirika, “Latest CPS lead-testing results show 113 schools with high levels.” Chicago Sun Times. 
August 20, 2016. https://chicago.suntimes.com/2016/8/20/18345315/latest-cps-lead-testing-results-show-113-
schools-with-high-levels (accessed February 2, 2023) 

 
 
 
 
6 of 17
 
diverse populations, including expectant and breastfeeding mothers on staff or attending as 
students, representing a high vulnerability to the effects of lead.20   
➢ Water system representatives should visually inspect for the presence of an LSL when on site to 
perform testing at childcares and schools, if not already completed as part of inventory efforts. 
➢ Community water systems should provide information on state resources and requirements for 
testing and mitigation. This should be provided in addition to the “3Ts” guidance for reducing 
lead in drinking water. This should be provided to schools annually, not just during sampling at 
20% of facilities every year. 
➢ Testing waivers should not be allowed simply for having a filter in place. In our experience, it is 
common to find that filters have not been properly maintained or were never tested following 
installation. Water testing is a critical step in ensuring that filters are working as intended. 
➢ As the agency responsible for testing, community water systems should check school and 
childcare licensing lists at least annually, not only every 5 years.21 In Illinois, we see significant 
changes in the location of licensed childcare facilities from month to month. 
 
While the reduced action level of 10ppb is a step in the right direction, it is insufficient.  
Removing the confusing “trigger level” construct and reducing the lead action level from 15 to 10ppb 
are improvements in the proposed LCRI. However, 10ppb is not sufficiently protective from a public 
health perspective. As EPA acknowledges, including through the Maximum Contaminant Level Goal 
(MCLG) of zero parts per billion, there is no safe level of lead in water.22 Even low levels of lead in blood 
have been shown to negatively affect children’s intelligence, development, and behavioral patterns, and 
pose health risks to adults alike.  
 
Many have recommended a maximum contaminant level of 5ppb, and the American Academy of 
Pediatrics recommended an action level of 1ppb in schools. While we recognize the challenge of 
implementing an action level lower than 10ppb, we offer the following examples of where 5ppm or 
lower has been implemented:  
• 
The Illinois Department of Children and Family Services licensing standards hold Illinois child 
care providers to a standard of 2.01ppb based upon laboratory limits of quantification and 
schools are required to sent notifications of lead levels are detected above 5ppb.23 If lead is 
detected in child care facilities, providers are required to issue notifications regarding presence 
of lead, mitigation plans, and follow-up test results.24   
 
20 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84957 (2023) 
21 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84956 (2023) 
22 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84898 (2023) 
23 Illinois Department of Public Health, ”Lead in Water Testing at Schools and Childcare Facilities,“ 2024, 
https://dph.illinois.gov/topics-services/environmental-health-protection/lead-in-water/testing-schools-child-care-
facilities.html 
24 LeadCare Illinois, “Notification Requirements,“ 2024, https://leadcareillinois.org/notification-requirements/ 

 
 
 
 
7 of 17
 
• 
Maine and Vermont both require schools to achieve a level of 4 ppb.25 26 
• 
Washington DC requires schools to achieve 5 ppb.27 
EPA’s analysis of systems at or below alternative lead action levels show that 37% of systems with LSLs, 
regardless of corrosion control treatment (CCT) status, would be able to comply with a lead action level 
of 5ppb. By comparison, EPA estimates that 59-65% of systems would be able to comply with the 
proposed lead action level of 10ppb, as shown in Exhibit 4.28 We appreciate EPA’s attention to 
administrative and cost burdens associated with CCT and other requirements under various action level 
scenarios, including attention to potential disproportionate impact on small and medium sized 
communities. However, we would argue that public health concerns outweigh administrative burden, 
and that the potential burden associated with optimized CCT and other ALEs protocols can be more 
easily overcome throughout LCRI compliance, with progress toward LSLR shifting the action level 
compliance landscape over time in favor of a lower action level.   
➢ A truly health-based standard would be zero, and we support lowering the action level as close 
to zero as is practical, at a maximum of 5ppb. EPA should embrace the lower action level, and 
work with states to address administrative challenges faced by small and medium sized systems 
to support compliance.    
 
Reporting, enforcement, and response to action level exceedances (ALEs) should be strengthened. 
While the LCRI improves upon the required response to ALEs, EPA should strengthen the public 
notification provisions by requiring water systems to immediately report ALEs to customers, state 
agencies, and EPA. 
➢ EPA should consider working with states to stand up centralized web pages or online bulletins 
where ALE information can be made publicly available as quickly and transparently as possible 
for real-time tracking and accountability and to enhance accessibility.  
➢ Additionally, EPA should clarify that ANSI lead-rated filters must be provided or delivered, not 
simply “made available” in response to multiple ALEs. This is an important step in ensuring 
equitable access to filters, creates an opportunity for additional education and touchpoints with 
residents, and clarifies ambiguity around what constitutes “availability.”29   
As noted above, the LCRI also includes enhanced communication and education requirements in 
response to ALEs and failure to meet LSLR replacement rates.  
➢ EPA should work with states to ensure this language is easily accessible in ready-to-use formats 
(e.g. template emails, door hangers, phone scripts, social media posts, slides for use in town hall 
 
25 State of Maine, 10-144 Code of Maine Rules, Chapter 234, Section 4(A). 
https://www.maine.gov/sos/cec/rules/10/144/144c234.docx  
26 State of Vermont, 18 V.S.A. § 1242(1). https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/section/18/024A/01242 
27 District of Columbia Public Schools, Water Testing for Lead, December 2023, https://dcps.dc.gov/page/water-
testing-lead  
28 LCRI, 88 FR 84940 (2023) 
29 LCRI, 88 FR 85072 (2023) 

 
 
 
 
8 of 17
 
meetings, and others corresponding to the communications methods identified in the LCRI). This 
will help ensure water systems regardless of staff size and communications capacity can 
communicate effectively with their customers.30 This should include, at minimum, English and 
Spanish versions and information to help water systems access additional translation services to 
comply with the updated public notification language requirements.31 
➢ These resources should be included in technical assistance materials, including through EPA’s 
work with the Environmental Finance Centers, WaterTA, and Get the Lead Out initiatives. The 
development of model or template materials that can be easily modified or directly deployed by 
community water systems will help support consistent and thorough community outreach and 
mitigate inequities resulting from CWS capacity constraints. 
 
EPA must do more to accelerate full lead service line replacement by tightening up deferred 
deadlines for LSLR completion and incorporating new learning into updated feasibility 
analyses throughout LCRI implementation to accelerate LSLR in deferral-eligible communities.  
While we are sensitive to feasibility and affordability concerns, allowing deferred deadlines threatens to 
leave millions of US residents at increased risk of lead contamination and creates a system of unequal 
protection from this dangerous neurotoxin that disproportionately harms already overburdened 
communities. EPA states that it expects significant learning, market correction, and advancement in 
efficiencies throughout the implementation of the LCRI in the next decade. Offering significant 
extensions beyond the national 10-year target at the outset, before these advancements have had a 
chance to take root, is misguided.  
 
In the interest of equitable implementation, environmental justice, and public health, we urge EPA to 
tighten up the deferral criteria and deadlines, work with states to identify opportunities to accelerate 
the rate of LSLR, and direct resources to communities that face the constraints identified in the agency’s 
feasibility analysis to expedite action to replace all LSLs and protect all communities from lead 
contaminated drinking water. As it stands, the LCRI leaves residents served by the most lead-burdened 
water systems with less protection for unacceptably long periods of time. “EPA is proposing two 
eligibility criteria for systems to defer their service line replacement deadline past 10 years in 
accordance with a schedule that is feasible and prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects of 
lead to the extent feasible” (emphasis added):32 
• 
The first criterion would allow deferred replacement deadlines for systems with a high density 
of LSLs per household (>0.039) based on affordability concerns. According to EPA’s estimates, 
this would apply to some 1-4% of all U.S. water systems, or 720-2,178 community water 
systems.33  
 
30 LCRI, 88 FR 84954 (2023) 
31 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85068 (2023) 
32 LCRI, 88 FR 84913 (2023) 
33 USEPA Office of Water, “Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements,” 
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0709 (December 5, 2023): 16, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-
0801-0709 

 
 
 
 
9 of 17
 
• 
The second eligibility criterion for a deferred deadline would be extended to the 4-7 water 
systems that would be required to replace 10,000 LSLs or more per year under the LCRI’s 
proposed 10% replacement rate. EPA is seeking comment on whether the rate of 10,000 
LSLRs/year - which the agency deems “technically possible” and therefore “feasible” - should be 
lowered to 8,000.34 This suggests that a system like Chicago, IL, with (further discussed below), 
could have some 45.6 - 55.6 years under these scenarios, barring more aggressive state and 
local implementation timelines.35 In addition to Chicago, this proposed deferral criterion would 
grant extensions ranging from one to 41 years to an additional eighteen cities – in descending 
order: Houston, TX; Cleveland, OH; New York City, NY; the thirteen cities served by North Texas 
Metropolitan Water District; Detroit, MI; and Wichita, KS – serving some 17.4 million people 
collectively.36  
What EPA estimates to be feasible today should not dictate nor constrain our expectations of what is 
possible for the next one to five decades. EPA should conduct periodic evaluations and commit to 
working with states and deferral-eligible water systems to ratchet up target rates of replacement with 
clear accountability measures. EPA, state, and TA resources should be mobilized to support deferral-
eligible communities in accelerating the rate of LSLR to meet progressively increasing benchmarks while 
controlling costs to ratepayers. 
➢ EPA should commit to conducting a review of the feasibility analysis portions of the LCRI related 
to rate of replacement and deferred deadlines to incorporate new learnings, account for 
anticipated shifts in market conditions throughout implementation, and identify opportunities 
to accelerate the rate of LSLR in deferral-eligible communities or delist communities from the 
deferral category. This should be clarified in the proposed revisions to §142.16 regarding special 
primacy requirements.37  This should be paired with technical assistance to incentivize and 
support over-burdened water systems in reaching, sustaining, and exceeding more ambitious 
targets. 
o On the first deferral criterion, EPA should establish minimum performance requirements 
with a commitment to targeting support for communities with a high portion of LSLs to 
alleviate financial pressures and affordability concerns. This could be reflected in 
guidance to State Revolving Fund programs around project scoring criteria for these 
over-burdened communities and distribution of principal forgiveness.  
o On the second criterion, we would argue that current data and assumptions around 
what is technically feasibility are limited. Indeed, it is likely that we have never seen 
cities work faster than 10,000 LSLR/year because they’ve never been required to do so. 
 
34 LCRI, 88 FR 84914 (2023) 
35 USEPA Office of Water, “Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements,” 
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0709 (December 5, 2023): 15, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-
0801-0709 
36 Ibid. 
37 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85089 (2023) 

 
 
 
 
10 of 17
 
At this early stage, EPA should not select a static number as an upper limit of what it 
considers feasible and apply that to water systems for decades into the future. 
➢ Rather than setting an upper limit of feasibility for these lead-burdened communities as a basis 
for deferred deadlines, EPA should consider replacing long-term deferral deadlines at the point 
of rule promulgation with a minimum starting rate of replacement for overburdened water 
systems, that can be increased upon review to close the gap between deferral-eligible 
communities and the rest of U.S. water systems that are expected to eliminate all LSLs within 10 
years. While we appreciate the nod to this sort of flexibility in the LCRI by retaining the provision 
in the LCR and LCRR that states must set a faster rate where feasible, it is insufficient to leave it 
up to states to require water systems to move faster without additional analysis and guidance 
around feasibility, and targeted technical assistance from EPA.38 
➢ An initial review of the feasibility analysis should take place before the 10-year deadline, with 
additional reviews conducted periodically throughout the remainder of LSLR periods in deferral-
eligible communities. As EPA acknowledges, the list of communities on deferred deadlines will, 
in theory, shrink over time as water systems complete LSLR efforts, and more resources and 
precise analysis can be applied to further accelerate LSLR in the remaining, outlier water 
systems. 
 
Chicagoans deserve lead-free water now, not in 50 years. EPA should work with the city and 
State of Illinois to deliver on that promise and reconsider the feasibility of accelerating LSLR 
in the nation’s most lead-burdened city.  
Allowing Chicago 40 years or longer to complete LSLR is unacceptable. City leadership has already 
committed to a more aggressive rate of LSLR than the proposed LCRI would require. This is reflected in 
statements by the current and former mayoral administration, and recent action by the city council. EPA 
references Detroit’s commitment to replacing 10,000 LSLs per year as an indicator that the city believes 
this rate is feasible. The agency should similarly take Chicago at its word and set the bar higher. EPA 
should encourage Chicago to meet or exceed its ambitious goals, not set long-term deadlines – 
especially at this early stage when supporting data is limited – that immediately disincentivize the action 
that the city has already committed to. 
 
Under Mayor Lori Lightfoot, the City of Chicago launched its LSLR program in partnership with CDM 
Smith, a global engineering firm recognized for LSLR technical and program expertise. Released in April 
2021, the City of Chicago Lead Service Line Replacement Program Report details a 25-year timeframe for 
LSLR under an aggressive replacement scenario.39 With new Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) funding, 
new state and federal funding opportunities, and increased political will in the city since the 2021 
 
38 LCRI, 88 FR 84913 (2023) 
39 Chicago Department of Water Management, City of Chicago Lead Service Line Replacement Program Report, 
(Chicago: CDM Smith, 2021) https://www.dropbox.com/s/u46q0sgpzoux4v7/2021-04-
29%20Chicago%20LSLR%20Program%20Report%20with%20Appendices%20SML.pdf?dl=0 

 
 
 
 
11 of 17
 
launch, there is no reason why Chicago should pursue LSLR at anything less than the most aggressive 
scenario.   
This commitment is also reflected by the sitting mayor. In the 2023 Mayoral Transition Report, Mayor 
Brandon Johnson’s team set an ambitious target to accelerate the rate of LSLR in Chicago up to 14,000 
per year within the term, with a goal of replacing 40,000 LSLs by 2027: “To achieve 40k LSLRs by end of 
term: replace 8k by end of year 2024, 10K in 2025, 12K in 2026, and 14K by end of  2027.”40 The year 
2027 marks both the end of the mayoral term and the estimated LCRI compliance timeline given the 
three-year waiting period after promulgation, which is expected by fall of 2024. If Chicago were to 
continue on this track, scaling up to and sustaining 16,000-18,000 LSLs replaced annually beginning in 
2028, the city would be able to replace all 400,000 LSLs within 20 years as compared to 50+ years under 
the proposed alternate annual replacement threshold. Federal action, including the LCRI, should push 
Chicago, the nation’s most lead-burdened drinking water system, to meet or exceed these targets, not 
set the bar lower than existing commitments.  
   
Year 
# of LSLs Replaced 
2024 
8,000 
2025 
10,000 
2026 
12,000 
2027 
14,000 
TOTAL (end of current 
term) 
44,000 
 
 
2028 (budget year) 
≥16,000 
 
Chicago’s ongoing commitment to pursuing aggressive LSLR is evident in recent city council action, 
including a subject matter hearing on December 6, 2023, an ordinance introduced to double down on 
LSLR program efforts, and a joint comment letter on the LCRI from nearly half of Chicago’s aldermen 
including the chairs of the Committee on Economic, Capital and Technology Development and 
Committee on Environmental Protection and Energy. In the December 2023 subject matter hearing, just 
days after the release of the proposed LCRI, City Council engaged subject matter experts and key leaders 
to identify opportunities to accelerate LSLR, including Jill Jaworski; City of Chicago CFO, Commissioner 
 
40 Chicago for the People, Building Bridges and Growing the Soul of Chicago: A Blueprint for Creating a More Just 
and Vibrant City for All (Chicago: Chicago for the People, 2023), pp. 77-79, 
https://www.chicago.gov/city/en/depts/mayor/supp_info/transition-report.html 

 
 
 
 
12 of 17
 
Andrea Cheng P.h.D., Department of Water Management; Dr. Janna Kerins, Medical Director of 
Environmental Health, Department of Public Health; as well as a panel of labor and industry leaders.41 
Newly introduced ordinances, including one focused on bonding and municipal finance options for LSLR 
and another designed to renew Chicago’s LSLR program efforts, both suggest Chicago is gearing up to 
meet its lead-in-water challenge.  
 
Further, recent changes at the state level may lead to additional resources for the City of Chicago, while 
city leaders continue to pursue equitable funding from the Public Water Supply Loan Program, Illinois’ 
Drinking Water SRF, to match the proportion of the city’s lead burden. Specifically, 35 Illinois 
Administrative Code Part 663, was adopted as of January 2024.42 The new rule removes population caps 
for principal forgiveness eligibility, updates the basis for principal forgiveness distribution, and changes 
project scoring criteria to include multiple factors, and creates scores based on census tracts rather than 
the entire CWS footprint. An analysis of how this may impact the City of Chicago shows that the city has 
the highest census tract scores in the state, which city leaders are optimistic would unlock new principal 
forgiveness under state SRF policy.43 EPA’s recent $336 million loan to Chicago under the Water 
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act (WIFIA) will help remove some 30,000 lead pipes.44 This, 
paired with further city, state, and federal action, including loans and principal forgiveness, will go a long 
way toward ramping up the pace of LSLR in Chicago. 
 
Chicago is an outlier when it comes to LSLR, but as we have argued above, we can and should expect 
that Chicago can do better than the LCRI currently outlines. EPA acknowledges that over the next 
decade, further efficiencies will be achieved, and the upper limit of what is feasible may shift. Rather 
than leaving it in the hands of the state, EPA should periodically review its feasibility analysis and employ 
tools to help Chicago to do better. EPA should certainly not set a longer deadline than those already 
 
41 Chicago City Council, Joint Committee on Economic, Capital, and Technology Development and Environmental 
Protection and Energy; Subject matter hearing regarding lead service line replacement programs, December 6, 
2023, https://vimeo.com/showcase/8928494/video/891573839 
42 State of Illinois, 35 Illinois Administrative Code Part 663, Procedures for Issuing Loans from the Public Water 
Supply Loan Program to Provide Funding for Lead Service Line Replacement (2024) 
https://www.ilga.gov/commission/jcar/SecondNotices/350663-2311879r02.pdf 
  
43 City of Chicago Lead Service Line Replacement Program Overview, Hearing on Lead Service Line Replacement, 
Before the Joint Committee on Economic, Capital, and Technology Development and Environmental Protection and 
Energy, Chicago City Council (December 6, 2023) (presentation by Andrea Cheng, Commissioner, Chicago 
Department of Water Management), pp. 19-22, https://drive.google.com/file/d/1b6-
2_G3KPapri2PUwPmV64FOdn_X6zGF/view?usp=sharing 
44 US EPA, Biden-Harris Administration Announces $336 Million Loan to Chicago to Help Remove 30,000 Lead Pipes 
Across the City, November 3, 2023, https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/biden-harris-administration-announces-
336-million-loan-chicago-help-remove-30000-lead 
 

 
 
 
 
13 of 17
 
committed to. It should, instead, be ratcheting that down, requiring more rapid action. We offer the 
following considerations based on the LCRI as it stands: 
• 
In the LCRI, EPA distinguishes between emergency and planned, “proactive” LSLR, and is 
“seeking additional data on service line replacement rates achieved by systems in proactive 
programs.”45 We expect this type of information to become available as water systems begin to 
comply with the LCRI. Chicago’s Department of Water Management already reports an 
estimated 3,500-5,000 emergency repairs per year, in response to which the utility provides full 
LSLR.46 If EPA’s current assumption of 10,000 LSLRs per year as the upper limit of feasibility were 
clarified to only include planned, “proactive” LSLR, Chicago’s ability to achieve 16,000-18,000 
LSLRs per year by 2028 appears feasible under EPA’s existing feasibility logic and Chicago’s 
current plans to ramp up LSLR before the LCRI 2027 compliance date. 
• 
Throughout the LCRI and BIL implementation guidance, EPA repeatedly attempts to right-size 
expectations and assistance based on system size and capacity. We should be able to expect 
more from large systems like Chicago. EPA notes Newark’s top rate of LSLR, up to 100 lines/day 
for 4-5 days per week. EPA projects out that if Newark’s rate “had been maintained for 20 weeks 
out of the year, it would have resulted in 8,000-12,000 replacements per year.”47 EPA argues 
that this could not serve as a standard for the rest of the country because it is an outlier and 
received significant federal support, the likes of which could not be widely guaranteed 
throughout LCRI implementation.48 But with more LSLs than any other U.S. city, Chicago is also 
an outlier. We should be able to call on state and federal agencies to help accelerate LSLR and 
improve upon what is currently considered feasible. What’s more, Chicago’s Department of 
Water Management conducts work year-round, reporting replacements every month, with 
significant proportions of non-emergency replacements happening into December and in early 
spring.49 This suggests a construction calendar closer to 40 weeks, which would nearly double 
EPA‘s projection of 8,000-12,000 LSLR/year being technically possible based on Newark‘s data, 
again consistent with a rate of LSLR more than 16,000 per year in Chicago.  
Illinois was heralded as a leader when it became one of the first states to legislate LSLR through the Lead 
Service Line Replacement and Notification Act of 2021, which also means Illinois communities have a 
 
45 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84913 (2023) 
46 Chicago Department of Water Management, City of Chicago Lead Service Line Replacement Program Report, 
(Chicago: CDM Smith, 2021) https://www.dropbox.com/s/u46q0sgpzoux4v7/2021-04-
29%20Chicago%20LSLR%20Program%20Report%20with%20Appendices%20SML.pdf?dl=0 
47 USEPA Office of Water, “Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements,” 
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0709 (December 5, 2023): 14, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-
0801-0709 
48 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84914 (2023) 
49 City of Chicago Lead Service Line Replacement Program Overview, Hearing on Lead Service Line Replacement, 
Before the Joint Committee on Economic, Capital, and Technology Development and Environmental Protection and 
Energy, Chicago City Council (December 6, 2023) (presentation by Andrea Cheng, Commissioner, Chicago 
Department of Water Management), pp. 11, https://drive.google.com/file/d/1b6-
2_G3KPapri2PUwPmV64FOdn_X6zGF/view?usp=sharing 

 
 
 
 
14 of 17
 
head start. That was before BIL funding and new federal tools were made available, and still the state 
law would require a faster replacement timeline for Chicago than the carveouts in the proposed LCRI.  
EPA should push cities like Chicago to do more, not less – to move faster, not slower – to protect public 
health, and back up that commitment with the tools, technical assistance, and resources to get the job 
done. Why start with conservative limits that prolong Chicagoan’s exposure to lead at the outset? 
 
EPA should close loopholes by clarifying language about service lines “under the control” of 
water systems and requiring full LSLR, at no direct cost to residents.  
We appreciate that the proposed LCRI intends to require water systems to conduct full LSLR regardless 
of property ownership, and that the LCRI would only allow full LSLR to count toward a water system’s 
overall replacement rate. However, allowing exemptions where systems claim that they do not “control” 
or do not have “access to” some portion of the service lines creates a major loophole.50 Water shutoff 
policies, the management and treatment of water supply, and local codes that dictate service line 
material all indicate that the entire lead service line is under control of the water system regardless of 
whether the soil around or above it is privately or publicly owned.  
 
Wherever possible, EPA should reject the practice of differentiating between public and private “sides” 
of a service line as a condition of responsibility for replacement, and ensure that residents do not bear 
the direct cost of LSLR. There are inherent inequities baked into the public-private construct, which the 
2021 LCRR attempted to address by requiring LSLR regardless of ownership, but which is left ambiguous 
in the proposed LCRI.51  
➢ EPA should close this loophole by amending the definition of service line to clarify that service 
lines may be owned by the water system, owned by the property owner, or both. We support 
further strengthening provisions regarding mandatory full service line replacement, as 
recommended by Neltner (2024), to affirmatively clarify criteria for determining access to 
conduct full LSLR.52 
➢ As stated above, in part I. regarding LSLR plans, EPA should provide guidance and model 
legislative language for passing or amending laws to reduce barriers to accessing LSLs as 
necessary to complete thorough, full LSLR at no direct cost to residents. This technical assistance 
and education should be provided to a range of stakeholders, including local NGOs and local TA 
providers, community water systems, and state and local decision makers.  
On the issue of cost-sharing, EPA should push to the extent of its authority to shield residents from 
direct cost of LSLR. Too often, residents are stuck paying for mistakes or outright negligence of water 
system decision makers. For example, the Chicago Municipal Code required lead service lines until it was 
federally banned in 1986, well past the point of scientific consensus that the use of lead in drinking 
 
50 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84920 (2023) 
51 Tom Neltner, ”Lead in Water: Critical Ambiguity in EPA’s Proposed Lead and Copper Rule,“ Unleaded Kids, 
January 29, 2024, https://unleadedkids.org/lead-in-water-critical-ambiguity-in-epas-proposed-lead-and-copper-
rule/2024/01/29/  
52 Ibid. 

 
 
 
 
15 of 17
 
water poses significant health risks. Adding insult to injury, contractor quotes put the cost of LSLR for 
Chicago homeowners between $16,000 and $25,000. Requiring residents to pay for LSLR is 
fundamentally unfair, violates principles of environmental justice, and disincentivizes action to remove 
LSLs.   
➢ The provision of safe, clean, affordable drinking water is a clear case of public purpose, as is the 
equitable implementation of programs to remove harmful lead infrastructure from U.S. drinking 
water systems. EPA should examine its authority and state action under the Public Purpose 
Doctrine to require water systems to address the full service line, including any portion thar runs 
through private property, at no direct cost to customers.  
➢ If and where residents are required to directly pay for LSLR and states do not act to prevent 
direct cost-sharing, EPA should work with states and other stakeholders to audit implications for 
participation in LSLR and examine such LSLR programs from an environmental justice 
perspective, including screening for civil rights violations.  
➢ Wherever possible, incentives and prioritization should be given to promote water systems’ 
assumption of responsibility for the full service line, as we have seen in Newark, NJ, Benton 
Harbor, MI, and other communities that have embraced this best practice. This could, for 
example, be included in guidance to states regarding the treatment of LSLR projects in State 
Revolving Fund scoring criteria or distribution of principal forgiveness.  
 
EPA should clarify acceptable materials for use in LSLR, and responsible management of post-
consumer waste through the process.  
EPA should disallow the use of plastics in pipe replacement and ensure safe storage, disposal, or reuse 
of lead materials. Ensuring replacement material is safe – and for service lines of the size for which lead 
was used, that means using copper – is essential. Otherwise, we could soon be facing a similar service 
line safety issue with tremendous public health and financial costs once again. Independent researchers 
have noted a variety of health concerns about plastic water pipes, including the leaching of plastic 
additives into drinking water, the increased permeation of ground contamination into the pipes, and 
increased risk to both the water and potentially first responders in the event of fires or excess heat.53 
Material scientists have also questioned the long-term durability of plastic piping materials, especially in 
comparison to copper.  
While plastic pipes have been certified to various standards, these standards are not comprehensive 
enough to address the health concerns that have been raised.  Furthermore, while copper pipes do 
present some potential health and leaching risks, our long experience with this material means we have 
a strong understanding of these risks and how to effectively address them. The same cannot be said 
about newer plastic materials for which practical experience and comprehensive research is limited.   
 
53 As reported by Robin Lloyd, ”Replacing Lead Water Pipes with Plastic Could Raise New Safety Issues,” Scientific 
American, August 16, 2022, https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/replacing-lead-water-pipes-with-plastic-
could-raise-new-safety-issues/ 
 

 
 
 
 
16 of 17
 
➢ Replacing lead with plastic has a significant risk of being a regrettable substitution and EPA 
should use its authority and influence to ensure only the safest and most well-studied materials 
are utilized. The cost of materials is small relative to the cost of service line replacement and 
should not be a barrier to choosing the most durable, proven, and safest material.  
➢ EPA should also issue guidance with clear requirements on how to handle lead pipe materials 
once old service lines are decommissioned.  As the Agency recognizes, there is no safe level of 
lead exposure, and therefore the old lead service line is a potential hazard.  Whenever feasible, 
the decommissioned service line should be fully removed and sent to a domestic recycling 
facility which offers additional assurances regarding safe handling and maintains some degree of 
control over lead materials under EPA’s purview.   
➢ We recognize that the removal of the old service line, especially when trenchless replacement 
techniques are utilized, may be difficult or economically impractical. In such cases, the agency 
should require the utility to document and preserve documentation as to the existence and 
location of the decommissioned lead line and ensure the property owner is also made aware 
that the decommissioner line remains as a potential hazard. 
 
 
III. Additional considerations 
As stated, we support EPA action to strengthen the Lead and Copper Rule, and we are grateful for the 
opportunity to comment on the proposed LCRI. In addition to the comments on the proposed changes 
offered here, we would like to draw attention to several attendant issues associated with the successful 
implementation of LSLR nationwide:  
 
Dovetailing LCRI implementation with ongoing technical assistance (TA) efforts 
EPA is already engaged in technical assistance efforts through BIL implementation, support for 
Environmental Finance Centers (EFCs), Get the Lead Out (GLO), the WaterTA initiative and other 
activities. We are pleased to see these efforts come together in a “whole of government” approach to 
mitigate the threat of lead in drinking water. We offer the following considerations to support successful 
implementation of LCRI:  
➢ EPA should work with TA providers, states, and regional actors to encourage and coordinate 
resource sharing across communities that may compete for access to the same supplies, 
resources, and labor pool as they work to comply with the LCRI. 
➢ TA and template communications materials should be provided to support water systems in 
effectively engaging the communities they serve and securing resident participation and 
cooperation in inventorying, testing, and LSLR strategies. 
➢ As stated earlier, EPA and TA providers should be prepared to offer model policies to support 
local implementation efforts, including local ordinances or statutory language that may help 
water systems in overcoming barriers to accessing properties served by LSLs.  
➢ EPA should work with partner agencies at the state level to identify capacity needs to support 
monitoring, enforcement, and provision of TA related to LCRI compliance. This should include an 
audit of state capacity to effectively implement the associated funding and financing tools that 

 
 
 
 
17 of 17
 
EPA notes as supporting LSLR nationwide: Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation 
(WIIN) funding, Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act (WIFIA), Drinking Water State 
Revolving Fund (DWSRF), and others. To the extent feasible, this assessment should be made 
publicly available.  
 
Prioritizing water affordability in LSLR funding and financing strategies 
In the LCRI, EPA identifies several federal resources available to support lead testing and LSLR. These 
include WIIN, WIFIA, DWSRF and others. Additional support may be available to align federal resources 
to support LSLR and LCRI compliance, including opportunities available through other agencies such as 
Community Development Block Grants. While we applaud existing efforts to provide resources to 
communities most in need, we would like to see a clear commitment to water affordability in the 
assessment of water system financial capacity by EPA and TA providers. 
➢ Whether through the EFCs or other channels, water systems should be directed to resources 
that can support local water affordability efforts and the development of customer assistance 
programs (CAPs). While we have significant work to do to remove lead from community water 
systems – and address a range of other pressing clean water and drinking water infrastructure 
needs – these efforts must be paired with water affordability and assistance measures.  
--- --- 
We thank EPA for its efforts to protect public health and advancing important, actionable provisions in 
the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvement.  If we can provide additional information or 
clarification, please do not hesitate to contact Anna-Lisa Gonzales Castle, Director of Water Policy, at 
anna-lisa.castle@elevatenp.org 
 
 
 
ElevateNP.org | 773-269-4037 
322 S. Green Street, Suite 300 | Chicago, IL 60607

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0968 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 2, 2024
RE: Final Lead and Copper Rule Must Prevent Lead in Drinking Water
CleanEarth4Kids.org urges the EPA to strengthen the proposed Lead & Copper Rule
Improvements (LCRI) to protect human health and especially children from lead. As
many as 12 million lead service lines threaten the drinking water of over 20 million
people.1
We ask for the following improvements and additions to the LCRI.
●
Require all water utilities to fully replace all lead service lines within 10 years
with no exceptions at no cost to consumers. This is necessary to protect
renters and low-income homeowners.
●
Set a maximum contaminant level (MCL) at all taps TO no higher than 5 ppb
(parts per billion) as done in Canada and the European Union.23
●
Require immediate electronic test results by water utilities to a publicly
accessible database shared by the EPA and state health departments.
●
Require water utilities to test for lead from each fountain and drinking/cooking
water source in schools and childcare centers at least once every 6 months.
Any tap exceeding 5 ppb must be shut off immediately with parents and
guardians notified
●
Implement mandatory lead testing for all children at 9-12 months, 24 months
and 3 years regardless of their participation in publicly funded programs.
Require lead testing as a requirement for admission to daycare, preschool,
kindergarten, elementary and middle school to provide early detection.
There Is No Safe Level of Lead
Exposure to lead can seriously harm a child’s health, including damage to the brain
and nervous system, slowed growth and development, learning and behavior
problems, as well as hearing and speech problems.4
4 https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/features/leadpoisoning/index.html
3 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2020/2184/oj
2 https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada-sets-new-guideline-for-lead-in-drinking-water.html
1 https://www.nrdc.org/resources/lead-pipes-are-widespread-and-used-every-state
1

There is no safe level of exposure to lead according to the World Health Organization,5
Centers for Disease Control6 and the American Academy of Pediatrics.7 Lead is
especially toxic to children and unborn babies.8 Lead damages children’s brains and
nervous systems, lowers IQ, causes behavior problems, and it is linked to higher
rates of suspension and detention along with lower reading and math test scores.9,10
Most health impacts from lead exposure are lifelong and irreversible.
EPA data shows minority and low-income populations have a higher risk of lead
exposure in drinking water.11 Lead poisoning disproportionately affects communities
of color,12 with Black children having the highest concentration of lead in their blood.
According to a 2021 study, over 170 million Americans are exposed to harmful levels
of lead as children.13
Lead can harm children by damaging their brain, nervous system, delay growth and
development, and hearing and speech issues.14
Please Take Additional Actions to Stop Sources of Lead
CleanEarth4Kids.org asks the EPA to take additional actions to protect children’s
health, public health, wildlife, water, soil and our environment from toxic lead.
Eliminate and Regulate Lead in Plastics
Lead is added to plastics like pacifiers, teethers, and cups including toys.15,16 Lead
dust is released when plastics are exposed to sunlight, air, and detergent or when
recycled/destroyed.17 Lead in items like teethers, pacifiers, sippy cups18, dishes,
utensils, children's toys, jewelry, clothing19, baby food or any products used or
borrowed by children must be stopped.20
Stop Lead in Consumer Goods
Lead and other heavy metals are also found in various children’s toys, products and
playground surfaces, including synthetic turf and crumb rubber infill.21,22 Children,
birds and wildlife can be harmed by ingesting the plastic blades of grass and infill.23
23 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3278598/
22 https://www.ecocenter.org/new-test-results-show-elevated-lead-rubber-shred-playground-washington-dc
21 https://static1.squarespace.com/static/1578881756966/CDC+2008+-+Lead+Advisory+in+Turf.pdf
20 https://www.healthybabyfood.org/sites/healthybabyfoods.org/files/2022-08/StoreVsHomemade_2022.pdf
19 https://www.usatoday.com//2022/12/02/bentex-kids-clothing-recall-lead-poisoning/
18 https://www.ewg.org/news-insights/news-release/2022/sippy-cups-and-bottles-recalled-due-lead-poisoning
17 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160412021002476
16 https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/features/leadintoys/index.html
15 https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/consumer-products.htm
14 https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/features/leadpoisoning/index.html
13 https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.2118631119
12 https://www.healthline.com/health/lead-poisoning-black-communities
11 https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/watered-down-justice-report.pdf
10 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4387706/
9 https://www.nber.org/papers/w23392
8 https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/health-effects.htm
7 https://www.aap.org/en-us/advocacy-and-policy/aap-health-initiatives/lead-exposure/Pages/default.aspx
6 https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/faqs/lead-faqs.htm
5 https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/lead-poisoning-and-health
2

Lead must not be allowed in consumer goods as children are commonly given party
favors and other items meant for adults. For example, over 60% of Mardi Gras beads
were found to contain over 100 ppm of lead and other toxins.24 25 million pounds of
these beads are used in New Orleans every year, polluting our waterways and soil.25
Additionally, along with regulations prohibiting the sale of lead containing products,
the public must be alerted that lead may be found in pottery and ceramics, including
glazes and coloring along with folk remedies.26,27
Stop the Sale, Use and Storage of Lead in Aviation Fuel
According to the FAA, leaded aviation fuel (AVGAS) is used in almost 170,000
piston-engine planes & helicopters (general aviation) in over 20,000 airports in the
US.28 Less than 1/4% of Americans are pilots for these aircraft. These planes and
helicopters cause 70% of the lead pollution in our air!29 Over 5 million people,
including over 360,000 children under the age of 5, live near at least one airport
where these aircraft fly.30
Multiple studies have shown that children who live near these airports have higher
levels of lead in their blood and most high lead emission airports are in communities
of color.31
According to EPA data, 22 of the 100 most lead polluting airports are in California.
Unleaded AVGAS is now available for all general aviation. California must take action
to stop the sale, storage and use of leaded aviation fuel.32
Lead in Second and Third Hand Tobacco Smoke
Lead is in second and third hand smoke. Secondhand smoke causes higher blood
levels in children33 and adults34 and lead in house dust is likely from thirdhand
smoke.35 California must implement strong measures to protect children from lead
exposure due to tobacco smoke. Blood lead levels were 14% higher in children living
with 1 smoker and 24% living with 2 or more smokers.36 This highlights the
importance of addressing not only direct sources of lead exposure, but also indirect
sources such as second and third hand smoke.
36 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3489360/
35 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0946672X20302212
34 https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2013/13_0056.htm
33 https://journals.lww.com/epidem/Second_hand_Smoke_Exposure_and_Blood_Lead_Levels.15.aspx
32 https://earthjustice.org/wp-content/uploads/top100leadpollutingairports_2021-08-23.pdf
31 https://news.sccgov.org/county-santa-clara-finds-increased-lead-levels-children-living-near
30 http://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF.cgi/P100YG4A.PDF-Dockey=P100YG4A.PDF
29 https://earthjustice.org/news/press/2022/epa-proposes-endangerment-finding-of-leaded-aviation-gasoline
28 http://www.faa.gov/news/fact_sheets/news_story.cfm-newsId=14754
27 https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/CCDPHP/CLPPB-FolkRemedies(English).pdf
26 https://www.consumerreports.org/lead/why-you-should-test-your-vintage-or-imported-dishes-for-lead/
25 https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/toxic-truth-mardi-gras-beads-180962431/
24 https://www.ecocenter.org/sites/default/files/BeadReport2013_lowres.pdf
3

Protect Children From Lead
CleanEarth4Kids.org urges the EPA to take strong action to improve the proposed
Lead & Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). There is no safe level of lead and we must
all work together to protect children’s health and future.
Sincerely,
Suzanne Hume
Educational Director and Founder
S@CleanEarth4Kids.org
(760) 518-2776
CleanEarth4Kids.org
CleanEarth4Kids.org works to protect children’s health & future, public health, and the health and
safety of communities, workers, and indigenous peoples globally and reminds all that clean air, water,
a livable future, and access to nature are human rights. Streams, rivers, oceans, public lands, forests,
trees, wildlife, ecosystems, climate, soils, and organic gardens must be protected. Access to healthy
safe food, playgrounds, schools, homes, communities, cities and public lands- without toxic pesticides,
chemicals, plastics, lead, heavy metals and pollution- is essential for life.
At the heart of CleanEarth4Kids.org: environmental protection, children’s health and future, public
health, environmental, racial, social and climate justice, education and JEDI (Justice, Equity,
Diversity & Inclusion). CleanEarth4Kids.org works to stop toxic chemicals, PFAS, pesticides, lead and
heavy metals, plastics and microplastics, toxic toys and products, synthetic turf, PIP (Pour In Place
Playgrounds), fossil fuels, pollution, environmental destruction, degradation and injustice and works
to uphold human rights and justice.
4

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1342 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
10320 Litle Patuxent Parkway, Suite 200    Columbia, MD 21044 
410.992.0712 (p)    443.539.4150 (f) 
www.nchh.org    @NCHH    facebook.com/HealthyHousing 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
Re: Comments on EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
Submited online via docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
 
To Whom It May Concern: 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this proposed rule. 
The mission of the NaƟonal Center for Healthy Housing (NCHH) is to secure healthy homes for all. NCHH 
is a naƟonal technical and scienƟﬁc nonproﬁt organizaƟon dedicated to developing and promoƟng 
pracƟcal measures to protect children from residenƟal environmental hazards, including lead poisoning, 
while preserving aﬀordable housing. NCHH develops scienƟﬁcally valid and pracƟcal strategies to make 
homes safe from hazards, to alert low-income families about housing-related health risks, and to help 
them protect their children. 
 
NCHH strongly supports and appreciates EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). The 
changes outlined by EPA would be a signiﬁcant improvement on the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule 
Revisions (LCRR), are responsive to advocate concerns about and since the LCRR, and would pave the 
way to removing all lead service lines (LSLs) in the U.S. by ten years aŌer the compliance deadline.  
The keystone change in the LCRI, and the one we are most excited to see, is the requirement that all 
water systems move to replace all of their LSLs within ten years. In the LCRR, replacement of LSLs was 
only included as a last resort and triggered when water systems exceeded the acƟon level. The LCRI 
decouples the acƟon level – sƟll an important measure for understanding risk to residents and for 
guiding corrosion control and public noƟﬁcaƟon measures – from the replacement requirements. This is 
in line with our understanding that there is no safe level of lead exposure, that even low levels of lead 
exposure can cause harm, and that the best way to prevent childhood lead exposure is to remove 
sources of lead in our homes and environments, including our drinking water. We applaud EPA for 
aﬃrming this approach in the LCRI.  
In addiƟon to the LSL replacement requirement, we are supporƟve of many of the other elements in 
the LCRI, including but not limited to: 
• 
As noted in the proposed rule, this is the ﬁrst Ɵme EPA has included the following esƟmates 
when calculaƟng the health beneﬁts of addressing lead exposure: 
o Avoided cases of ADHD  
o Avoided cases of low birth weight 
o Avoided deaths due to cardiovascular disease. 
Including all of these outcomes, as well as IQ beneﬁts, helps EPA and advocates capture some of 
the outsized posiƟve beneﬁts that will result from compliance with the LCRI. EPA esƟmates that 

10320 Litle Patuxent Parkway, Suite 200    Columbia, MD 21044 
410.992.0712 (p)    443.539.4150 (f) 
www.nchh.org    @NCHH    facebook.com/HealthyHousing 
implemenƟng the LCRI will result in beneﬁts of between $20.2 billion-$47 billion a year (at a 
three percent discount rate); notably, the beneﬁts from just implementaƟon of the LCRR (taken 
as the baseline in this analysis) are only $2.8 billion-$12.2 billion a year, and the large increment 
between the two further demonstrates how the LCRI will be a signiﬁcant improvement over the 
LCRR in terms of boosƟng public health. 
 
We are addiƟonally appreciaƟve of EPA’s demonstraƟon of these societal beneﬁts because the 
models developed and deployed in this rulemaking could also support eﬀorts to address other 
sources of lead exposure at other federal, state, and local agencies.  
 
• 
In recogniƟon of the work done by communiƟes to sample water at schools and childcares using 
funding from EPA’s WIIN grants, the proposed rule allows states to count sampling work 
completed since January 1, 2021 towards requirements in the LCRI. We support this inclusion as 
a way to avoid duplicaƟng eﬀorts and help states and communiƟes implement the LCRI 
requirements eﬃciently. 
 
• 
The LCRR requirements will go into eﬀect October 16, 2024. If EPA publishes the ﬁnal version of 
the LCRI in October 2024 as planned, this means that water systems will have to begin working 
towards compliance with the LCRI just as they are required to be in compliance with the LCRR. 
Under the anƟ-backsliding analysis, EPA is proposing that water systems to transiƟon directly 
from compliance under the LCR (i.e. the current requirements unƟl October 2024) to compliance 
with the LCRI, bypassing the need to comply with many of the elements LCRR for a relaƟvely 
short period of Ɵme. However, the 2024 compliance date for the inventory and noƟﬁcaƟon 
requirements under the LCRR will remain in place. We support this approach because it 
prioriƟzes the more health-protecƟve standards under the LCRI while maintaining the inventory 
and noƟﬁcaƟon requirements, two important elements of the LCRR (and, in the case of 
inventories, something that water systems have begun working on and that many states and 
communiƟes have allocated federal funds towards over the past few years). 
 
• 
As in the LCRR, the LCRI requires water systems to produce a lead service line replacement plan. 
The LCRI adds the requirement for the replacement plan to be made publicly available. We 
support this inclusion as it will provide a way for community members and partners to engage in 
and understand the water system’s plan and goals, and could also provide an avenue for 
connecƟon to other local and state policies to support equitable LSL replacement, especially 
because the LCRI also requires water systems to include the follow elements in the plan: 
o A prioriƟzaƟon strategy (see below) 
o A funding strategy 
o A strategy to achieve LSL replacement at rental properƟes 
o IdenƟﬁcaƟon of potenƟal barriers in local ordinances, water service agreements, and 
state laws. 
 
• 
The LCRI strengthens the requirements regarding when water systems must noƟfy customers 
about the results of water sampling and lead acƟon level exceedances, and also adds to the 

10320 Litle Patuxent Parkway, Suite 200    Columbia, MD 21044 
410.992.0712 (p)    443.539.4150 (f) 
www.nchh.org    @NCHH    facebook.com/HealthyHousing 
requirements for noƟﬁcaƟon content. We support these changes as they will result in more 
informaƟve and transparent noƟces to customers. Some of these changes include: 
o NoƟces must be provided to all addresses served by the water system, in addiƟon to all 
bill-paying customers. This will help ensure that informaƟon reaches renters. 
o Sampling results must be given to all customers who had a tap sampled no later than 
three days aŌer results are received, instead of just customers whose tap sample 
exceeded the acƟon level. 
o EPA’s required language about the health eﬀects of lead has been revised to provide 
more clarity and speciﬁcally state that there is no safe level of lead in drinking water. The 
language also directs residents to contact a health provider for more informaƟon on 
health risks from lead exposure. Water systems are also required to provide contact 
informaƟon for the state and/or local health department. 
 
To ensure the LCRI can be most fully and eﬀecƟvely implemented, we recommend that EPA consider 
the following changes to further strengthen the LCRI: 
• 
EPA should amend the deﬁniƟon of “service line” to read: 
o Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a porƟon of pipe which 
connects the water main to the building inlet. Where a building is not present, the 
service line connects the water main to the outlet. A service line may be owned by the 
water system, owned by the property owner, or both. 
This will ensure that the deﬁniƟons in 40 C.F.R § 141.2 make it clear that a service line includes 
both the porƟon of the line owned by the property owner as well as the water system. For more 
details on the necessity of this change, please see comments submited by Unleaded Kids. 
 
• 
EPA should provide criteria to establish when a water system has access to a LSL. The rules 
outlined in the LCRI require water systems to do full LSL replacement when they “control” the 
service line, with “control” deﬁned as “access.” We support EPA’s intent to require full LSL 
replacement, including when the property owner technically owns the side of the service line on 
private property. However, in order to make this requirement eﬀecƟve, EPA needs to remove 
ambiguity and be clear about what “access” means. Providing a criteria and process to establish 
access will more strongly hold water systems to the requirements of the LCRI. For more details 
on the necessity of this change and suggested language, please see comments submited by 
Unleaded Kids; for addiƟonal support of this change, see also comments submited by the 
Robert Wood Johnson FoundaƟon. 
 
• 
EPA should remove or adjust the condiƟons under which water systems can defer the LSL 
replacement deadlines. The proposed LCRI includes two primary situaƟons where water systems 
can take more than 10 years to complete replacement of LSLs: 
 
o The ﬁrst condiƟon applies to water systems with a high proporƟon of LSLs relaƟve to the 
overall system (measured in the proposed rule by number of households served, with 
the threshold set at 3.9%). EPA esƟmates that between 663 and 2,134 systems would be 

10320 Litle Patuxent Parkway, Suite 200    Columbia, MD 21044 
410.992.0712 (p)    443.539.4150 (f) 
www.nchh.org    @NCHH    facebook.com/HealthyHousing 
eligible for the deferral, and that for most of these systems, the deferral would add 1-7 
years to the 10 year deadline (the system in the 75th percenƟle would complete 
replacement in 15.6 years). 
 
We ﬁnd this exempƟon unnecessary and would support removing it from the ﬁnal rule. 
If EPA does keep it in place, the raƟo used to determine eligibility should be based on 
the number of service lines in the system, not the number of households served. This 
would make implementaƟon easier, because the number of service lines is data that 
water systems already have (and are also required to collect/use through the LCRR and 
LCRI inventory requirements), as opposed to data on number of households, which likely 
lives outside the water system. It’s also more logical and reﬂecƟve of the true burden of 
work, since mulƟ-family properƟes include mulƟple households but only have one 
service line. 
 
o The second condiƟon applies to water systems where the requirement to replace LSLs in 
ten years would require replacing more than 8,000 or 10,000 LSLs a year. Under this 
exempƟon, these water systems would then be allowed to sƟck to the 8,000 or 10,000 
cap per year, rather than meeƟng the ten-year deadline. EPA esƟmates that only four 
water systems naƟonally would be eligible for this deferral. These systems have a wide 
range of total number of LSLs; EPA esƟmates that the exempƟon would mean that they 
would complete replacement in approximately 14, 18, 33, and 45 years. 
 
EPA should delete this exempƟon. From a policy perspecƟve, creaƟng a rule for only four 
water systems is unnecessary and the wide range in the replacement deadlines that this 
would create demonstrates that it does not even make sense to group these four 
systems together. We recognize that systems with an unusually high number of service 
lines may face speciﬁc challenges, but those systems should be able to work with EPA on 
a tailored variance that lets them deal with these challenges while also holding them to 
the public health goals of the LCRI. For more informaƟon and support of removing this 
exempƟon, see comments submited by Unleaded Kids and the Robert Wood Johnson 
FoundaƟon. 
 
• 
EPA should move to lower the lead acƟon level to 5 ppb rather than 10 ppb. We appreciate that 
the LCRI proposed lowering the acƟon level from 15 ppb to 10 ppb, but we think 5 ppb would be 
a more appropriate goal. There is no known safe level of lead and federal agencies seƫng acƟon 
levels for sources of lead exposure should drive towards standards that are as health-protecƟve 
as possible while sƟll being technically feasible and measurable. EPA recognized this when 
proposing to lower the lead dust hazard standard in August 2023 to a level “greater than zero;” 
the Food and Drug AdministraƟon pursues a “closer to zero” approach when regulaƟng lead in 
food. 
 
Recognizing that lowering the acƟon level to 5 ppb may require states and water systems to 
increase their technical capacity in handling corrosion control, we suggest a phased 
implementaƟon approach. EPA should lower the acƟon level to 5 ppb for the noƟﬁcaƟon and 

10320 Litle Patuxent Parkway, Suite 200    Columbia, MD 21044 
410.992.0712 (p)    443.539.4150 (f) 
www.nchh.org    @NCHH    facebook.com/HealthyHousing 
public educaƟon requirements upon implementaƟon of the LCRI, but should have a later 
implementaƟon date for lowering the exceedance trigger for corrosion control treatment from 
10 ppb to 5 ppb. This will allow states and water systems to prepare for this shiŌ while sƟll 
supporƟng increased public awareness and educaƟon around lead in water and allowing more 
residents to beneﬁt from requirements around noƟﬁcaƟon and ﬁltraƟon. 
 
• 
EPA should require water systems to make sampling results from schools and child care faciliƟes 
publicly available. 
 
• 
When deﬁning how water systems have “access” to a service line as described above, and when 
that deﬁniƟon includes gaining permission from the property owner, EPA should also allow water 
systems to gain permission from renters occupying the property. This will allow water systems to 
move more eﬃciently when contacƟng property owners is challenging. In addiƟon, when 
conducƟng any noƟﬁcaƟon to customers and property owners, EPA should clarify that water 
systems must also noƟfy residents of the property. This will ensure that renters who don’t pay a 
water bill will be noƟﬁed of any informaƟon related to LSL replacement or lead in their water. 
 
In addiƟon to the above changes, we recommend that EPA add the following elements to either the 
proposed rule itself or the accompanying implementaƟon of the rule: 
• 
We noted that the LCRI (in conƟnuity from the LCRR) requires that water systems include a 
replacement prioriƟzaƟon strategy in their replacement plan, but decided not to require that 
speciﬁc environmental or housing data be used as prioriƟzaƟon criteria for LSL replacement. We 
understand EPA’s reasoning in leaving the speciﬁc criteria up to the water systems, since the 
individual replacement plans should be responsive to speciﬁc community needs. However, we 
encourage EPA to support water systems by providing tools, resources, and examples that can 
help them establish prioriƟzaƟon strategies and ensure that these strategies serve communiƟes 
equitably. This could include informaƟon on publicly available data sources water systems should 
use, best pracƟces for understanding and using this data, best pracƟces for engaging with the 
community and listening to community needs, and best pracƟces or guides for partnering with 
other sectors like health and housing departments. Some example of exisƟng public resources 
that speciﬁcally focus on equity in LSL replacement include the Lead Service Line Replacement 
CollaboraƟve’s Equity Toolkit and Human Impact Partners’ 2018 report Achieving Equity in Lead 
Poisoning Prevention Policy Making: Proceedings from a Consensus Conference. 
 
• 
EPA should monitor the implementaƟon of the LCRI and make sure it is implemented equitably, 
including by collecƟng and publishing data about the households, properƟes, and populaƟons 
served by LSL replacement. This may also provide opportuniƟes to share this data and/or LSL 
inventory data with other federal data mapping projects. For more informaƟon on this 
recommendaƟon, see comments submited by the Robert Wood Johnson FoundaƟon.  
 
 

10320 Litle Patuxent Parkway, Suite 200    Columbia, MD 21044 
410.992.0712 (p)    443.539.4150 (f) 
www.nchh.org    @NCHH    facebook.com/HealthyHousing 
In implemenƟng the LCRI, EPA should take parƟcular care to monitor how water systems are handling 
the issue of payment for “private-side” replacements and provide assistance to communiƟes in 
dealing with this aspect of the replacement equitably. Ideally, the LCRI would require water systems to 
always pay for the full replacement of a LSL, regardless of quesƟon of ownership. However, within the 
bounds of what EPA has proposed in the LCRI, we support the following elements: 
• 
That the water systems’ replacement plans can’t include parƟal replacement of LSLs. 
• 
That, when water systems are replacing the public side of a LSL, they have to oﬀer to replace the 
private side. 
• 
That the required replacement plan must include a funding strategy. 
• 
That the required replacement plan must include a strategy for addressing homes where, when 
property owners will be required to pay for replacement (either due to state or local 
requirements or the water systems’ own plan), they are unable to do so. 
• 
That the required replacement plan must include idenƟﬁcaƟon of potenƟal barriers to access to 
full replacement in local ordinances, water service agreements, and state laws. 
EPA also outlines the exisƟng funding sources, including several that have been created in the last couple 
years, that will help water systems fund full replacement (and that many communiƟes across the country 
are already uƟlizing for this purpose). This includes funding in the BiparƟsan Infrastructure Law, use of 
American Rescue Plan Act funding, EPA’s WIIN grants, use of CDBG funds, and other exisƟng ﬁnancing 
mechanisms at EPA and USDA.  
We echo EPA’s support of these exisƟng funding avenues for LSL replacement, but that shouldn’t be the 
end of the story, especially since some of these funding sources have Ɵme-speciﬁc allocaƟon plans or 
deadlines that precede the full 10 year deadline in the LCRI.  
In the LCRI, EPA has outlined a plan that will result in the removal of virtually all of the LSLs in the 
country. This is a needed and urgent acƟon to reduce the number of Americans exposed to lead. In order 
to support the eﬀecƟveness of the LCRI and truly allow EPA, states, localiƟes, and water systems to fulﬁll 
this goal, Congressional leaders and the AdministraƟon must conƟnue to support the above funding 
avenues and provide further funding and ﬁnancial resources to help communiƟes replace LSLs and ﬁnd 
and ﬁx other sources of lead.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amanda Reddy, ExecuƟve Director 
NaƟonal Center for Healthy Housing 
areddy@nchh.org

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0872 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0792 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Feb 1st, 2024
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket, 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, 
Washington, DC 20460.
RE: Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 (Lead and Copper Rule)
The Wisconsin Board for People with Developmental Disabilities (BPDD) appreciates the 
opportunity to comment on proposed revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule. Lead poisoning is 
a 100% preventable cause of Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities; every Wisconsin 
county has children poisoned by lead. BPDD has been working with state agencies and the 
legislature on policy changes that will reduce and eliminate lead exposure from lead
contaminated water and paint.
Utility and customer side lead service lines and internal lead plumbing are sources of lead 
poisoning that can be eliminated when pipes are replaced. Up to 20% of lead exposure is 
caused by drinking water. In infants, 40-60% of lead poisoning is traced to drinking water and 
tap water used in infant formula. We appreciate the rule’s 10 year timeline for complete 
replacement, which will eliminate this source of lead poisoning that has been allowed to 
continue for decades.
Lead service lines exist in Wisconsin communities across the state. Based on 2022 data from 
Wisconsin’s Public Service Commission (PSC), there is an estimated 158,000 utility lead service 
lines and 141,000 customer side lead service lines in Wisconsin, with an additional 34,000 utility 
side and 45,000 customer side lead service lines that could have lead. Cities with aging 
infrastructure and a significant amount of old stock housing—including Milwaukee, Racine, and 
Kenosha—have many lines that need replacement, and many low-income residents who often 
cannot afford to move even if they are aware of unsafe lead levels.
Wisconsin has a patchwork of existing loan programs and funding sources that can be leveraged 
to support utility and customer side lead line replacement; however, replacement progress has 
been slow due to restricted eligibility, local capacity to write and administer grants and 
contracts, workforce shortages, limited funding, match requirements, lack of knowledge about 
lead line replacement options, and competing priorities. Many of Wisconsin’s options limit the 
ability for individual property owners to self-finance remediation and do not help renters.
Despite the infusion of ARPA funds and the dedication of $15B nationally under federal 
infrastructure law for lead line replacement, additional funding will be needed to fully replace 
lead service lines in the next ten years as the final rule proposes. Existing Wisconsin programs, 
including the Safe Drinking Water Loan program and the Private Lead Service Line Replacement 

program, provide some relief to municipalities, although both are competitive programs and 
funding authority is set by the legislature through the state’s biennial budget process. 
Many communities and individual property owners may not be able to complete lead line 
replacement within a 10-year timeframe given the scale of pipes that need replacement, 
procurement and supply chain delays, and workforce shortages. An ongoing source of funding 
for lead service line replacements is needed throughout the implementation period or until the 
work is done. 
Wis. Stats. 196.372 offers a mechanism for a dedicated funding source that requires a portion 
of the water utility rate to be used for utility and customer side lead service line replacement.
Current Wis. Stats. 196.372 allows a water utility to apply to the Public Service Commission to 
raise water utility rates to provide financial assistance for complete replacement of customer 
and utility side lead service lines. The statute specifies that the water utility rate increase must 
be used solely for lead line replacement. Utilities can establish either a grant or loan program 
for customer side replacement; grants are limited to cover only 50% of the cost and loans 
cannot be forgiven. 
Several Wisconsin communities have successfully used this statute to finance complete 
replacement of their lead service lines. Some communities are concerned about the impact 
increases in water rates may have on low-income households which are often correlated with 
old stock housing served by lead pipes. In these low-income communities, affected properties 
may not have high property values and affected properties may be rental units; affected 
tenants are not eligible to apply for funding that would remove lead hazards.
We recommend EPA keep the ten-year implementation requirement. The infusion of ARPA 
and Infrastructure Act funds with existing Safe Drinking Water Loan program authority offers a 
unique opportunity over the next five years for replacement of lead service lines. To the extent 
possible, we recommend state spending be directed towards communities that have the 
most lines to replace, the highest number of low-income households by census tract data, 
and rural areas with small water utilities and lower numbers of utility rate payers.
We recommend throughout the 10-year implementation period, complete lead service line 
replacement is prioritized within the Safe Drinking Water Loan program. Replacement of 
orphan customer lead service lines should be an allowable use of Safe Drinking Water Loan 
program funds, and funding should be managed centrally such that individual property owners 
are not dependent on local water utilities to apply for funding.
After the implementation deadline, we recommend EPA require water utilities to raise water 
utility rates and use the funds generated from the rate increase to replace utility and 
customer side lead service lines until all lines have been replaced. Water utilities should be 
required to document on utility bills the rate increase, that funds are being used to replace lead 
service lines, and the number of known utility and customer service lines left to replace. These 

elevated rates and required spending on lead service line replacement should continue until 
complete replacement has been accomplished; then water utilities should be required to lower 
rates.
This rule is silent on lead paint which is the source of an estimated 80% of childhood lead 
poisoning. Lead service line replacement is important and long overdue; however, this major 
accomplishment will not be sufficient to end childhood lead poisoning. 
BPDD is charged under the federal Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act 
with advocacy, capacity building, and systems change to improve self-determination, 
independence, productivity, and integration and inclusion in all facets of community life for 
people with developmental disabilities1. 
Thank you for your consideration,
Beth Swedeen, Executive Director, 
Wisconsin Board for People with Developmental Disabilities
                                                       
1 More about BPDD https://wi-bpdd.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Legislative_Overview_BPDD.pdf .

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0831 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Office of the General Counsel 
3211 FOURTH STREET NE  WASHINGTON DC  20017-1194  202-541-3300  FAX 202-541-3337 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
Submitted Electronically  
 
Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center (EPA/DC) 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801  
 
Mail Code 28221T  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue,  
NW Washington, D.C. 20460  
Re:  
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements (LCRI)  
Dear Sir or Madam:  
The EPA is proposing revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation for Lead and 
Copper (hereafter referred to as Lead and Copper: Improvements or LCRI) under the authority of 
the Safe Drinking Water Act. 88 Fed. Reg. 84878 (Dec 6, 2023).  
Lead and copper enter drinking water mainly from corrosion of plumbing materials. 84 Fed. Reg. 
61684 (Nov 13, 2019). “Lead was widely used in plumbing materials until Congress banned its 
use in 1986, and there are an estimated 6.3 to 9.3 million homes served by lead service lines 
(LSLs) in thousands of communities nationwide…”  84 Fed. Reg. at 61685. LCRI revisions 
include updates in testing protocols, corrosion controls, acceptable lead and copper levels, 
requirements for water sampling in schools and for utilities to complete lead service line 
inventories. The most significant revision is the requirement to replace lead service lines in the 
nation within 10 years. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84878. 
The U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB) Committee on Domestic Justice and Human 
Development, Committee on Pro-Life Activities and other committees have long advocated for 
safe drinking water, including funding for lead pipe replacement in the Bipartisan Infrastructure 
Law1 and other legislation to address chemicals in drinking water that disproportionately affect 
 
1 USCCB, Letter to Congress Concerning Legislation on Infrastructure, Apr. 22, 2021, 
https://www.usccb.org/resources/letter-congress-concerning-legislation-infrastructure-april-22-2021  

 
children, expecting mothers, and the unborn.2 “[A]ccess to clean water is crucial and additional 
funding is needed to replace lead pipes nationally, ensuring that all Americans have access to 
clean water, a universal human right.”3 The LCRI details the implementation of water standards 
throughout the United States which remains a priority for the USCCB’s integral ecology policies 
for three central reasons: the importance of water for health, life and justice. 
Water, health, and life 
It is well known that that lead exposure can cause harmful health effects for all people and 
“especially pregnant people, infants, and young children (CDC, 2022a; CDC, 2022b; CDC, 
2023)… Lead exposure causes damage to the brain and kidneys and… developing fetuses, 
infants, and young children are most susceptible to the harmful health effects of lead (ATSDR, 
2020)”. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84897.4 Drinking water can account for 20 percent of an adult persons 
lead exposure and most of a child’s lead exposure comes from drinking water (absent routine 
exposure to other sources like paint or contaminated soils), whereas infants may “receive 40 to 
60 percent of their exposure to lead from drinking water used in the formula.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 
84897. 
The health and well-being of all people—especially the unborn, children, and pregnant 
mothers—is affected by the quality of drinking water. In his landmark encyclical on ecology, 
Laudato Si’, Pope Francis dedicated an entire section exclusively to the importance of water for 
the world’s peoples and the planet.5 In turn, the USCCB has continuously advocated for safe 
water standards and highlighted the connection of water with health of the most vulnerable. 
Indeed, clean water is an expression of a “culture of life.”6  
For people of faith, the stewardship of water matters not only for life on this earth but for the 
afterlife. Numerous religions throughout the world revere and respect water for its healing, 
purifying and spiritual qualities and symbolism.7 Inspired by the Jewish customs and the sacred 
scriptures with its “many connections between water and healing (cf. 2 Kings 5:8-14; Jn. 5:2-4; 
Jn. 9:6-11)” 8, Christians throughout the world use water for the sacrament of baptism, which 
 
2 USCCB, Letter to Congress Regarding PFAS Action Act of 2021, Jul. 19, 2021, 
https://www.usccb.org/resources/letter-congress-regarding-pfas-action-act-2021-july-19-2021 
3 USCCB, Letter to Congress on Federal Budget Reconciliation, Sep. 7, 2021, 
 https://www.usccb.org/resources/letter-congress-federal-budget-reconciliation-september-7-2021   
4 “Exposure to lead is known to present serious health risks to the brain and nervous system of children (USEPA, 
2013). Young children and infants are particularly vulnerable to the physical, cognitive, and behavioral effects of 
lead due to their sensitive developmental stages. There is no known safe level of exposure to lead.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 
84897.  
5 See Pope Francis, Laudato Si’: On care for our common home, nos. 27-31, 24 May, 2015, 
https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-francesco_20150524_enciclica-laudato-
si.html#_ftn1  
6 USCCB, Chairmen Statement, Aug. 1, 2022, 
https://www.usccb.org/news/2022/after-dobbs-congress-must-come-together-protect-life-and-promote-common-
good    
7 See Dicastery for Promoting Integral Human Development, Aqua fons vitae, no. 23, Mar. 2020, 
https://www.humandevelopment.va/content/dam/sviluppoumano/documenti/Aqua fons vitae _ 03 2020.pdf 
8 Ibid, no. 21. 
https://www.humandevelopment.va/content/dam/sviluppoumano/documenti/Aqua fons vitae _ 03 2020.pdf 

 
“signifies and actually brings about death to sin” as the baptized are “born of water and Spirit” 
(Jn 3:5) and enter “into the life of faith.”9   
Water is a source of life and salvation. As such, it is a terrible contradiction that today in 
America we quench thirst and baptize children with water poisoned with lead and copper. 
Communities of faith throughout America have an additional, faith filled reason to support 
efforts to replace lead pipes and clean our nations drinking water. Based on principles of life and 
health, the USCCB supports the ambitious requirements in the LCRI to replace LSLs, update 
testing protocols, increase testing in schools and reduce levels of water contamination. 
Water and Justice 
 
While water poisoned with lead and copper constitutes an injustice to all Americans, this 
injustice is unevenly distributed among the population. The CDC asserts that “American 
drinking water supplies are among the safest in the world,”10 and points to the early history of 
water infrastructure and treatment that delivered clean water to millions in the decades that 
followed the dawn of the nation. Installation of water infrastructure, built with cast iron and lead 
pipes, began on a major scale in the United States in the late 1800s, particularly in the larger 
cities, and continued until the 1920s and 1930s.11 In the 1920s, on a trip to New York, the 
English Catholic author G.K. Chesterton was struck by the American ideal of equality expressed 
in daily experiences, including widespread and efficient access to water.12 As such, clean water 
access was not only an expression of health and salvation, but of equality of all people.   
Can we say the same today? In the last twenty years, there have been numerous municipal water 
crises stemming from deteriorated infrastructure and exacerbated by the continued use of LSLs, 
such as in Washington D.C. in 2004 and Flint, Michigan a decade later. An American Water 
Works Association report pointed out that virtually all cast-iron pipes either already have expired 
or will expire this decade, and although lead pipes may have a slightly longer average lifespan, 
much of lead infrastructure replacement must occur within the next two decades as well.13 
America’s ailing and unrepaired infrastructure is responsible for much of the disproportionate 
 
9 Catechism of the Catholic Church, Libreria Editrice Vaticana, nos. 1239. 1236, 
https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/_INDEX.HTM      
10 CDC, History of Drinking Water Treatment, https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/drinking/history.html      
11 Rabin, Richard, The Lead Industry and Lead Water Pipes “A MODEST CAMPAIGN”, Sep. 2008, 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2509614/#:~:text=National%20model%20plumbing%20codes%20a
pproved,at%20least%20into%20the%201940s.  
12 Chesterton, G. K., What I Saw in America, loc. 340, T. and A. Constable Ltd. at the Edinburgh University Press. 
Kindle Edition.  
13 “cast-iron pipes that were laid in the late 1800s have an average lifespan of 120 years; pipes laid in the 1920s, 
constructed using different manufacturing techniques, have a lifespan of a 100 years, and pipes laid during the post-
World War II economic boom are expected to have a useful lifespan of about 75 years.” See American Water Works 
Association, Dawn of the Replacement Era, May 2001, https://www.awwa.org/Portals/0/AWWA/ETS/Resources/ 
DawnReplacementEra.pdf?ver=2019-04-02-112931-320; Deloitte, The aging water infrastructure: Out of sight, out 
of mind?, Mar. 2016, https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/economy/issues-by-the- numbers/us-aging-water-
infrastructure-investment-opportunities.html     

 
effect of lead exposure from drinking water on communities of color and low-income 
communities.14 
The EPA has already established that communities of color and low-income communities are 
disproportionately exposed to the risks of lead in drinking water delivered by community water 
systems. 86 Fed. Reg. 71574 (Dec. 17, 2021). In addition to higher lead exposure from water, 
communities of color and low-income communities also tend to have higher exposure to lead 
from other sources, such as paint from older housing or contaminated soil, increasing the risk of 
these populations suffering elevated blood-lead levels. Due to other disparities such as lower 
economic status and limited access to medical care, these communities face additional harms 
from lead and associated health risks, of which lead-contaminated drinking water is a significant 
contributor. 86 Fed. Reg. at 71575. 
Other challenges posed by replacement of privately owned LSLs are well addressed in the LCRI. 
The USCCB supports the restrictions on partial LSL replacement due to its adverse health 
effects, which are especially likely in low-income communities and communities of color that 
cannot pay for the private portion of the LSL replacement. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84928. We also 
recognize the need for flexibility in implementation of LSL replacement given different laws in 
each state and water district and support limited flexibility in meeting timelines for LSL when 
water utilities/systems demonstrate plans to replace LSL and that do not incur extra costs on 
ratepayers. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84926. 
We thank you for your consideration of this comment, and your work on this issue of 
tremendous importance to the health and wellbeing of all Americans, especially the most 
marginalized in our society.   
 
Respectfully submitted,  
William J. Quinn 
General Counsel  
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops  
 
 
 
 
 
14 Rabin, Richard, The Lead Industry and Lead Water Pipes “A MODEST CAMPAIGN”, Sep. 2008, 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2509614/#:~:text=National%20model%20plumbing%20codes%20a
pproved,at%20least%20into%20the%201940s.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1108 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0926 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 4, 2024
Administrator Michael Regan
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
RE: Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
NPDWR for Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI)
We appreciate the opportunity to comment on EPA’s proposal to strengthen
regulation provisions in the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI).
We’re grateful to - too many people to name - with whom we reached out to.
They answered questions and helped us understand, when our local & state Drinking
Water officials would not.
Portland Oregon is a cautionary tale.
Here’s what we recommend EPA strengthen:
❖Filters - multiple ALE history (since 1997 compliance date); most vulnerable
communities (Preg/infants/1-6 yrs/POC/low-wealth/adults with heart disease)
❖Public outreach (beyond CCR’s) - complete/concise, transparent, easy access
❖5 ppb MCL
❖1 ppb ALL Childcares Utility-provided filters
❖LCR site ID/lab analysis - Require 3rd party
❖Materials inventory - Require public map
❖FLSLR (+ GRR’s & pigtails) - Utility-funded via BIL/SRF’s/non ratepayer $
1

The elephant in Portland’s room: Lead and Copper Rule’s “OCCT”
27 years ago, Portland Water Bureau (PWB) forged a distinctive agreement with the
state health authority, exempting PWB from adhering to federal regulation. It was
proposed as “regulatory flexibility for compliance with the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR)”
and as “a substitute for Lead and Copper Rule requirements for Optimal Corrosion
Control Treatment (OCCT).”1997 PWB XL project
Portland Water Bureau never complied with the federal LCR regulation aimed at
“minimizing public exposure to lead in drinking water.” Jeanne Briskin,EPA. 1989 interview.
Instead, our provider created their own Lead Hazard Reduction Program (LHRP), touted
as a “model strategy for other water systems” and “a cost-savings measure.” 1997 PWB XL
In short, PWB found loopholes to circumvent LCR OCCT treatment requirements.
Even where there are supposedly no or few lead pipes (LSL, GRR, pigtails), water that
is inadequately treated for corrosion can cause serious lead contamination, as it has
here, and where it’s an ongoing problem :
“... lead corrosion of plumbing materials is inextricably linked to drinking water
corrosivity, and drinking water corrosivity is to a great degree – albeit not completely –
controlled by water utilities.
This link is the foundation of the Lead and Copper Rule.”Dr. Lambrinidou, LEAD Action News OCT 2017
______________________________________________________________________
Despite their own data, PWB continues to downplay their improper treatment,
mischaracterizing science and facts through false assurances and misleading
messaging :
“We are fortunate to have safe, abundant and delicious water.”
- PWB Director Gabriel Solmer, 6/2021, four months before her 3rd ALE (14th ALEs total)
2

“We have no lead in our distribution system!” - Portland Water Cm Fish, April & June 2018
“We do not have lead in our drinking water!"
- PWB Kim Gupta, p.e., 2021 (1 month later, PWB recorded 21 ppb, PWB’s 14th ALE)
“I assure you our water is safe to drink” - Portland Water Comm. Mapps, Feb 2022
“These are the worst of the worst” [tier 1 LCR homes with lead solder]
- PWB LHRP Manager Scott Bradway, various dates
_________________________
While local and state officials portrayed the LHRP as an innovative program, PWB’s
multiple lead action level exceedances (14 ALE’s total), and, elevated levels every year
since 1991 LCR is the result. Ultimately, the people in charge of our drinking water
failed to follow both the letter and the spirit of the LCR.
As a result, customers have been unwittingly drinking lead-contaminated water
seemingly as “pristine” as the source water it comes from.
_________________________________
“I was pleased to see that the U.S. EPA was much more aggressive in protecting
consumers in Newark, NJ in 2019, than they were in prior high-profile water crises in
Flint, MI, Washington, D.C., or cities like Portland, Oregon where their LCR has
been broken for decades.” Dr. Marc Edwards,Congressional Hearing, 10/15/19 (bold for emphasis, ours)
_________________________________
If you were living in Portland Oregon, or are just now starting your family in 2024, you
had/have no idea that the City had/still has elevated levels of lead in drinking water. This
is because we are told (over and over and over since 1997) :
3

________________________________
“Portland’s water is safe and delicious”
“Excellent water every minute of every day”
“From forest to faucet, we deliver the best drinking water in the world.”
“Portland’s water is still safe to drink.”
_________________________________
PWB’s cheerful images and socials’ videos reinforce misleading messaging. PWB
amplified them in 2001(D.C.), 2015 (Flint), 2018 (Newark), and 2021 (PWB’s 14th ALE):
Image on PWB’s website landing page, amid their 14th lead ALE in 2021.
Because PR campaigns (misleading messaging, rhetoric) and regulatory loopholes
worked well for them for years, we fear PWB will find & use new loopholes in the LCRI.
Therefore, please promulgate the strongest, health-based LCRI possible. e.g.:
●
Set an enforceable 5 parts per billion (ppb) MCL. We know 5 ppb
(90th percentile) is feasible because most, if not all, large water providers in the
U.S. PNW region achieved 5 ppb or less decades ago, through OCCT :
4

OR & WA public water systems’ data show historically low water lead levels; most are under 5 ppb, except Portland
______________________________
“Since the lead rule was proposed, we’ve obtained additional data that we
believe support setting an MCL at the tap that is both feasible and protective of
health.” Jeanne Briskin, Asst to EPA administrator. JAWWA 1989 (bold ours, for emphasis)
______________________________
●
Free Filters FIRST and until Utility has significantly “minimized” (EPA) lead in
drinking water levels (5 ppb MCL)
Prevention is key. After PWB’s 2021 ALE, PWB Director did not publicize her limited “free
filters program” which used flawed eligibility and sampling protocol. PWB did promote their
old-science lead-in-water test kits which took >2 months to process in the PWB lab. Filters
FIRST is best practice nationwide, and should be required, immediate, robustly advertised,
and at no cost to customers. Portland’s most disadvantaged and vulnerable communities,
disproportionately harmed by lead in water exposure, were not prioritized.
For water systems like Portland OR - with a history of multiple lead ALE’s since 1991 -
filters should be provided starting now (2024), for anyone who asks, and proactively to
5

most vulnerable/disadvantaged customers, until PWB’s proposed $2B Filtration treatment
shows CCT effectiveness =/<5 ppb and until PWB replaces leaded infrastructure.
●Prohibit misleading messaging and omissions
Messaging that deceives, deflects, or omits - often on important science and data -
prolongs health harm. It’s insidious, used here often, and it has increased since Flint.
Ultimately, intentionally misleading the public damages our health and the public trust :
__________________________________
“[Portland] Water bureau Jaymee Cuti says the main source of lead in Portland's water
is copper pipes with lead solder.” OPB, Jan 8, 2022. “Oregon wants quick fix to high lead levels in Portland's water”
“They must be told what you have determined they ought to know in order to deal with
the [crisis] at hand” - Joe Glicker PWB p.e.: CONVINCING THE PUBLIC THAT DRINKING WATER IS SAFE. 1990
___________________________________
We know EPA can’t regulate unethical behavior, but dismissing, passing blame,
corrupting public engagement, and bullying citizens & experts alike must stop. This
practice has kept the public in the dark (for decades here). EPA must amplify zero
tolerance for any abusive, unethical behaviors and practices by water providers.
Finally, a regulation is only effective if the agency is responsive, and if there’s effective
oversight. Our water agency has not been responsive and PWB’s regulator, Oregon
Health Authority DWS, has not been effective. We appreciate EPA M.Jennings &
D.McLerran raising heightened concern 8 years ago. However, Reg 10 took no
immediate actions to protect PWB’s customers, “nearly 1 million served”.
3 ALE’s followed Region 10’s letter of escalated concern. Excerpt here:
6

“Nevertheless, because of past exceedances of the lead action level…EPA is
concerned that there could be a future exceedance, even though [PWB’s] most recent
90th percentile lead level was below the action level.” Ap14, 2016. EPA Reg 10 letter to OHA re PWB
______________________________
Prescient words. PWB did have future exceedances; in 2016, 2017, 2021 - totaling 14
ALE’s since the LCR was promulgated. Portland Oregon is a cautionary tale.
________________________________
“Would you not rather have jumped in too soon, despite the law,
to protect the children of Flint…than be [pulled] into congress to testify why you
stepped in too quickly to safeguard health, as opposed to
why you didn’t act soon enough?”
- U.S. Senator Tammy Duckworth, 3/17/16 House Oversight Hearings
- EPA’s noble intent for their new LCR regulation proposal. JAWWA interview with
Jeanne Briskin, Asst to EPA Administrator, 1989
__________________________________
We appreciate EPA’s commitment to strengthen LCRI provisions to protect public health
and children’s developing brains.
~Portland Advocates for Leadfree Drinking Water, Oregon
7

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0796 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 
 
  
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         Sandra Mattavous-Frye, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       People’s Counsel 
February 2, 2024 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
Re:   COMMENTS OF THE OFFICE OF THE PEOPLE’S COUNSEL FOR THE 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA ON THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL 
PROTECTION AGENCY’S PROPOSED RULEMAKING ON NATIONAL 
PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATIONS FOR LEAD AND 
COPPER 
I.  
Introduction  
The Office of the People’s Counsel (“OPC-DC” or “Office”), the statutory representative 
of District of Columbia utility ratepayers,1 respectfully submits these Comments in response to 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) proposed rulemaking entitled “National 
Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements” published in the 
Federal Register on December 6, 2023.2 OPC-DC commends the EPA for its proactive steps 
toward addressing a critical public health issue – the presence of lead in our nation’s drinking 
water. OPC-DC recognizes and applauds the EPA’s commitment to enhancing the safety and 
quality of drinking water through these proposed revisions. The initiative to phase out all lead 
service lines within a decade is a testament to the agency’s dedication to public health and its 
responsiveness to the urgent need for improved water safety standards. 
 
1 D.C. Code § 34-804 (Lexis 2020). 
2 Hereafter referenced as “LCRI”. 

2 
 
The proposed revisions to the Lead & Copper Rule represent a significant advancement 
in the fight against lead contamination. Lead in drinking water poses severe health risks, 
particularly to children and pregnant women, and the EPA’s move to finally eradicate this threat 
is both timely and essential. By mandating the replacement of lead service lines and lowering the 
action level for lead in drinking water, the EPA is setting a more aggressive standard to 
strengthen public health protection. These actions will have a profound and lasting impact on 
communities across the country, including those in the District. 
II.  
Summary 
In summary, OPC-DC supports the EPA’s initiative to mandate lead service line 
replacements within ten years of issuance, as this is a critical measure for public health 
protection.  
• The proposed requirements for comprehensive service line inventories and replacement 
plans should ensure a detailed and systematic approach toward identifying and addressing 
lead pipes. OPC also applauds the proposed reduction of the lead action level to 0.010 
mg/L for its potential to significantly reduce lead exposure risks while line replacement is 
ongoing. To meet these goals while complying with White House mandates, the EPA 
must provide a balanced approach that ensures an equitable cost burden 
• However, OPC-DC recommends enhancements in public education requirements, 
emphasizing the need for inclusive, clear, and frequent communication strategies about 
the dangers of lead in water and the benefits of line replacements.  
• Addressing the feasibility of the 10% annual replacement rate, OPC-DC recommends a 
thorough market analysis to ensure adequate labor and material resources are available, 

3 
 
while also advocating for partnerships with educational institutions for workforce 
development.  
• OPC-DC supports the prohibition of partial service line replacements, except in 
emergencies or during planned infrastructure work, as it aligns with long-term public 
health objectives.  
• Lastly, OPC-DC recognizes the importance of identifying and addressing potential legal 
barriers at state and local levels to full lead service line replacement and therefore 
recommends efforts to align varied laws and regulations with the EPA’s lead and copper 
rule improvements.  
These combined efforts are crucial for a more effective, efficient, and equitable approach 
to eliminating lead exposure from drinking water. In the following comments, OPC-DC seeks to 
offer constructive feedback and recommendations that we believe will strengthen the 
effectiveness of the rule's implementation and ensure that the benefits of these crucial changes 
are realized by all residents, particularly those in the most vulnerable communities. 
 
DISCUSSION 
III.  
OPC-DC Supports Mandated Lead Service Line Replacement in an Affordable and 
Equitable Manner 
First, OPC-DC firmly endorses the EPA’s proposed 10-year replacement deadline for lead 
service lines as part of its revisions to the Lead & Copper Rule. We recognize the critical 
importance of this timeline in addressing such a pressing public health concern as the presence of 
lead in drinking water is a serious issue that poses considerable health risks, particularly to 
children and vulnerable populations. Accelerating the removal and replacement of lead service 

4 
 
lines within this concrete timeframe is not only a necessary step but also a moral imperative to 
ensure the provision of safe and clean drinking water to all residents. 
However, while OPC-DC supports this vital initiative, we are acutely aware of the 
challenges that accompany it, notably the potential for rising utility rates. Across the country, we 
are witnessing a significant increase in the cost of water services, a trend that could be further 
influenced by the financial demands of such a widespread infrastructure overhaul. Without 
significant coordinated state and federal investment, the additional costs of replacing lead service 
lines within ten years, although essential for public health, may place a substantial financial 
burden on utilities and, by extension, on consumers. 
In light of this, OPC-DC urges a balanced approach. While we advocate for the swift 
elimination of lead hazards in our water supply, we also emphasize the need to consider the 
economic impact on consumers, particularly those in lower-income brackets. This could be done 
with significant state and federal funding, sliding-scale payment options and customer rebates for 
property owners that proactively replace their lead service lines, and regular review of progress 
and adjustment of strategies as needed. It is crucial that as the nation advances toward a lead-free 
future, we also ensure that these improvements are achieved equitably, without placing undue 
financial strain on residents who can least afford the costs of these replacements. 
 
IV.  
OPC-DC Supports Service Line Inventories and Replacement Plan Requirements 
But Recommends Clear Measures to Address Environmental Justice Goals 
As the advocate for water consumers in the District of Columbia, OPC-DC is keenly 
aware of the critical importance of the EPA’s proposed requirements for water systems to 
regularly update service line inventories, develop a replacement plan, and identify all service 

5 
 
lines of unknown material by the replacement deadline. The emphasis on accurate service line 
inventories is commendable, as it forms the backbone of an effective lead pipe replacement 
strategy – especially since a large portion of DC Water’s service line inventory is of unconfirmed 
material. We support the proposed validation process to ensure inventory accuracy and believe 
that this will significantly enhance the effectiveness of replacement plans. 
The requirement for water systems to include lead connectors in their inventories and 
replace them is a vital addition, considering these connectors can be significant sources of lead 
contamination. OPC-DC applauds this thorough approach, which acknowledges and addresses 
often overlooked components of water infrastructure. 
OPC-DC also agrees with EPA’s proposal to consolidate completion deadlines for water 
systems to categorize the material of all unknown service lines with the mandatory full service 
line replacement deadline. This streamlines administrative processes by synchronizing these 
critical tasks and should help water systems more efficiently manage their resources and efforts, 
leading to smoother and more coordinated operations. 
Additionally, EPA’s expanded requirements for notification and safety procedures 
following significant disturbances to lead service lines, galvanized-requiring-replacement service 
lines, or service lines of unknown material is a step in the right direction. The proposed revision, 
which extends the requirement for notification and flushing instructions to include disturbances 
resulting from inventory efforts like potholing, better protects public health than the current rule. 
This proposed change aligns with the comprehensive approach needed to mitigate the risks 
associated with lead exposure in drinking water and acknowledges that even activities not 
directly related to repair or replacement, such as inventory assessments, can disrupt lead 
particulates and potentially elevate lead levels in the water supply. 

6 
 
However, it is crucial to recognize that lead service lines (“LSLs”) are disproportionately 
found in older, lower-income, and underserved neighborhoods where residents have the least 
ability to personally afford the replacement of LSLs. This disparity raises significant concerns 
about environmental justice and the equitable distribution of public health protections. While the 
LCRI encourages water systems to prioritize replacements in an efficient, effective, and 
equitable manner, we believe more concrete and clear measures are needed in the final rule to 
meet the environmental justice goals laid out by the Biden administration.3 
As a result, OPC-DC recommends that the EPA consider mandating prioritization 
protocols that specifically target underserved and vulnerable communities. This could include 
guidelines for water systems to identify and prioritize areas with older housing stocks, lower-
income households, and a history of neglect in infrastructure upgrades. Such protocols should be 
accompanied by adequate funding mechanisms to ensure that the financial burden of these 
necessary upgrades does not fall disproportionately on the communities that are most in need of 
these improvements. Furthermore, we suggest that the EPA provide additional guidance and 
support for public outreach and community engagement in these neighborhoods to guide local 
water utilities on best practices. This will help in building trust, ensuring transparency in the 
replacement process, and encouraging community participation, which is critical for the success 
of these initiatives. 
 
 
 
3 Executive Order 14096, Executive Order to Revitalize Our Nation’s Commitment to 
Environmental Justice for All, April 21, 2023, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2023/04/21/executive-order-on-revitalizing-our-nations-commitment-
to-environmental-justice-for-all/. 

7 
 
V.  
OPC-DC Supports the Reduction of the Lead Action Level  
OPC-DC supports EPA’s proposal to lower the lead action level to 0.010 mg/L in its 
proposed LCRI – this more stringent standard for the lead action level demonstrates a serious 
commitment by the federal government to see the eradication of lead from drinking water 
sources. Lead is a well-documented neurotoxin with no safe level of exposure, particularly 
harmful to children and pregnant persons; by setting the action level at 0.010 mg/L, the EPA is 
taking a crucial step in reducing these health risks. This move aligns with the growing body of 
scientific evidence suggesting that even low levels of lead exposure can lead to significant health 
problems, including developmental disabilities in children and various chronic cardiovascular, 
neurological, and kidney conditions in adults.4 
Furthermore, the proposal to remove the lead trigger level and directly set the action level 
at 0.010 mg/L is a proactive approach that OPC-DC endorses. This change will prompt water 
systems to initiate full-scale replacement actions sooner, rather than waiting for lead levels to 
reach higher, more dangerous thresholds. Such prompt action is essential in mitigating the risks 
associated with lead exposure and ensuring that all communities have access to safe drinking 
water. 
While we recognize that this lower action level may present challenges to water systems, 
particularly in terms of resources and logistics, the potential public health benefits far outweigh 
these challenges. It is an imperative step towards ensuring that all residents, regardless of their 
socio-economic status or geographic location, have access to safe and clean water. We encourage 
 
4 EPA, Basic Information about Lead in Drinking Water, https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-
drinking-water/basic-information-about-lead-drinking-water#health; EPA, Learn about Lead, 
https://www.epa.gov/lead/learn-about-lead  

8 
 
the EPA to provide the necessary support and guidance to water systems as they work to meet 
this new standard, ensuring that the transition is effective, efficient, and equitable. 
Additionally, EPA’s proposal to limit corrosion control requirements for systems that 
have re-optimized their corrosion control and continuously meet optimal water quality standards, 
but experience a subsequent exceedance, is a pragmatic approach to reducing costs while moving 
towards full lead line replacement. This approach acknowledges the balance between protecting 
public health and being mindful of the cost implications for ratepayers. Requiring repeated re-
optimization can lead to significant expenditures that may not proportionately contribute to 
reducing lead level exceedances – especially during system-wide lead line replacement. By 
exempting systems from re-optimizing if they have already done so effectively and are 
maintaining optimal water quality, the EPA is preventing unnecessary financial burdens on 
consumers while ensuring that resources are allocated more effectively. 
 
VI.  
OPC-DC Supports Improvements in Public Education Requirements and 
Recommends the Development of Multilingual and Culturally Sensitive Educational 
Materials 
OPC-DC recognizes the critical role of public education in tackling the issue of lead in 
our drinking water. The EPA’s push for enhanced public education campaigns is a step in the 
right direction, but these efforts must be as inclusive as possible. In major urban areas as diverse 
as the District, information about the risks of lead and the importance of service line replacement 
must be accessible to all, irrespective of language or cultural background. 
To this end, OPC-DC advocates for the development of multilingual and culturally 
sensitive educational materials. We urge the EPA to provide the necessary resources and 

9 
 
guidelines to ensure that these campaigns effectively reach every corner of our community. 
Moreover, this should be more than simply disseminating written notices; visual, social, and 
digital media is necessary to ensure that crucial information about lead exposure reaches 
everyone. This could take the form of bus station ads, notices on popular local websites, or 
television public service announcements. OPC-DC also recommends adoption of programs 
similar to DC Water’s Lead Free DC Community Activators Program, which trains local 
residents to inform residents and property owners about replacing lead service lines.5 
The EPA’s requirement for water systems to make substantial efforts to engage with 
property owners is an important aspect of these educational outreach endeavors. EPA’s proposal 
to require that there be at least four different outreach attempts, utilizing various communication 
methods, is an excellent way to ensure that this message gets through. However, it’s not just 
about reaching out; it’s about providing clear, comprehensive information about the health risks, 
the benefits of replacing service lines, and available support, especially for financial aid 
programs.  
Furthermore, in areas where the risk of lead exposure is particularly high, we believe that 
the frequency of communication needs to be increased. While annual notifications are useful, 
more regular updates — perhaps quarterly — could significantly boost public awareness and 
prompt residents to take proactive measures. Lastly, the requirement to re-engage with new 
property owners is a thoughtful strategy to ensure ongoing protection and awareness. This 
continuous engagement is particularly important in a place like D.C., where property turnover 
can be frequent. 
 
5 DC Water, DC Water and District Department of Employment Services Launch the Lead Free 
DC Community Activators Program, May 23, 2023, https://www.dcwater.com/whats-going-
on/news/dc-water-and-district-department-employment-services-launch-lead-free-dc.  

10 
 
VII.  OPC-DC is Concerned About the Feasibility of EPA’s Proposed Replacement Rate 
and Market Response  
The EPA’s proposed annual replacement rate of 10%, aiming for complete replacement 
within a decade, is a commendable and ambitious goal that reflects the urgency of this public 
health concern. However, the realization of this goal hinges on the critical factor of whether the 
labor and material markets can keep pace with this heightened demand. 
Because of the very real concern over whether adequate labor and material resources 
exists to reach these admirable goals, it is imperative that EPA undertake a comprehensive 
assessment of the current labor market’s capacity to meet this increased demand for skilled labor 
in LSL replacement. This should encompass a detailed evaluation of the availability of qualified 
workers, an understanding of the training requirements, and insights into the geographical 
distribution of these labor resources. Such an assessment is crucial to anticipate potential 
shortages and to devise effective strategies to address them.  
Moreover, while the 10% annual replacement target is praiseworthy, its practicality may 
vary significantly across different jurisdictions. It is vital to consider a range of factors, including 
the size and age of water systems, the condition of existing infrastructure, and the unique labor 
market conditions in various locales when determining compliance requirements and standards. 
A more adaptable approach, allowing for variability in the replacement rate based on these 
factors, could prove more effective than a one-size-fits-all mandate for replacement. 
Addressing potential labor shortages is a critical aspect of this initiative. OPC-DC 
advocates for the formation of partnerships with vocational schools and trade unions to foster the 
development of specialized training programs, akin to the District’s founding of the D.C. 

11 
 
Infrastructure Academy.6 Such initiatives would not only support this specific project but also 
contribute to long-term economic development and job creation within our communities. 
Collaboration with industry stakeholders and educational institutions is equally vital. These 
partnerships can spur innovative solutions to both labor and material shortages, potentially 
including apprenticeship programs, on-the-job training opportunities, and research into 
alternative materials or methodologies that could streamline the replacement process. 
Furthermore, the potential shortages in materials and filters necessary for replacement 
work represent a significant challenge. We urge the EPA to explore and establish contingency 
plans and alternative supply chains, in cooperation with other federal and state agencies and 
stakeholders, to ensure uninterrupted access to these essential resources over the next decade. 
This might involve strategies such as stockpiling critical materials or forming agreements with 
suppliers to prioritize lead replacement projects. 
 
VIII.  OPC-DC Supports the Prohibition of Partial Service Line Replacements  
OPC-DC largely supports EPA’s proposal to prohibit partial service line replacements, as 
partial replacements of LSLs have been shown to potentially increase lead levels in the short 
term due to disturbances in the pipes.7 The prohibition of such partial replacements, unless in the 
 
6 OPC-DC advocated for the establishment of the D.C. Infrastructure Academy as a condition of 
the negotiated settlement approving the District’s Pepco-Exelon merger; it is now a multi-utility 
collaborative between Pepco, Washington Gas, DC Water, Washington Metropolitan Area Transit 
Authority, University of D.C., and the District Government. See, e.g., D.C. Infrastructure 
Academy, https://dcia.dc.gov/; D.C. Office of the City Administrator, Mayor Bowser Announces 
Negotiated Settlement for Pepco Exelon Merger, Oct. 6, 2015, https://oca.dc.gov/release/mayor-
bowser-announces-negotiated-settlement-pepco-exelon-merger.  
7 Rebecca Renner, Reaction to the Solution: Lead Exposure Following Partial Service Line 
Replacement, Environ. Health Perspect., Vol. 118, Issue 5, A202-A208, May 2010, 
https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2866705/.  

12 
 
case of emergency repairs or as part of broader infrastructure work, is a prudent approach that 
will protect public health. It ensures that replacements are comprehensive and do not 
inadvertently exacerbate lead exposure risks to the public while addressing historical 
environmental injustices.8 
Additionally, the EPA’s proposed requirement for systems to provide advance notification 
to customers along with an offer to replace the customer-owned portion of the LSL is a 
commendable practice. This measure ensures transparency and allows homeowners to participate 
in complete line replacement, thereby reducing their risk of lead exposure. 
OPC-DC agrees with and supports the EPA’s exceptions for emergencies, since in urgent 
situations where partial replacements are necessary, it is vital to have clear and stringent 
guidelines to manage any potential increase in lead exposure. This approach balances the 
immediate need for repairs with the long-term goal of reducing lead exposure. 
Furthermore, the mandate for risk mitigation measures following a partial replacement, 
such as public education and the provision of pitcher filters, is an essential component of this 
rule. These measures are crucial in minimizing the immediate risks associated with disturbed 
lead pipes during and after LSL replacement. 
 
 
 
8 A recent study has shown that full lead service line replacements were less common in lower-
income, higher-minority neighborhoods under a cost-sharing program design in Washington, 
D.C. between 2009 and 2018. The study finds supportive evidence that household income is a 
major predictor of full replacement versus partial replacement prevalence, with race also 
showing significance in some analyses. Karen J. Baehler, et al., Full Lead Service Line 
Replacement: A Case Study of Equity in Environmental Remediation¸ Sustainability, Vol. 14, 
Issue 1, at 352, Oct. 1, 2022, https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010352.  

13 
 
IX.  
In Addressing Legal Barriers to Full Replacement, OPC-DC Recommends 
Guidance for State and Local Reform  
These improvements are vital steps towards ensuring safer drinking water for all. 
However, the intricate web of differing state and local laws poses significant challenges in 
implementing the proposed improvements to the LCRI. Across various jurisdictions, the 
diversity in statutes, constitutional provisions, local ordinances, and service agreements creates a 
complex regulatory environment. This diversity can potentially hinder the uniform 
implementation of the EPA’s plan, making it difficult to achieve the goal of safer drinking water 
on a nationwide scale. As state and local authorities navigate these changes, we recognize the 
potential conflicts that may arise within existing state and local laws and regulations; a challenge 
that the EPA’s new proposal seeks to address by requiring systems to identify potential legal 
barriers to full service line replacement. 
To navigate these challenges, OPC-DC proposes the creation of a framework that would 
guide states and localities in aligning their laws with the EPA’s LCRI requirements. It should 
include clear guidelines for water systems and state authorities to identify and assess legal 
barriers, alongside a compilation of best practices and examples from jurisdictions that have 
successfully integrated their local laws with federal regulations on lead in drinking water. 
Furthermore, we suggest that the EPA provide support for legal reforms at the state and local 
levels, aiding in resolving conflicts and facilitating compliance with the LCRI. 
Collaboration is key in this endeavor, so the affected communities must be actively 
involved in identifying and addressing these barriers. OPC-DC urges the EPA to facilitate 
partnerships between legal experts, state and local authorities, water systems, and community 
stakeholders. Through this collaboration, states and localities can explore and develop effective 

14 
 
strategies for overcoming legal barriers, pooling insights and experiences to inform more 
effective policy-making. 
 
X. Conclusion  
In conclusion, OPC-DC agrees with much of EPA’s proposed improvements to the Safe 
Drinking Water Act’s Lead & Copper Rule, however, there is still room for improvement. EPA 
should consider the implementation of OPC-DC’s recommendations to ensure that ratepayers 
who are least able to afford service line replacement are not left with the bulk of the costs. 
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
/s/ Sandra Mattavous-Frye 
Sandra Mattavous-Frye  
People’s Counsel 
D.C. Bar No. 375833 
 
Karen R. Sistrunk  
Deputy People’s Counsel 
D.C. Bar No. 390153 
 
Laurence C. Daniels  
Director of Litigation 
D.C. Bar No. 471025 
 
Adam S. Carlesco 
Assistant People’s Counsel 
D.C. Bar No. 1601151 
 
OFFICE OF THE PEOPLE’S COUNSEL  
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
1133 Fifteenth Street, NW, Suite 500 
Washington, DC 20005 
 
 
Date: Feb. 2, 2023

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1118 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0957 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Service 
People 
Integrity 
Responsibility 
Innovation 
Teamwork 
 
 
  
 
 
Water Department 
Dubuque Water Works 
1902 Hawthorne Street 
Dubuque, IA 52001 
Office 563.589.4291 
TTY 563.690.6678 
clester@cityofdubuque.org 
www.cityofdubuque.org/water 
 
February 5, 2024 
Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE:  
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations:  
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions,  
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
 
Dear Administrator, 
The City of Dubuque, Iowa is hereby providing comments on the Environmental Protection 
Agency's proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI), announced in the 
proposed rule at 88 Fed. Reg. 84878 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
The City of Dubuque, chartered in 1837, is the oldest city in Iowa and is situated along the 
western bank of the Mississippi River, at the intersection of where Iowa meets Illinois and 
Wisconsin, and has a long history associated with lead and lead mining. Dating back to the 
17th Century, European maps document the presence of zinc-lead mines in the area. The 
City’s water services reflect the abundance of metal, as we have recorded over 5,000 lead 
and partial lead service lines.  
While we applaud the efforts to improve water quality and improve outreach to our 
customers in our communities understanding that “lead in drinking water can irreparably 
harm children and adults and disproportionately impacts those living in disadvantaged 
communities”1, there are some aspects of the proposed rule changes that may need to be 
addressed regionally, or via a strategic approach at the state or primacy agency level rather 
than a one-size fits all method. We offer the following commentary and are appreciative of 
this opportunity.  
Achieving 100% Lead Pipe Replacement within 10 years. The proposed LCRI would 
require many water systems to replace lead services lines within 10 years.  

 
Service 
People 
Integrity 
Responsibility 
Innovation 
Teamwork 
 
 
While the City of Dubuque supports EPA’s goal of completely removing lead service 
lines (“LSL(s)”) as quickly as possible, we believe establishing a 10-year timeframe for 
achieving that goal is not the optimal approach for many municipalities including 
Dubuque. The City of Dubuque is responsible for the operation and maintenance of 
the city’s public water mains but does not maintain or possess ownership of the water 
service from the public main into privately owned buildings, therefore there is 
concern that we, and many other communities not responsible for the water service 
line, would not be able to fulfill this aspect of a proposed rule. Further, a one-size fits 
all timeframe presents a challenge in economically disadvantaged communities, 
placing an undue financial burden on the whole community and potentially prevents 
other significant capital improvements from being completed in a timely manner, such 
installing treatment processes and advancing replacement groundwater wells for 
PFAS reduction, and replacing fatigued water distribution mains, storage facilities, and 
other water treatment processes. The arbitrary timeframe also omits adequate 
consideration of the city’s optimized corrosion control treatment (“OCCT”), which has 
proven to be effective in Dubuque and would continue to be successful in mitigating 
exposure to lead in drinking water during an LSL replacement program. However, if 
cities were to be granted the ability to work with their primacy agencies and develop 
a lead service line replacement program that coordinates with other necessary capital 
projects along with managing other variables such as working with private property 
owners, material availability, labor/workforce limitations,  along with continued 
successful use of OCCT, and if cities were provided with financial assistance in the 
form of a revolving fund administered by the state with significant, such as 90%, 
principal and interest forgiveness with reduced barriers to accessing the monies, or 
grant funds to provide the necessary funding to customers, it may lead to increased 
numbers of removal and replacement of lead service lines and lessen a concentrated 
burden on our communities. For reference, a recent cost estimate in the Dubuque, 
Iowa area for full lead service line replacement was $10,000 per property.  
Lead Service Lines are not to be Taxable Benefit. We are in the process of initiating a 
pilot lead service line replacement program to replace approximately 585 lead service 
lines in our community, so we are firsthand understanding the challenges and barriers 
that need to be overcome. We are moving forward with the pilot program albeit 
significantly less than the program we wanted to undertake for many reasons. One 
key reason was the significant reduction of loan forgiveness, it was dropped from 90% 
to 49%, thereby limiting our ability to leverage the available public funds to spend on 
private infrastructure lead service lines, this is also being done with very little to no 
assistance from state or federal agencies on public education materials or messaging, 
as we are committed to gaining the interest of as many private property owners as 
funds will be permit. In this process, we were informed by an alarming possibility that 
the lead service line replacement may be a taxable benefit. We urge as part of this 

 
Service 
People 
Integrity 
Responsibility 
Innovation 
Teamwork 
 
public comment period, that EPA directly address the Internal Revenue Service and 
require that publicly funded service line replacements are not taxable income for 
individual households or property owners.  
Locating Legacy Lead Pipes. The City of Dubuque is in support of this part of the rule 
and agrees knowing where lead pipes are is critical to replacing them efficiently and 
equitably. The city is prepared to provide an initial inventory of the lead service lines 
by October 16, 2024, create a publicly available service line replacement plan, and 
identify the materials of all service lines of unknown material. 
 
Public Education, Outreach and CCR. We are in support of providing greater clarity in 
the consumer confidence report and specifically, information pertaining to results 
associated with lead and copper testing. We do however request that further 
education and outreach come directly from EPA to assist state primacy agency field 
offices that are called upon to aid public water supplies in providing proven methods 
in communicating what the results mean to customers. In the current social media 
climate of “fake-news”, it is important the language, the tone, and the methods used 
to deliver results and explanation of those results is well thought out and consistent. 
This is important as the water industry looks to regain its position as a valued and 
trusted member of the community and build expertise to address questions and 
concerns from our customers. This is challenging to accomplish as many field offices 
are understaffed, as are many utilities, and so we look to the federal agency to assist 
in this matter. Regarding the provision of making point of service water filters 
available to customers, we request that a certified list of water filters be provided to 
utilities to reduce the risk of an ineffective filter being provided and rule preventing 
price-gouging be placed on water filters being provided by utilities to their customers.  
Again, we commend and acknowledge the work and advancement by EPA to present the 
proposed LCRI and recognize it is a major advancement in protecting children and adults 
from the significant, and irreversible, health effects from being exposed to lead in drinking 
water.  
Should you have any questions regarding any of the comments provided, please contact me 
at 563.589.4291 or via email clester@cityofdubuque.org. 
Sincerely, 
 
Christopher Lester 
City of Dubuque 
Water Department Director

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0754 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: US EPA's Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water <drupal_admin@epa.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, January 16, 2024 5:12 PM 
To: safewater <safewater@epa.gov> 
Subject: Public Inquiry from EPA's Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Website 
 
Submitted on January 16, 2024 5:12 pm EST Submitted by: Anonymous 
 
Submitted values are: 
Name: Tihitina Andarge 
Email Address: tandarge@umass.edu 
 
Topic: Lead and Copper Rule/Lead Service Line Replacement Describe Your Drinking Water Inquiry: 
Hi there! I'm an Assistant Professor at UMass Amherst and I'm currently working on a project related to 
lead in drinking water. I am trying to better understand the testing requirements for the LCR. 
Specifically, I have a question about MDLs in the LCR prior to the recent revisions. It is my understanding 
that labs much achieve a MDL of 0.001 mg/L if they are processing composite samples. What MDLs are 
labs required to achieve if they are not processing composite samples? Is it possible and allowed for a 
lab to have an MDL of 0.005 mg/L? Again, this is prior to the recent revisions to the rule. Please let me 
know. Thanks! Tina

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0802 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024
Mr. Michael Regan, Administrator
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20460–0001
Re: Comment on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, Docket ID
No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Dear Mr. Regan,
The first attempt to apply the lessons of the Flint Crisis ended in disappointing
Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) that would not adequately protect public
health from a preventable problem: lead poisoning. It is incumbent upon this current
administration to do everything in its power to indeed “Get the Lead Out.” This comment
on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) is informed by our
experience working with several Great Lakes communities experiencing lead in drinking
water, including Flint and Benton Harbor. Freshwater Future’s mission is to be a catalyst
for community action that strengthens policies designed to safeguard the waters of the
Great Lakes region.
A Stronger Rule - Thank You
Thank you to the leadership and everyone who contributed to the new proposed LCRI.
We are grateful for the stronger and more equitable components that integrate the
science, research, and lessons learned since before the Flint Water Crisis to improve
the 2021 LCRR. Some of the proposed improvements we are especially grateful for
include:
1. Requiring 100% full lead service line replacement (LSLR)
2. Reducing the Action Level and eliminating the Trigger Level
3. Strengthening the transparency and requirements of lead service line (LSL)
inventories and replacement plans

4. Standardizing and strengthening Public Education and Notification requirements
Feedback and Recommendations
Once adopted, the LCRI rule will have massive socioeconomic and public health
implications. Our specific recommendations are organized under the following
categories:
Click on and jump to any section
●
Environmental Justice
●
Schools and Child Care Facilities
●
Lead Service Line Replacements
●
Tap Sampling
●
Action Level Exceedances
●
Public Education and Notification
●
Corrosion Control Treatment
●
Other
Environmental Justice
Environmental Justice considerations are critical due to past racial and economic
discrimination that has impacted residents in communities that experience or are at risk
of experiencing, higher or more adverse human health, and environmental effects,
including the presence of lead pipes. These communities face many inequities, such as
reduced access to public funding for infrastructure. In addition, the takeover of city
governments, including water systems, through antidemocratic dismantling of
communities of color using appointed emergency managers has resulted in inequities
that must be addressed, in processes such as this one, to ensure these processes stop
and the communities begin to be made whole. We commend you for ensuring that the
new Lead and Copper Rule will address these critical issues.
We strongly recommend that the U.S. EPA, in addition to its requirement for full
LSLR and funding strategies within those replacement plans, require that utilities cover
the full cost of replacements. As a key environmental justice consideration, these
policies for funding strategies alone will not improve equitable outcomes because of the
financial burden to households. Likewise, the proposed flexibility offered to systems with
high numbers of LSLs will only prolong exposure for thousands, possibly millions, of
people, who are more likely to be low-income. As described in greater detail under Lead
Service Line Replacements, the U.S. EPA should also eliminate exceptions for the
LSLR deadline as it will only prolong exposure for thousands, possibly millions, of
2

people, living in Environmental Justice communities.
Below we outline a couple of Freshwater Future’s previous Environmental Justice
policy recommendations that were not addressed in the LCRI, which would require
identification, prioritization, and financial support. We recommend these additional
policies to bolster support to impacted communities and to strengthen compliance.
1. Identifying and Prioritizing Environmental Justice Communities:
Environmental Justice communities are most vulnerable to environmental
hazards such as lead and thus should be first in line for water infrastructure
improvements. The U.S. EPA should recommend or require the use of the U.S.
EPA’s EJScreen 2.0 to consider factors such as social vulnerability and
environmental burden.
2. Funding for Environmental Justice Community Emergencies: We
recommend an emergency set-aside fund for efficient access during lead
emergencies. In addition, when a community is in crisis due to an Action Level
Exceedance (ALE), there should be no cap on funds provided in order to remedy
the crisis.
Schools and Child Care Facilities
We strongly recommend that the U.S. EPA reconsiders updating the school and child
care facility regulations for lead sampling and notification requirements. As the most
sensitive demographic to lead poisoning, children must receive equally strong
protections at home and at school. The current school and child care facility rules,
unfortunately, fall short of those proposed for community water systems.
1. The settings that are required to test need to expand beyond elementary schools
and child care centers to include junior high and high schools to ensure all
children are protected.
2. Lead sampling should be "required" rather than offering it "on request" for all
schools and licensed child care facilities.
3. Instead of one mandatory sampling round, testing should be completed
repeatedly, on a schedule, just like all community water systems. “On request”
testing will not catch changes to lead levels, either. In addition, not all schools will
have filters, and those that do may not necessarily have maintained them well.
3

Lead Service Line Replacements
The U.S. EPA should not allow exceptions to the 10-year replacement deadline
based on its own reasoning and to protect future generations from lead
poisoning.
In the proposed LCRI, the U.S. EPA reasons that multiple water systems have
shown 10 years to be an achievable goal. We ask the Agency to hold all water systems
to the same standard. In addition, many of the systems that have large numbers of
LSLs should be able to scale up these replacement plans more so than smaller ones
due to their higher technical, managerial, and financial capacity, thus making an
extension unnecessary.
It also makes no sense that larger regional systems are not held to the same
standard as cities of the same or smaller size. For example, the Great Lakes Water
Authority (GLWA) serves almost 4 million residents across nearly 120 communities in
Southeast Michigan and supplies treated water through hundreds of thousands of LSLs.
All of these densely populated Detroit suburbs and the City of Detroit itself must
compete for the funding and labor needed to achieve the full replacement of almost 4
times as many LSLs in 10 years. This is why ALL systems must be held to the same
deadline and standard.
The U.S. EPA should retract its LSLR deadline exceptions in order to limit and
prevent irreversible poisoning to the best of our ability and protect future generations of
developing children. The U.S. EPA itself estimates that the “benefits of the rule will be
4-10x greater than the costs.”1 Systems should be pushed to replace these known
sources of poisoning as quickly as possible to maximize the return on investment. A
strong, consistent standard of 10 years will give all children an equal chance to live,
thrive, and contribute to the economy.
The U.S. EPA needs to require that water utilities cover the full cost of lead
service line replacements.
The U.S. EPA should add requirements that ensure the cost of replacements
does not cause financial distress to homeowners, especially low-income households. If
the U.S. EPA does not add requirements for cost-sharing, low-income households may
not be able to afford their part of the replacement. This will further hurt impacted
1 U.S. EPA Office of Water. (2023, Dec 6). Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements: Informational
Webinar. Powerpoint presentation.
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-12/proposed-lcri-presentation_public-webinar_12.06.2
3_final-slides.pdf
4

communities by prolonging exposure to lead and/or causing additional financial distress.
In addition, Mandating (or directing) water systems to provide financial assistance to
residents in need is essential to ensure full and timely replacements.
The U.S. EPA should provide guidance and recommendations on the types of
materials used in replacements.
Without guidance, many utilities will continue to use plastic alternatives that have
shorter useful lives AND can leach toxins. The U.S. EPA should require copper for pipe
replacements. The Environmental Working Group states that if copper is not feasible,
then polypropylene can be a safer alternative than cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) or
polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
The U.S. EPA should provide guidance and recommendations on how to safely
and equitably dispose of post-consumer waste following replacements.
Toxic waste must not cause further harm due to unsafe disposal practices within
environmental justice communities. The majority of the United States’ LSLs are
disposed of in countries with less stringent environmental protections. Particularly India,
Mexico, China, Ecuador, Guatemala, Bangladesh, and Indonesia. Removing toxins from
our water infrastructure should not result in environmental justice crises elsewhere. We
recommend that EPA require all removed LSLs to be recycled at a U.S. facility.
We disagree with the U.S. EPA’s use of phrases “under the system’s control” and
“adequate access” in its mandate for the full replacement of lead lines and
connectors.
Simple measures, such as the adoption of a local ordinance like those in Newark,
New Jersey, and Benton Harbor, Michigan, would resolve these control issues and
ensure all LSLs are replaced. We recommend the U.S. EPA require such ordinances to
resolve this issue.
Unlike the tap sampling requirements, the proposed LCRI does not specify the
types of buildings included in the full LSLR mandate.
To ensure that all residents receive the same protections under the new LCRI,
the U.S. EPA needs to explicitly specify the types of buildings included in the mandate.
We recommend that all buildings with lead and galvanized-requiring replacement water
service lines be specified and included in the LSLR plans, including multi-family homes,
single-family homes, schools, and child care facilities.
5

Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper
The LCRI should require and enforce community water systems to conduct water
sampling immediately after changing its water source.
Precedents indicate that the variability in water pH and the condition of the
distribution system lines will inevitably and harmfully impact the water quality every time.
Proactive measures and procedures should be mandated to safeguard public health
and prevent predictable negative outcomes.
It is also recommended that LCRI compliance sampling increase in frequency
from the current requirement of three years to annually.
There are significant issues with a sampling gap of this length. Despite attaining
compliance during a three-year sampling period, a water system would likely not know
in the interim if homes are experiencing unsafe increases in lead and copper levels,
therefore prolonging neurotoxin exposure to at-risk populations.
Action Level Exceedances
Action Levels are important triggers to implement protective measures and
reduce residents’ exposure to lead in drinking water. Additional policies are
recommended to ensure the strongest protections possible.
1. Certified filters need to be clearly and strongly recommended for all
residents in systems with an ALE, and the U.S. EPA should mandate water
utilities to make this same recommendation
2. The U.S. EPA should also require Immediate alerts when compliance
sampling indicates an ALE, along with how residents can protect
themselves
3. The U.S. EPA should mandate and standardize the language used to
communicate between utilities and residents upon violation of the LCR.
This will ensure that public health and safety information is uniform across
communities and reduces the burden of the state primacy agency’s oversight
over the quality and accuracy of community water systems’ public education.
These materials should be plain language, translated widely into major
languages, and adaptable to different contexts.
4. The U.S. EPA should strengthen and clarify the language they use to
6

ensure local water utilities with multiple ALEs in 5 years comply with
regulations and support local residents with filters and replacements. The
current language needs to be strengthened because stating that filters should
merely be made “available” does not ensure this important mitigation tool is
actually provided and implemented.
5. A filter program is not an acceptable small system flexibility alternative to
corrosion control treatment (CCT) or LSLR. Not only is this a short-term
solution, but residents of these systems would receive weaker protections than
everyone else. While CCT or LSLR are more challenging for smaller systems to
manage, a filter program is the least effective and protective of the three options.
Residents of small systems deserve the same protections as larger systems.
Public Education and Notification
The U.S. EPA should provide model language for public education in schools and
child care facilities, and for water utilities instead of putting each state in charge
of their own templates.
1. It should be standardized with clear instructions for safety in the event of lead
exposure in drinking water.
2. The new Rule makes great progress in the public education and notification
requirements, but for the safety of consumers and to reduce the time and money
burden on states, it is strongly recommended that this information be provided in
a model template.
3. We also recommend that the U.S. EPA mandate water utilities to add the
following info to public education materials details on the type of corrosion control
treatment implemented, the amount implemented and any changes to these
parameters
The U.S. EPA should eliminate the water system size limit for the online public
education requirement.
The U.S. EPA requested feedback on the online public education requirements in
the proposed LCRI. We recommend requiring all water systems to publish the lead line
inventories and replacement plans online instead of limiting it to systems serving more
than 50,000 people. As communities have become increasingly aware of the dangers of
lead in water, the lack of readily accessible information about their water systems can
be a barrier to participation, trust, and successful prevention of lead poisoning in
families. It's good that systems that serve over 50,000 residents now have to put the
inventory and public education materials online, and we recommend requiring this of all
7

water systems. To help small or disadvantaged systems meet these requirements, all
State Revolving Fund programs have resources from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Act to
provide technical assistance and grants.
Corrosion Control Treatment
There is a lack of clarity on how the U.S. EPA would regulate CCT in
regional water systems due to the complexity of delivering water to many
municipalities with different pipe inventories and chemical treatment needs. For
example, it is not clear how the Great Lakes Water Authority (GLWA) of Southeast
Michigan would be held accountable for the ongoing and repeated Action Level
Exceedances among its member water systems. Two distinct operations and budgets
may result in inefficient processes to mitigate lead poisoning, and customers have less
transparency and oversight over the water system management because GLWA lacks
public governance.GLWA controls the CCT study and implementation, yet the member
systems are financially and operationally responsible for the inventories, replacements,
sampling, notification, education, and filter distribution programs. The new LCRI should
add language that clarifies how regional systems should be treated.
In addition, a corrosion control study should be mandated any time a water
source is changed to proactively protect public health because, as indicated
previously, changing water source without additional intervention results in negative
impacts to water quality and therefore public health.
Finally, as addressed in the prior section, the U.S. EPA should require water
utilities that use CCT to publicly disclose details on the type, the amount used, and
whenever there are changes to these parameters.
Other
Ensuring Equal Protection Across Systems
The U.S. EPA needs to ensure equal and the best protections by standardizing
regulations across systems of all sizes. For example, by offering “flexibilities” or
exceptions to very small water systems, the residents are subject to less stringent lead
mitigation measures. This is not to deny that these systems do face more challenges
than larger and better funded systems. However, it is better to implement the strongest
interventions possible to prevent a costly and irreversible public health concern.
For example, very small systems can access the technical assistance and
support of the state revolving fund to implement CCT or LSLR in the event of an ALE.
We strongly disagree that a filter program is an acceptable alternative to CCT or LSLR,
8

and systems of all sizes should be held to the same best practices.
Similarly, by allowing extended replacement timelines for systems with the most
lead lines, those residents face higher risks of lead poisoning due to prolonged
exposure. We strongly urge the U.S. EPA to eliminate the exceptions and exemptions
that inequitably expose residents to this neurotoxin.
***
No lead is safe and the U.S. EPA should ensure that it prioritizes and enforces
stricter rules for public health, children, and environmental justice. Please feel free to
contact us with any comments or questions by reaching out to Kristen Haitaian at
kristen@freshwaterfuture.org or call (231) 348-8200 ext. 9.
Sincerely,
Jill M. Ryan
Executive Director
9

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0902 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1
February 2, 2024 
Re: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, Request for Comment on National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,878 
(Dec. 6, 2023)
The Center for Water Policy is a research group housed in the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee’s School of Freshwater Sciences. We conduct original research on pressing water 
issues in the Great Lakes and Mississippi River Basins and beyond. Our mission is to provide 
world class interdisciplinary solutions to resolve regional, national, and international problems 
related to the protection, restoration, and conservation of freshwater resources to ensure long 
term environmental health and quality of life.
The Center for Water Policy researched and analyzed lead service line replacement efforts in the 
Great Lakes region. Our law review on this subject is publicly available and linked in the 
footnote: Andrian Lee and Melissa Scanlan, Got Lead in Your Water? The Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law May Be Poised to Help, 13 Mɪᴄʜ. J. Eɴᴠ’ᴛ& Aᴅᴍɪɴ. L. __ (forthcoming 
2024).1 The Great Lakes region contains seven of the ten states with the most lead service lines
in the country. The Center’s research supports provisions of this proposed rule, but gaps may 
remain in approach and funding.
Under the existing 2021 Lead and Copper Rule, the average annual 3% replacement rate is
insufficient for public health needs; to replace all lead service lines in a community would 
require over three decades. As there is no safe known level of lead for humans, such prolonged 
timeline fails to protect human health in our communities. Thus, we support EPA’s proposal to 
increase the replacement rate for nearly all water systems to achieve 100% lead service line
replacement over a 10-year period, or sooner where feasible.2
The proposed requirement for water systems to make a reasonable effort to encourage property 
owners to allow full replacement of lead service lines is an important step.3 However, Center for 
Water Policy research suggests that states may have greater success through legal changes that
allow replacement without permission. For example, in Newark, New Jersey’s success story of 
                                                            
1 Andrian Lee and Melissa Scanlan, Got Lead in Your Water? The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law May Be Poised to 
Help, 13 Mɪᴄʜ. J. Eɴᴠ’ᴛ& Aᴅᴍɪɴ. L. __ (forthcoming 2024), available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4710339.
2 Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(d)(4).
3 Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(d)(3).

2
lead service line replacement, mandating private line replacement regardless of property owner 
consent was a critical component.4
Historic financial support for this endeavor came in the form of the Bipartisan Infrastructure 
Law, with a $15 billion commitment to lead service line identification and replacement. This 
monumental infusion is crucial to lead service line replacement efforts, as the Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements identify. However, the Center for Water Policy’s research assessed this
amount accounts for approximately one-fifth or 20% of the total estimated cost of achieving
100% lead service line replacement in the Great Lakes region.5 Thus, while the Center supports 
EPA’s proposed timeline acceleration, we also emphasize the necessity of additional financial 
support for water systems to achieve this goal.
Sincerely, 
Melissa K. Scanlan
Lynde B. Uihlein Endowed Chair in Water Policy
Director of the Center for Water Policy
Professor, UW-Milwaukee School of Freshwater Sciences
Cora L. Sutherland
Water Policy Specialist
University of Wisconsin Sea Grant Water Science-Policy Fellow
                                                            
4 Andrian Lee and Melissa Scanlan, Got Lead in Your Water? The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law May Be Poised to 
Help, 13 Mɪᴄʜ. J. Eɴᴠ’ᴛ& Aᴅᴍɪɴ. L. __ (forthcoming 2024), available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4710339.
5 The Center for Water Policy’s assessments primarily rely on EPA’s estimated average cost of replacement per line 
of $5,066, from the Economic Analysis Appendices for the Final Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, at A-10 (Dec. 
2020). The actual costs may be much higher.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0962 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
 
Submitted Electronically 
 
 
Attention: Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T  
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW 
Washington, D.C.  20460 
 
Subject: National 
Primary 
Drinking 
Water 
Regulations 
for 
Lead 
and 
Copper:  
Improvements (LCRI) 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published in the Federal Register the proposed 
rule “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI)” 
on December 6, 2023 (Proposed Rule) 88 Fed. Reg. 84,878. The enclosed comments support the 
comments submitted by Paul Calmita on behalf of the AquaLaw Association, including any 
technical documentation prepared for and submitted by AquaLaw. 
 
City Utilities of Springfield, Missouri (CU) is pleased to submit comments on the referenced 
agency action. City Utilities is a municipally owned public utility providing electric, natural gas, 
water, transportation, and broadband services within the Springfield metropolitan area. CU serves 
approximately 119,000 electric customers, 85,000 natural gas customers, 85,000 drinking water 
customers, 900,000 annual public transit patrons, and 1,700 commercial broadband customers. For 
23 years, CU has received the Directors Award from the Partnership for Safe Water, a program of 
the American Water Works Association (AWWA). CU has two water treatment plants, the 
Fulbright and Blackman Water Treatment Plants, that utilize seven different ground and surface 
water sources to deliver up to 75 million gallons of water per day to its customers via approximately 
1,300 miles of distribution pipes. City Utilities, along with its committed City of Springfield and 
Greene County partners, is a vital participant in EPA’s nationally touted and successful Integrated 
Planning process. 
 
City Utilities respectfully requests EPA reconsider elements of the proposed rule and its impacts to 
municipally owned drinking water systems across the country and community implications like 
Springfield, Missouri. 
 
 
 
Respectfully, 
 
 
Elizabeth Robertson 
Manger-Water Quality 
Elizabeth.Robertson@cityutilities.net 

 
Comments of City Utilities of Springfield, Missouri on the 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
 
Proposed Rule: 88 Fed. Reg. 84,878 (December 6, 2023)  
 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
I. 
Summary of comments 
CU believes that EPA included several items in the proposed rule that are overly onerous on 
drinking water system across the country. We have significant concerns, summarized below, about 
several of the proposed changes.  
 
II. 
Specific issues: 
A. The Rule should require the identification of all lead status unknown lines before the 
Service Line Replacement goes into effect.  
To have an accurate replacement pool, more time should be given to Utilities to identify the 
lead status unknown (LSU) lines in their system. This will allow the Utilities to plan their 
service line replacements effectively and efficiently in a manner that prioritizes those with 
higher risk lines while being fiscally responsible to their rate payers. CU has never historically 
tracked the private side of the service line, but we do not have any evidence of lead lines in our 
system nor do we have a significant number of galvanized lines. If there is a high percentage 
of private side LSU lines in the initial inventory, this will skew the replacement rate calculation 
due to a large initial replacement pool. The replacement program is dependent on the initial 
service line inventory; however, utilities are concurrently required to identify and validate 
service lines in their inventory. It is counterproductive to use our limited resources to meet an 
annual replacement rate when not all service lines have been identified and are not required to 
be identified until the end of the mandatory replacement deadline.    
B. For lead status unknown lines that are out of the Utility’s control, alternate methods 
should be considered to categorize the private side service line in the inventory. 
Consider allowing statistical methods like interpolation to assign a category to those customers 
with service lines out of our control. If a customer declines or ignores the required four 
communication attempts over two methods, it will not be in the best interest of the utility to 
attempt to gain access to their private property to identify their service line material. It is a 
breach of customer trust and is unsafe for our employees to attempt multiple communication 
attempts beyond the reasonable attempt requirements stated by the proposed Rule. Under the 
proposed Rule, if the private side service line is disturbed and is classified as LSU and is out 
of the utility’s control, the utility must provide lead risk mitigation, like pitcher filters, for as 
long as that service line remains as LSU. Since these LSUs would be out of our control, they 
may remain classified as LSU long after the 10-year replacement. A reasonable material 
interpolation may be made based on already identified and verified homes nearby with similar 
construction dates that would properly classify the private side service line material. 
C. A three-day lead result notification will be difficult to achieve.  
Notifying customers of their lead levels within three calendar days of receiving the results will 
be difficult to achieve with limited employees and planned/unplanned days absent. A 
suggestion would be to notify customers with results over the proposed Action Limit of 10 ppb 
within three weekdays. If the customer does not have results over the proposed Action Limit 
of 10 ppb, a longer notification period would be more pertinent. 
 
III. 
Further Contacts 
City Utilities welcomes the opportunity to discuss the proposed rule and any of the matters 
described herein.  If additional information or clarification is required, please contact Elizabeth 
Robertson, Manager – Water Quality, at the address indicated in the cover letter to these comments.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0904 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 4th, 2023 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
US Environmental Protection Agency    
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW   
Washington, DC 20460   
 
Dear Administrator Regan,    
 
The NAACP State Conference of Ohio submits the following comments regarding the US Environmental 
Protection Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”). The Ohio NAACP State conference provides leadership for local branches, 
youth councils, and college chapters for environmental and climate justice needs in Ohio. The NAACP 
and its Center for Environmental and Climate Justice have a longstanding interest in ensuring that issues 
of community engagement and environmental justice center Black communities and frontline 
communities most impacted, including communities in Ohio.    
 
Ohio applauds EPA for proposing stronger regulations to protect communities from lead in drinking 
water. Lead in drinking water has been a historically prevalent issue in Black communities, posing 
extreme risks to the health of young people, mothers, and their families. In Ohio, estimates suggest that 
there are as many as 650,000 lead service lines, threatening families across our state with exposure to a 
potent and irreversible neurotoxin which even at low levels of exposure is linked to damage to the brain 
and nervous system, learning disabilities, shorter stature, impaired hearing, and harm to blood cells. In 
Ohio, we would derive $63,702,715,500 in public health cost savings from full lead service line 
replacement according to a study by the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) based upon a 
published scientific paper from Harvard researchers Ronnie Levin and Joel Schwartz.   
 

   
 
The State of Ohio ranked second highest in the US for both number of lead service lines and number of 
lead service lines per 100k people (second only to Illinois, and Wisconsin, respectively). This is an issue 
that affects people throughout the state and from all backgrounds. That said, the brunt of the burden 
disproportionately affects low-income and BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, and People of Color) communities.  
Ohio already has a long history of environmental burdens, particularly in low-income and BIPOC 
communities, but allowing the threat of lead contamination to continue impacting the next generation 
of Ohioans, their neurological and educational development, and Ohioan’s overall public health, should 
not be allowed to continue.  
For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong elements of the proposed 
LCRI such as the requirement for the removal of all lead service lines in ten years, the requirements for 
water systems to sample both the first and fifth liter of water passing through lead pipes and a lower 
action level; but also ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes which undermine their goals 
and ensure that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened.   
Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule does not leave black 
communities in Ohio behind:  
 
Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it is a fundamental injustice that 
the communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed 40 or more years to fix this issue.      
 
Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines: Removal can cost thousands 
of dollars, and putting the financial burden on impacted communities will result in mostly wealthy and 
white neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced. Removal and replacement do not make up 
major proportions of utility budgets, and utilities should be expected to maximize the use of available 
federal water infrastructure funds and other non-ratepayer sources of funds to prioritize solving this 
crisis.       
 
Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who spend many hours there daily are not at 
risk of exposure: Black children face an increased risk of lead exposure when compared with white 
children. The proposal’s suggested testing program does not differ from past ineffective programs, and 
EPA should move towards incentivizing the installation of filters and protecting children.    
 
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components would allow for 
environmental injustice to persist. Black communities and frontline communities have long suffered from 
disinvestment and lack of resources. Past NAACP analysis has demonstrated that race, ethnicity, or 
language spoken had the strongest relationship to slow and inadequate enforcement of the SDWA of any 
sociodemographic characteristic analyzed. The final LCRI is a rare opportunity to make significant 

changes in the lives of millions of people in Ohio, and to provide a measure of environmental justice 
which these families are owed, and we encourage this administration to build on the progress made in 
the proposed rule by strengthening the final rule further.    
Sincerely,   
Annette McCoy, 3rd VP Ohio Conference NAACP   
 
Cc:   
President Tom Roberts, NAACP Ohio Conference  
Dr. Will Pinn, EJC Chair Ohio Conference NAACP  
Justin Thompson, EJC NAACP Chair Ashtabula  
Emari Edmonds, Ohio Conference Youth and College President

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1329 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0744 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: US EPA's Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water <drupal_admin@epa.gov>  
Sent: Wednesday, December 6, 2023 2:52 PM 
To: safewater <safewater@epa.gov> 
Subject: Public Inquiry from EPA's Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Website 
 
Submitted on December 6, 2023 2:51 pm EST Submitted by: Anonymous 
 
Submitted values are: 
Name: Don North 
Email Address (required if seeking response): dnorth@inframark.com 
Topic: Lead and Copper Rule/Lead Service Line Replacement 
City: Macon 
State: Georgia 
Zip Code: 31210 
Describe Your Drinking Water Inquiry: 
Under the proposed LCRI, does the water system need to collect 1st and 5th samples on service line 
other than Lead, such as Galvanized lines that need replacement, or just 1st draw on galvanized service 
lines? 
Can pH saturation be used as CCT or Polyphosphate only?

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1140 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESIDENT 
John Entsminger 
Las Vegas Valley Water Dist. 
 
 
Julie Anderson 
Denver Water 
 
 
Edward Campbell 
Portland Water Bureau 
 
 
Yann Le Gouellec 
Newport News Waterworks 
 
Todd Swingle 
Toho Water 
VICE PRESIDENT 
Vacant 
 
 
Mike Armstrong 
WaterOne 
 
 
Shane Chapman 
Metropolitan Water District of 
Southern California 
 
Angela Licata 
New York City Department of 
Environmental Protection 
 
Timothy Thomure 
Tucson Water 
 
 
TREASURER 
Jeffrey Szabo 
Suffolk County Water Authority 
 
 
Verna Arnette 
Beaufort-Jasper Water & Sewer 
Authority 
 
Vacant 
 
Lindsey Rechtin 
Northern Kentucky Water District 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARY 
Calvin Farr 
Prince William County Service 
Authority 
 
Tad Bohannon 
Central Arkansas Water 
 
 
Scott Dewhirst 
Tacoma Water  
 
 
Holly Rosenthal 
Phoenix Water Services 
Department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jeff Brown 
Onondaga County Water 
Authority 
 
Randy E. Hayman 
Philadelphia Water 
Department 
 
Brian Steglitz 
Ann Arbor Water 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER 
Tom Dobbins 
 
 
Chris Browning 
Oklahoma City Water Utilities 
Trust 
 
Ghassan Korban 
Sewerage and Water Board of 
New Orleans 
 
John P. Sullivan, Jr. 
Boston Water and Sewer 
Commission 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan  
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
Via electronic submission 
 
Re: Docket ID #: EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801; National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) welcomes the opportunity to provide 
feedback on EPA’s proposed revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation 
(NPDWR) for lead and copper, also known as the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). 
AMWA is an organization representing the largest publicly owned drinking water utilities in the 
United States, and collectively its membership serves more than 160 million people. The 
association has been involved with the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) since its inception and values 
all the work that EPA has done to decrease the risk posed by lead and copper to public health. All 
along, we have sought a rule that is achievable, practical, and enforceable. 
 
EPA promulgated the LCR Revisions (LCRR) on January 15, 2021, and subsequently announced 
its intent to further revise the rule prior to the October 16, 2024, compliance date. These proposed 
revisions ultimately became known as the LCRI. AMWA has several suggestions for how this 
proposed rule could be improved upon, as well as thoughts on the components the association 
believes should be retained. The proposed LCRI encompasses a complete reworking of numerous 
of the provisions included in the LCRR and LCR, and details new requirements that the agency 
declined to include in previous iterations of the rule.  
 
 

 
 
 
                                                                               
 
AMWA is pleased to submit the attached comment letter for EPA’s consideration. If you have any 
questions, please contact Erica Brown (Brown@amwa.net), AMWA’s Chief Policy and Strategy 
Officer. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Tom Dobbins 
Chief Executive Officer 
 
Attachment 
 
cc:  
Radhika Fox, OW 
 
Bruno Pigott, OGWDW 
 
Jennifer McLain, OGWDW 
 
Eric Burneson, OGWDW 
 
Hannah Holsinger, OGWDW 
 
Michael Goldberg, OGWDW 
 
 

 
 
 
                                                                               
 
 
 
 
Comments on 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Section 1: Introduction .......................................................................................................... 3 
Section 2: Service Line Replacement ...................................................................................... 5 
Section 2.1: 10-Year Replacement Timeline ..................................................................................5 
Section 2.2: Galvanized Requiring Replacement ...........................................................................9 
Section 2.3: Calculating Service Line Replacement Pool ............................................................. 11 
Section 2.4: Water System Access to the Private Side of the Service Line .................................... 12 
Section 2.4.1: Reasonable Effort to Obtain Property Owner Consent ............................................................... 14 
Section 2.4.2: Rental Properties ......................................................................................................................... 14 
Section 2.5: Partial Service Line Replacements ........................................................................... 15 
Section 2.6: Inclusion of Lead Connectors and/or Galvanized Service Lines that Were/Are 
Downstream Lead Connectors Under Mandatory Replacement ................................................. 15 
Section 2.7: Annual Rolling Average ........................................................................................... 16 
Section 3: Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan ................................. 17 
Section 3.1: Updating Service Line Replacement Plans ............................................................... 18 
Section 3.2: Lead Connectors ...................................................................................................... 19 
Section 3.3: Non-Lead service Line Validation ............................................................................ 20 
Section 3.4: Unknown Identification Timeline ............................................................................ 21 
Section 4: Tap Sampling ...................................................................................................... 21 
Section 4.1: Tiered Sampling System .......................................................................................... 22 
Section 4.2: Sampling for Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) Efficacy .................................... 23 
Section 4.3: Addition of First Liter Sample ................................................................................. 23 
Section 5: Lead Action and Trigger Levels ........................................................................... 24 
Section 6: Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) .................................................................... 26 
Section 6.1: CCT Feasibility ........................................................................................................ 26 
Section 6.2: Repeated Re-Optimization After Action Level Exceedances .................................... 27 
Section 6.3: Delaying Optimized CCT Until After All LSLs/GRRs are Replaced in Five Years ... 27 
Section 7: Public Education ................................................................................................. 28 
Section 7.1: Public Education Feasibility .................................................................................... 28 
Section 7.2: Capacity of Water Systems to Conduct all the Required Public Education Activities 
in 30 days .................................................................................................................................... 29 

 
2 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Section 7.3: Capacity of Water Systems to Provide Individual Tap Sampling Results in Three 
Days ............................................................................................................................................ 31 
Section 7.4: Types and Timing of Outreach Activities Proposed for Failing to Meet LSL 
Replacement Rate ....................................................................................................................... 32 
Section 7.5: Notification of a Service Line Disturbance ............................................................... 33 
Section 7.6: Increased Frequency of Public Education Requirements ......................................... 34 
Section 7.7: Streamlining Public Education Requirements ......................................................... 35 
Section 8: Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances
 ........................................................................................................................................... 36 
Section 8.1: Definition of Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances ............................................ 37 
Section 8.2: Providing Filters to all Consumers After Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances . 38 
Section 9: Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities ............................................ 39 
Section 9.1: Previous Non-Regulatory Efforts to Promote School Testing ................................... 39 
Section 9.2: List of School and Child Care Facilities ................................................................... 40 
Section 9.3: Testing Requirements .............................................................................................. 41 
Section 9.4: Sampling Protocol.................................................................................................... 43 
Section 9.5: Waivers .................................................................................................................... 43 
Section 10: Compliance Dates.............................................................................................. 44 
Section 11: Economic Analysis and Affordability.................................................................. 45 
Section 11.1: Overall Costs.......................................................................................................... 46 
Section 11.2: HRCCA/Economic Analysis for the Proposed Rule ................................................ 47 
Section 11.3: Annualized costs not representative of compliance timeframe ................................ 48 
Section 11.4: Cost of Orthophosphate Removal and Clean Water Act (CWA)/ Safe Drinking 
Water Act (SDWA) Connection ................................................................................................... 49 
Section 11.5: Feasibility............................................................................................................... 50 
Section 11.6: Affordability .......................................................................................................... 51 
Section 12: Conclusion ........................................................................................................ 53 
Appendix A.............................................................................................................................. 
Appendix B ............................................................................................................................. 
Appendix C ............................................................................................................................. 
Appendix D ............................................................................................................................. 
 

 
3 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Section 1: Introduction 
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) is pleased to offer these comments on 
EPA’s National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI). AMWA acknowledges the consideration EPA has put into the proposed 
changes to the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) and recent Revisions (LCRR) and supports EPA’s 
efforts to address the complex issue of eliminating exposure to lead in drinking water. AMWA has 
been involved with the LCR since its inception and values all the work that EPA has done to 
decrease the public’s exposure to lead through drinking water.  
 
Addressing lead in drinking water is particularly challenging because – unlike most other 
contaminants – lead is typically not present in drinking water sources, and, therefore, it cannot be 
removed at the treatment plant. Instead, lead is introduced into drinking water in the distribution 
system, when treated water passes through buried service lines and premise plumbing containing 
lead. To minimize the absorption of lead into drinking water, water systems take a variety of 
measures that make water less corrosive to pipes, decreasing the likelihood that any lead in service 
lines or household plumbing will be released into the water. Because water systems may not have 
adequate information on the number and location of lead service lines and cannot control 
individual residents’ premise plumbing, there is no easy solution that can quickly and completely 
eliminate the problem of lead in drinking water. 
 
The revisions outlined in the LCRI far exceed simply mending the existing regulations and instead 
effectively upend the LCR. Water systems will need to devote significant time and resources to 
meet the full lead service line (LSL) replacement goal proposed in the LCRI. However, EPA has 
incorporated substantial additional requirements beyond this goal, many of which will become 
impractical once a water system has located and removed its LSLs and galvanized requiring 
replacement (GRR) lines.  
 
At the root of this proposed rulemaking is the goal of removing 100 percent of lead service lines 
within 10 years. AMWA aligns wholeheartedly with EPA’s shared objective to swiftly identify, 
remove, and replace lead service lines and agrees that the complete removal of all lead service 
lines is the ultimate goal. AMWA appreciates EPA's acknowledgment that this objective may not 
be universally attainable for every water system in the timeframe specified in the proposal. 
Because of this, we urge the agency to tailor the rule, using AMWA’s recommendations in these 
comments, to allow water systems to primarily focus on this principal goal of removal LSLs. 
Overloading systems with multiple concurrent requirements can divert essential money, time, and 
personnel from lead service line replacement efforts. 
 
In order to achieve the primary goal of the LCRI, full lead service line replacement, EPA, in this 
proposal, seems to equate access to private property with control of the private side of the service 
line. While AMWA does appreciate EPA recognizing instances in which the private side will not 
be accessible to the water system, the association cautions EPA against putting water systems in 

 
4 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
the untenable position of forcing individual customers to replace their side of the line. The 
feasibility of ultimately replacing the private side of the line comes down to funding: either the 
availability of state and federal funds to finance the private side replacement, or the entirety of the 
costs, in one form or another, falling on the ratepayers. 
 
The immense amount of public notification, education, and outreach requirements included in the 
proposed rule has the potential to disrupt ongoing programs designed to accelerate LSL 
replacements by utilities. Such notifications may inadvertently impede the positive momentum 
generated by utilities actively engaged in these replacement initiatives. One significant concern is 
the potential to create confusion among customers, particularly those with service lines of 
unknown material, who may perceive the notification as a cause for alarm or an indication of 
immediate risks. The public may question the effectiveness of ongoing LSL replacement 
programs, and the water system's commitment to ensuring safe drinking water might be called into 
question. The potential setback in progress resulting from public confusion or distrust highlights 
the delicate balance that water systems must strike in their communication strategies.  
 
Throughout the LCRI preamble, EPA uses anecdotal examples of cities and water systems that 
were able to identify and remove all LSLs in a short time to reinforce the agency’s claim that 
expedient, full removal is possible. While AMWA applauds these systems for the immense amount 
of time, resources, and planning that went into these efforts, and their ultimate achievements, these 
individual examples do not equate to data that justifies a sweeping, national mandate. Applauding 
the highlighted water systems for their commendable achievements is important, as it recognizes 
their commitment to addressing lead-related concerns. However, it is equally important to 
acknowledge the unique circumstances, local contexts, and resources available to each system. 
Anecdotal evidence, by its nature, tends to focus on specific instances that may not be 
representative of the broader spectrum of challenges faced by diverse water systems across the 
nation. 
 
AMWA also believes it is important to note that two major regulations under the Safe Drinking 
Water Act are expected to be finalized in 2024, including this rule and the National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) for six Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS). Each 
of these proposals carry three-year compliance dates from promulgation. These two rulemakings 
alone are estimated by EPA to cost up to a combined $4.8 billion annually to implement. In 
addition to complying with other regulations, there is a pressing demand for water systems to 
modernize aging infrastructure, improve customer experiences, and adapt to increasing threats 
from climate change and extreme weather. The escalating costs of materials and labor, influenced 
by supply chain disruptions, inflation, and workforce shortages, further compound these 
challenges.  
 
Publicly owned water systems are not-for-profit agencies that supply drinking water, a crucial 
and critical human necessity, at cost to the public. These water systems must balance the costs it 
takes to supply clean water and the rates it must charge customers to provide it. Contrary to the 
claims made by other stakeholders, water systems typically cannot pay for LSL replacement or 

 
5 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
any other infrastructure project, treatment process, or maintenance, without the funds coming 
directly from the ratepayers or from local, state, or federal sources, when available, which is 
ultimately, financed by the taxpayer. In either case, the general public will ultimately be 
responsible for footing the bill. Additionally, costs for test pits and investigations which do not 
result in construction of new infrastructure cannot be capitalized and thus must come from the 
utility’s operating budget. 
 
It is essential to dispel misconceptions and recognize that the financial burden of these increased 
costs is likely to be disproportionately felt by low-income communities. As water systems strive 
to meet stringent regulatory requirements and ensure the provision of safe and clean drinking 
water, the economic realities they face underscore the importance of exploring sustainable funding 
mechanisms and seeking support from various levels of government. Acknowledging these 
challenges is pivotal in fostering a nuanced understanding of the financial dynamics involved in 
the essential task of maintaining and upgrading water infrastructure for the benefit of communities. 
 
AMWA will delve further into each of these topics throughout this comment letter and asks that 
EPA consider these recommendations and suggestions. In this letter, AMWA also requests 
clarifications on several aspects of the proposed rule. The association believes our comments will 
provide EPA with valuable suggestions that, if adopted, will ensure the proposed rule is achievable, 
practical, and enforceable. We thank you in advance for your consideration. 
Section 2: Service Line Replacement 
 
AMWA supports EPA’s objective to attain full lead service line (LSL) replacement – not partial – 
and agrees that the end goal should be the removal of the entire lead service line. AMWA 
appreciates EPA’s acknowledgement of situations where a partial lead service line replacement 
would be unavoidable. AMWA firmly believes that water systems will need adequate flexibility 
and resource support to achieve 100% LSL replacement and urges EPA to consider the following 
before finalizing the rule.  
 
As EPA works to finalize the LCRI, the association urges the agency to allow for flexibilities and 
refrain from “one-size-fits-all” approaches that will not work at all water systems. While AMWA 
recommends changes in this letter, a central theme throughout our comments is this: The main 
goal of the Safe Drinking Water Act is to protect public health via the provision of safe drinking 
water, and a main component of the LCRI is to remove LSLs, which do not always pose an 
immediate risk to public health. Any final rule should keep this difference in mind and refrain from 
concurrent requirements that can spread resources too thinly, diverting essential money, time, and 
personnel from lead service replacement efforts, with little increased health benefits. 
 
Section 2.1: 10-Year Replacement Timeline 
 

 
6 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
A major component of this proposed rule is the requirement that public water systems (water 
systems) remove all LSLs and galvanized requiring replacement (GRR) lines within 10 years of 
the compliance date of the rule. GRRs are galvanized lines that are, or were, ever downstream of 
an LSL. AMWA emphasizes that any revisions to the LCR must consider the practical challenges 
faced by water systems seeking to replace all publicly and privately-owned LSLs (See: Appendices 
A, B, C, and D). While EPA has addressed some of these concerns, of which AMWA is 
appreciative of, the association continues to highlight obstacles that must be addressed to finalize 
a rule that water systems and states can fully implement.  
 
AMWA appreciates EPA’s acknowledgment that some water systems will be unable to meet the 
proposed requirement to complete LSLs replacement within 10 years. These include water systems 
that have over 100,000 known LSLs/GRRs and would be required to replace over 10,000 lines 
annually, and those with a high proportion (0.039 or 39 replacements per 1,000 households) of 
LSLs and GRR service lines in their distribution system relative to their total number of households 
served. AMWA does believe that these thresholds are high, and will affect few systems, but 
otherwise is pleased to see some avenues for systems that have a heavy burden to lift to replace all 
lines. AMWA’s suggestions for a more appropriate threshold for systems with a high number of 
lines is explained in this section. 
 
EPA requests comment on if the 10,000 LSLs replaced annually should be the maximum threshold, 
or if another number such as 8,000 would be more appropriate. To put this into perspective, utilities 
required to replace 10,000 lines per year would need to conduct approximately 40 LSL 
replacements daily. The following equation assumes utility crews would work only Mondays 
through Fridays, not work on federal holidays, and could replace lead lines year-round. 
 
 
 
10,000 service lines / ~250 working days a year = 40 lines a day 
 
As currently proposed, AMWA does not believe the replacement rate of 10,000 lines annually will 
be feasible for several systems. A single crew of workers would likely only be able to replace a 
couple lines a day, meaning multiple crews would need to be working every day to meet this goal. 
Water systems located in northern climates, where below-freezing temperatures and winter 
weather is an issue, could see those days cut by 1/3, or even more, meaning that they would have 
to replace approximately 60 lines per day to remain on schedule. This is assuming perfect weather 
the rest of the year, 100% focus on LSL replacement, adequate work crew availability, and other 
conditions where LSL replacement can take place.  
 
In reality, the number of lines that would need to be replaced daily would be much higher than the 
estimate of 40 lines a day. Furthermore, a water system would need to coordinate the efforts of 
work crews, assure all permissions and preparations by homeowners have been acquired, and 
devote significant financial and time resources to the task of line replacement. These actions would 
all occur while water systems have a vast number of other priorities that require attention. A 
lowered threshold would allow water systems to make progress on LSL replacement while also 

 
7 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
addressing other public health and system maintenance responsibilities and spreading out limited 
resources.  
 
EPA has also proposed a threshold ratio of 0.039 annual replacements per household served (39 
replacements per 1,000 households). If replacing all LSLs and GRRs causes a system to exceed 
this ratio, a system is eligible for a deferred deadline. AMWA appreciates EPA’s recognition that 
the quantity and density of LSLs can create barriers to replacement plans. While this ratio may not 
cover many utilities, it does recognize that there are limits to what a water system can accomplish 
in terms of LSL replacement rates. AMWA would like to emphasize that this rate will leave many 
water systems below the threshold but still unable to meet the challenges of the replacement 
requirements. EPA’s anecdotal examples of water systems able to meet these rates do not use data 
that can be scaled to all other water systems.  
 
EPA should shape the rule in such a way that water systems with elevated lead issues will have 
the resources they need to quickly remove LSLs. Since the presence of an LSL alone does not 
itself automatically result in an individual drinking water sample exceeding the action level, there 
should be avenues for water systems that have documented success at controlling lead 
concentrations within their system, whether through corrosion control or another method, to 
replace service lines at a rate that does not sacrifice other critical treatment and infrastructure 
projects.  
 
For example, Cleveland Water is ranked high among the water systems with the largest number of 
LSLs in the system, but lead levels detected in samples have been below 15 ppb since 1997, and 
constituently below 5 ppb since 2009.1 Cleveland Water would qualify for one of the deferment 
methods proposed, however, the system will have to divert significant resources toward meeting 
this replacement goal, even though lead levels are far below the proposed action level. If water 
systems were able to couple LSL replacement with things like water main replacement, this would 
present a cost-effective solution that gets LSLs out, but also does not cripple a water system 
financially.  
 
Easing these thresholds could have increased public health benefits by allowing water systems to 
evaluate where resources can best be utilized to reduce public health risks from a variety of 
sources, like PFAS or aging infrastructure. Currently, AMWA members continue to be plagued by 
ongoing supply chain disruptions, inflation, and workforce shortages2. These issues continue to 
delay critical water treatment and infrastructure work, while simultaneously driving up costs of 
 
1 Farr, Andrew. (January 29, 2024). Inside Cleveland Water’s Ambitious Lead Service Line Replacement Program. 
Trenchless Technology. https://trenchlesstechnology.com/inside-cleveland-waters-ambitious-lead-service-line-
replacement-program/.  
2 Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA). December 20, 2023. AMWA comments on availability of 
products for water infrastructure projects. https://www.amwa.net/system/files/linked-
files/AMWA_EPA_2023%20comments%20on%20products%20for%20water%20infrastructure%20projects.pdf  

 
8 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
projects. Easing the thresholds would ensure systems with the highest risk have the materials, 
labor, and financial assistance to address LSL replacement issues.  
 
While AMWA recognizes, and is extremely encouraged by, examples of cities and water systems 
that have been able to replace all LSLs in 10 years or less, it is important to acknowledge that 
many of these instances included either extenuating circumstances or as EPA admits “relatively 
low number of LSLs (<1,000).” While many systems will have fewer than 1,000 LSLs, EPA 
cannot ignore the very real challenges that systems with more LSLs will face. EPA cites Flint, 
Michigan and Newark, New Jersey as examples of cities where LSL replacement has taken less 
than 10 years. AMWA applauds the efforts of these cities but points out the immense exposure 
and media these cities received because of elevated lead levels, and as a result, the federal funding 
these cities received in a timely manner. This resulted in outside funds being made quickly 
available, and while it streamlined the LSL removal process, it also required lead to be the focus 
of those utilities, demanding the vast majority of time and resources to address it. Not all cities 
with LSLs have exceeded the lead action level, and therefore cannot justify this type of response 
while other pressing updates are needed to address other regulations, aging infrastructure, and 
other priorities. AMWA would like to reiterate that EPA should include options for systems that 
do not have elevated lead levels to remove LSLs at a rate that allows them to focus on other public 
health risks in their system, particularly for systems that might have both PFAS and LSLs.   
 
It seems unfair that EPA would point to exceptional circumstances in which water systems were 
able to complete LSL replacement in 10 years or less but then proceed to say, “While EPA is aware 
that some systems completed their service line replacement programs in more than 10 years, EPA 
does not interpret these examples as conclusive or dispositive evidence that a 10-year deadline is 
infeasible.”3 AMWA understands a 10-year timeline will be possible for many water systems and 
does not dispute that they should strive to meet this goal if financially and technically feasible. 
However, EPA should allow systems with legitimate concerns regarding compliance within 10 
years, and those who are able to demonstrate that lead concentrations do not exceed the action 
level, flexibility with the 10-year timeline.  
 
One member water system in California detailed their efforts to remove LSLs that were installed 
during the World War II era when copper was unavailable. The water system ramped up efforts to 
replace these LSLs in the 1990s but was only able to remove approximately 200 per year without 
adversely impacting other critical work that needed to be done. This underscores the importance 
of recognizing that replacement is one of many projects water systems must accomplish to protect 
public health, and EPA must take risk into account when finalizing a regulation, so the agency is 
not choosing a water systems priority for them without taking other factors into account.  
 
 
3 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (December 6, 2023). Preamble, National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements. https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-
0036.  

 
9 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Other obstacles that could delay full lead service line replacement can be found in the federal tax 
code. If a water system attempts to finance the replacement of both the public and private portions 
of a lead service line with tax-exempt bonds, which are a common and cost-effective infrastructure 
financing mechanism, it must first navigate the IRS’ “private business use test” to certify that a 
disproportionate portion of the bond issuance would not benefit a private, home-based business.4 
This process adds months of work and expense to the process, as utilities must document whether 
each property with a private lead service line is the location of a rental property or a home-based 
business. Any final LCRI rule must be created with the knowledge that the US tax code currently 
imposes difficulties on utilities using tax-exempt bonds to pay for private-side lead service line 
replacement. 
 
AMWA also requests that EPA consider how setting such high thresholds could affect water 
systems whose primacy agencies accelerate their replacement timelines because EPA has deemed 
10,000 LSL replacements a year as feasible. By setting such a high threshold, EPA risks some 
primacy agencies setting unrealistic, accelerated timelines for some water systems solely because 
EPA chose an arbitrary maximum yearly replacement that will be difficult, if not impossible, for 
some water systems to attain. For example, if a system has 10,000 total service lines assigned lead, 
GRR, or unknown status, a primacy agency could say that EPA has deemed 10,000 replacements 
a year as feasible and require that system to finish everything in one year. However, as EPA details 
throughout the preamble, it will take time for identification, obtaining permissions, planning, etc. 
EPA should caution primacy agencies against accelerating timelines unless a consultation with the 
water system results in a mutual understanding that it can be accomplished.  
 
Section 2.2: Galvanized Requiring Replacement 
 
AMWA supports the inclusion of galvanized lines downstream of lead service line within the 
definition of lead service line since galvanized pipe can absorb lead particles; the association 
believe this designation is the most protective of public health. The current proposed rule defines 
a GRR line as one that is, or ever was, downstream of an LSL or a service line with an unknown 
lead status.  
 
AMWA is concerned with the inclusion of “ever was” within the determination of galvanized pipe 
which is downstream of a lead service line or a pipe of unknown material. This distinction is 
problematic as water systems may not have specific records for service lines that go back to the 
initial installation and may be unable to definitively prove or disprove what material may have 
been upstream of the galvanized line throughout the life of the service line. Additionally, current 
and long-term employees who are aware of past practices, and have a first-hand account, are able 
to certify that the water system did not have lead lines preceding galvanized pipes without this 
 
4 Office of Representative Dan Kildee. (March 8, 2022). Kildee Introduces Bill to Help Communities Replace Lead 
Pipes. https://dankildee.house.gov/media/press-releases/kildee-introduces-bill-help-communities-replace-lead-pipes  

 
10 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
information being in historical records. EPA could allow this information to be used by water 
systems when historical records were not kept. 
 
EPA cites several published studies that document evidence that iron scales in galvanized pipes 
can act as a sink and source for drinking water lead, and therefore determines all GRRs must be 
replaced regardless of the length of time that has passed since the LSL was removed. EPA says, 
“While one stakeholder recommended that galvanized lines that were downstream of an LSL 
should be classified as non-lead after a period of time, stating that these lines eventually stop being 
a lead source (USEPA, 2023j), EPA disagrees with this stakeholder.” EPA does not provide 
adequate reasoning for its disagreement.  
 
Water systems are seeing instances where the LSL was removed many years previously, and 
current lead concentrations at the galvanized lines are an order of magnitude lower than the 
proposed action level. While AMWA is aware that EPA in the preamble addresses this, the 
association believes EPA should reassess this determination and consider the costs and benefits of 
removing galvanized lines that have not been downstream of an LSL for a prolonged period from 
the mandatory replacement. It is possible that there are no health benefits of removing GRRs after 
a certain amount of time since these galvanized lines may not result in elevated lead levels. EPA 
should consider revisiting state of the science regarding whether GRRs are a source of lead after a 
period.  
 
For example, the McFadden study from Washington, D.C. cautioned the following:  
 
The fact that substantial lead release from pipe loops and from residential galvanized 
plumbing after full LSLR continued even after months of exposure indicates that iron 
scales can be a persistent source of lead over extended periods…However, substantial 
variation in magnitude of lead release within this data set indicates that the question of 
whether this phenomenon might result in lead release that persistently exceeds the LCR 
AL over the long term must be determined on a case-by-case basis. Although these data 
suggest that any home with galvanized plumbing and historical lead service may 
potentially be susceptible to a high lead risk, the seven sampled homes with galvanized 
plumbing provided insufficient statistical significance to quantify that risk for general 
application. Substantial additional study is required before general guidelines can be 
developed.5 
  
A recent Water Research Foundation study, Evaluating Key Factors That Affect the Accumulation 
and Release of Lead from Galvanized Pipes, suggests a decision tree whereby utilities can classify 
 
5 McFadden, M., Giani, R., Kwan, P., and Reiber, S.H. (April 1, 2011). Contributions to drinking water lead from 
galvanized iron corrosion scales. Journal AWWA, 103(4): 76–89. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1551-
8833.2011.tb11437.x  

 
11 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
their galvanized pipes as “low risk” or “high risk” of lead release based on various factors.6 The 
LCRI should allow water systems with old GRRs to determine whether their site-specific 
conditions create this phenomenon. As Edwards et. al noted: “This research provides methods for 
utilities to identify and classify their unique scenario using profile sampling, scale analysis, lead 
isotope ratios, and element co‐occurrence within water samples and pipe scale.” Similar to 
conducting a corrosion control study, water systems with historical GRRs should be allowed to 
conduct an investigation to determine whether their GRRs are or are not a source of lead, and 
therefore whether or not removal is justified from a public health standpoint. 
 
AMWA would like EPA to reconsider its proposal for a galvanized line to be considered a GRR 
if it is downstream of a lead status unknown service line. The proposed rule would require systems 
to identify all their unknown service lines by the 10-year deadline for replacement, so water 
systems will know if their galvanized lines are/were downstream of an LSL by that time. 
Therefore, in AMWA’s view, this provision is not needed in the definition of GRR and could result 
in galvanized lines being replaced that don’t need to be, since the unknown upstream may later be 
classified as non-lead. This will save resources and allow water systems to focus on replacing 
known LSLs and GRRs.  
 
Section 2.3: Calculating Service Line Replacement Pool 
 
EPA is proposing in the LCRI that water systems calculate their replacement pools at the start of 
the year by adding up the total number of LSLs, GRRs, and unknowns in their system. At the start 
of each following year, this replacement pool only changes as water systems identify the 
composition of their unknown service lines. AMWA seeks further clarification on EPA’s inclusion 
of unknown service lines as part of the replacement pool. Many systems have many or even a 
majority of unknown service lines due to the lack of available records, and some water systems’ 
inventories may include only non-lead and unknown status service lines. While these utilities are 
likely making significant efforts to identify these unknowns, it is not feasible to expect water 
systems to have all their unknowns classified after year 1, particularly utilities with thousands of 
unknown lines.  
 
Since the replacement pool is calculated at the start of each year, some water systems could run 
into the issue where the number of unknowns in their system will set an unrealistic replacement 
goal for the year. For example, if a system has 40,000 unknown service lines, with all others 
classified as non-lead, that system, under EPA’s proposed rule would be required to replace ~4,000 
services in the first year (10% annual removal; 40,000 x 0.10). If, throughout their efforts, a utility 
cannot find 4,000 service lines to replace, or finds no lead among the “unknowns,” that first year 
will result in a less than a 10% replacement rate and could therefore affect their ability to reach 
10% in a rolling annual average calculation. Even if said utility exceeded the replacement rate in 
 
6 Edwards et al. (2022). Evaluating Key Factors That Affect the Accumulation and Release of Lead from 
Galvanized Pipes. https://www.waterrf.org/research/projects/evaluating-key-factors-affect-accumulation-and-
release-lead-galvanized-pipes  

 
12 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
the next two years, a 0% replacement in the first year, or in subsequent years, would result in being 
out of compliance even when the system has not identified any LSLs or GRRs.  
 
Therefore, AMWA recommends EPA include only LSLs and GRRs in the replacement pool 
calculation. Water systems already need to have all unknowns identified in the 10-year deadline, 
so the incentive to classify these unknowns is already there. In addition, further incentive is offered 
by the proposed deferred deadline calculation for the 0.039 ratio that only includes known LSL 
and GRRs. As a system classifies its unknown service lines, it should be required to add any newly 
identified lead lines to the replacement pool for the following year’s 10% calculation. 
 
Section 2.4: Water System Access to the Private Side of the Service Line 
 
EPA, in this proposal, seems to equate access to private property with control of the private side 
of the service line. AMWA cautions that this assumption is not true for water systems. To 
understand the difficulties associated with full lead service line replacement, it is important to 
understand the ownership of service lines that connect water mains to the building inlet of each 
home served by a water system. Typically, ownership of service lines is shared by a community 
water system and a customer. The water utility usually owns the portion of the service line from 
the water main to the curb stop or meter, and the private property owner usually owns the portion 
of the service line from the property line to the building inlet. The water system is generally unable 
to access the customer-owned portion of the service line without the customer’s permission, nor is 
the utility under any obligation to replace, or pay for replacement of, the customer portion of a 
service line. In short, the customer portion of a service line is the customer’s private property, akin 
to premise plumbing inside the home. 
 
This does not mean that water systems are wholly unable to financially aid in the replacement of 
privately owned lead service lines. Many utilities often offer to replace the customer-owned 
portion of a service line at cost to the customer, in conjunction with the water system’s replacement 
of the publicly owned portion. Additionally, some utilities and localities have developed plans to 
fully replace lead service lines without charging customers individually. Some opportunities and 
challenges of these approaches will be discussed further in these comments.  
 
AMWA requests that EPA clarify in the final rule and develop specific guidance for instances 
where utilities are barred by state or local statutes from spending certain utility funds on privately-
owned service line replacement. Specifically, AMWA is concerned about the implications for 
homeowners who cannot afford to pay for replacement and whether water systems will be 
considered “in control” of a privately-owned service line that the water system legally cannot pay 
to replace. For example, in some states and localities, water systems are barred by statute or 
regulation from using certain funds for individual customer benefit – including replacing privately-
owned sides of a lead service line. In instances where the water system identified a privately-
owned side of a service line composed of lead, homeowners may not be able to pay to replace the 
line but nonetheless want it replaced. AMWA appreciates that EPA included a provision in the 

 
13 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
LCRI for water systems to record when local or state authorities do not permit the use of certain 
funds for individual customer benefit. AMWA is specifically concerned about the implications 
this potential scenario will have for low-income communities.  
 
AMWA appreciates the proposed provisions in the LCRI allowing a water system to designate a 
service line as "out of its control" in specific situations; however, AMWA seeks clarification on 
the consequences once a service line is deemed out of the system's control. For instance, what is 
required after the 10-year period if systems still have LSLs in their inventory due to refusals from 
homeowners to replace lines? Are recordkeeping, outreach efforts, monitoring of building 
ownership, etc., for these LSLs included in the cost-benefit analysis? EPA must provide clear 
guidance on actions regarding LSLs out of a system's control while ensuring simplicity and 
streamlining to minimize time and financial burden. 
 
Some water systems may have minimal publicly owned lead portions in their service lines, 
resulting in LSLs or unknowns being mostly located on the private side. This places water systems 
entirely dependent on property owners to meet replacement rates and identify unknown 
compositions. The first-year replacement calculations for these water systems will be particularly 
challenging, requiring substantial outreach, permission-seeking, planning, and coordination to 
access the private side or obtain information on service line composition. There is no guarantee of 
obtaining sufficient approvals, potentially leading to non-compliance with the 10% replacement 
rate in the first year. This may necessitate additional resources in the subsequent years to maintain 
compliance with the annual rolling average. The process must not unduly burden water systems, 
especially considering their concerns about LSLs under their control and other priorities. 
 
Replacing LSLs on the private side involves many instances where people’s yards, gardens, 
foundations, walls, and other private property features could be disturbed. Replacing those lines 
creates questions as to who is responsible for any damage done during replacement, but also who 
is responsible a few years down the road if something goes wrong. If a utility can cover the cost 
of a replacement, but several years later there is an issue with that line, will the customer expect 
the utility to come back and handle it, free of charge, since they installed it years ago? If not, will 
this lead to animosity from customers who feel they shouldn’t have to pay for their private side at 
all? EPA should consider this when determining requirements for private side replacement.  
 
While many water systems across the country can and do offer incentives to encourage 
homeowners to cooperate on LSL replacement projects, in the absence of the enactment of local 
ordinances that compel homeowners to take action, water systems themselves are extremely 
limited in their ability to force a homeowner to consent to the replacement of a privately-owned 
LSL. Any revised rule therefore should not hold water systems responsible for falling short of 
prescribed replacement targets due to lack of customer cooperation on private-side replacement. 
EPA must reflect in this rulemaking what it has presented in initiatives like the “Get the Lead Out” 
event – that LSL replacement is a community-wide effort that will require cooperation and buy-in 
from community groups and citizens themselves.  
 

 
14 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Section 2.4.1: Reasonable Effort to Obtain Property Owner Consent 
 
EPA is proposing that a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent is four outreach 
attempts using two different communication methods. While AMWA believes this to be excessive, 
the association insists that EPA not increase this number of communications in its final rule. Water 
systems already have a multitude of new recordkeeping requirements in this proposed rule; adding 
more will only increase the burden. If a property owner does not respond after four attempts with 
two different modes of communications, the odds are the property owner will not respond at all.  
 
Obtaining permissions at all properties within a distribution system will not be as simple as 
contacting the account holder. This is because the account holder in many cases is not the property 
owner. It could be that a member of the family owns the home, the property is a rental (address 
below), or the property is not a primary residence and therefore uninhabited for much of the year. 
In each of these situations, water systems will have to track down the owners, get contact 
information, conduct the outreach, and wait for responses. Many of these property owners could 
be located out of state or even out of country. Water systems will have to use significant resources 
and time to conduct this outreach. 
 
Section 2.4.2: Rental Properties 
 
AMWA has many concerns regarding the LCRI’s implications for water systems’ interaction with 
rental properties. These concerns include substantial difficulties contacting rental property 
inhabitants and property owners, obtaining permission to replace lines from the property owners, 
and replacing the LSLs on rental properties. Furthermore, AMWA is concerned that without 
community support and coordination, occupants of rental units could miss out on benefits of LSL 
replacement.   
 
In nearly all cases, water utilities require the permission of the property owner to conduct a lead 
service line replacement on the customer property side. Without adequate support to connect with 
property owners, which can range from individuals managing a few properties to large 
organizations with multiple, multi-unit properties, many utilities may not be able fully replace lead 
service lines where rental residents would benefit. For example, in multi-unit rental buildings, 
water systems may not have the individual addresses for each occupant or a total count of units. 
Water systems need substantial resources, time, and support to carry out the provision of LSLR on 
rental properties, as it will be a significant undertaking for any water system meeting all other 
provisions included in this proposed rule. 
 
AMWA recommends that EPA provide additional guidance and assistance to help with targeted 
outreach and mandates to landlords, public officials, and community groups in neighborhoods with 
high proportions of rental housing served by LSLs. The occupants of rented homes generally lack 
the authority to initiate or approve private-side LSL replacement work, and therefore could 
continue to be served by an LSL if a rental property owner is unresponsive to water system 

 
15 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
outreach or refuses to allow the water system to conduct LSLR. In developing guidance and 
support on connecting with rental property owners and community groups, EPA should account 
for the increased time and resource commitment this will require. 
 
The situation could also arise where a property owner approves a replacement and a water system 
proceeds to do the work, but a renter was not consulted or disagreed with the approval. This could 
create unnecessary discomfort for water system employees trying to do their job but could also 
present dangers to employees as well. These situations highlight the need for EPA to consider 
additional flexibilities in circumstances where the water system must make decisions that affect 
the safety of their employees.  
 
Finally, AMWA requests EPA reevaluate whether the agency accurately described “customer” and 
“consumer” accurately in the LCRI. These terms are not interchangeable. A customer is an account 
holder who pays a water bill and whose information a utility typically has. A consumer is anyone 
drinking water from a utility’s distribution system.   
 
Section 2.5: Partial Service Line Replacements 
 
AMWA agrees with EPA’s discouragement of partial lead service line replacements in its 
proposed rule; partial replacements carry few public health benefits and allow lead pipes to remain 
in the ground. However, a total ban on partial replacements, as some have advocated, is ill-advised 
as it could interfere with the realities of emergency water main replacement work and planned 
replacements alike. For example, emergency water main replacement work may offer an 
opportunity for a water system to simultaneously replace the publicly owned portion of a 
household’s lead service line in a cheaper manner. Likewise, a planned water main replacement 
project may result in a new alignment or spacing of the main, necessitating replacement of at least 
part of a lead service line. Ideally the privately owned portion of the lead line would be replaced 
at the same time, but a water system’s ability to do so is often contingent upon that customer’s 
willingness to allow work on his or her property (and, in many cases, for the customer to pay the 
costs associated with replacing the privately owned portion). Simultaneously replacing LSLs 
within control on the water system during planned water main projects is also significantly less 
expensive in the long run. The proposal recognizes that there will be situations where customer 
consent cannot be quickly obtained, and in those limited cases permits a water system to at least 
remove the publicly owned portion of a lead service line when the emergency main repair projects 
or other scheduled infrastructure work has provided an opportunity to do so. 
 
Section 2.6: Inclusion of Lead Connectors and/or Galvanized Service Lines that Were/Are 
Downstream Lead Connectors Under Mandatory Replacement  
 
EPA requests comment on whether the Agency should include lead connectors or galvanized 
service lines that are or were downstream of a lead connector as part of mandatory replacement. 
AMWA agrees with EPA’s approach to not include lead connectors or galvanized service lines 

 
16 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
downstream of a lead connector for the reasons EPA states in the preamble, including that “…in 
many cases connector material records are not available, and field investigating all connector 
material in the absence of records ‘would not be feasible or practical for most systems’ as material 
identification would generally require disturbing pavement and repaving.” 
 
Requiring a system to identify every single connector in its distribution system is simply not 
feasible, and AMWA thanks EPA for recognizing that. The proposed LCRR and LCRI require 
systems to replace lead connectors as they are encountered. AMWA recommends EPA keep this 
provision in the final rule to ensure these potential sources of lead are removed as they are 
uncovered but urges EPA to refrain from including lead connectors and galvanized service line 
downstream from lead connectors as part of the mandatory replacement requirement.  
 
Section 2.7: Annual Rolling Average 
 
EPA is proposing a three-year rolling average for required replacement rates of LSLs. AMWA 
prefers that EPA consider using a “cumulative average” to determine a water system’s compliance 
with a mandated percentage target and replacement goal. AMWA is however appreciative that in 
moving from the LCRR to the proposed LCRI, EPA increased the number of years included in the 
rolling average from two to three. If EPA does not amend the proposal to include a cumulative 
average in the final rule, which is AMWA’s preference, the association asserts that the number of 
years should not decrease.  
 
Allowing for a cumulative average will ensure that water systems are given credit for their previous 
accomplishments and are provided flexibility for the difficulties which may arise through no fault 
of the system. It is likely that a water system will have more success finding customers who will 
agree to pay for the replacement of their portion of the service line during the water system’s initial 
outreach efforts. As the water system’s replacement program continues, the pool of willing 
customers will likely diminish as the water system goes through subsequent rounds of outreach to 
customers who have previously chosen to forgo replacement. 
 
A hypothetical example of how this cumulative average might be implemented with a 10% 
mandated replacement target is shown in the table below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
17 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Table 1: Hypothetical comparison of cumulative average versus three-year rolling average 
 
Year 
Percentage of 
LSLs Replaced 
Cumulative Average 
Percentage of LSL 
replaced 
Three-Year 
Rolling Average 
1 
10 
10.00 
10.00 
2 
12 
11.00 
11.00 
3 
12 
11.33 
11.33 
4 
11.5 
11.38 
11.83 
5 
8.5 
10.80 
10.67 
6 
12 
11.00 
10.67 
7 
6 
10.29 
8.83 
8 
10 
10.25 
9.33 
9 
10 
10.22 
8.67 
10 
8 
10.00 
9.33 
 
This hypothetical situation could reflect some systems LSL replacement compliance realities. 
Some water systems may be able to replace more LSLs earlier in the 10-year period if they have 
completed inventories and the resources needed from sources such as the Bipartisan Infrastructure 
Law (BIL). Using the cumulative average approach, the above hypothetical system, at the end of 
the 10 years, would remain in compliance and have a cumulative average of 10% LSL replacement 
annually. However, under the three-year rolling average approach, starting in year seven, this 
system would be out of compliance. This alternative approach still allows water systems to work 
toward 100% in the require time, but would allow for more flexibility in scheduling, as there may 
be more variability in replacement rates, particularly between the start and end of the replacement 
period.  
 
As seen with the cumulative average example, allowing for flexibility could lead to the 
replacement of LSLs at a faster rate, because a water system would know that any additional lines 
beyond the mandated percentage replaced in one year would still count toward its replacement 
mandate in future years. Water systems should not be penalized for replacing a larger number of 
LSLs earlier on in the 10-year period, and the proposed three-year rolling average discourages 
that.  
Section 3: Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
 
AMWA supports EPA’s goal for lead service line inventories and agrees inventories are a good 
method for informing the public about the extent and scope of the lead service lines in their 
community. Information on lead service line locations is also necessary for water systems to target 
areas for potential lead service line removal in an LSLR plan. AMWA agrees with the agency’s 
understanding that many systems do not have complete records on LSL locations and would 

 
18 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
struggle to quickly obtain this data. With this lack of full data in mind, AMWA appreciates any 
additional time and flexibilities EPA has provided to water systems to continually update 
inventories, rather than have a completed (no unknowns) inventory by the compliance date.  
 
Section 3.1: Updating Service Line Replacement Plans 
 
AMWA agrees that any state and local laws and water tariff agreements that could prevent a system 
from full LSL replacement should be well documented in a water system replacement plan. 
AMWA asks for further clarifications in the final rule as to what happens when these state or local 
laws cause delays in or prevent LSL replacement. For water systems in states with ambiguous 
laws, AMWA also asks that water systems be able to provide opinion from legal counsel 
demonstrating that state law does not provide enough information to give the system clear 
authority to use rate revenue, or other available funds, to fund private lead service line replacement. 
Without express statutory authority, a clear mechanism for how water systems should handle these 
situations should be laid out clearly in a final rule, and the remedies should neither be overly 
burdensome nor costly.  
 
Across the nation, many states have ambiguous or altogether no statutory language regarding 
whether water systems may use revenue from ratepayer funds to fund lead service line 
replacements. This ambiguity has led many legal counsels of water systems to discourage water 
systems from using revenue from rates – typically a system’s largest source of funding – to fund 
private side replacement. In 2019, researchers from the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) and 
Harvard Law School reviewed state laws and policies in 13 states with the highest number of LSLs 
(at the time of publication) and found no explicit barriers to the use of ratepayer funds for lead 
service line replacement in seven of the 13 states.7 However, a lack of explicit legal barriers is not 
the same as explicit statutory authority. Many water systems are not willing, nor have the financial 
or legal resources, to risk a legal battle over their ability to fund lead service line replacements. 
Moving forward with a program that uses ratepayer revenue for replacing the private side of a LSL 
is an untenable option for utilities that do not have express authority; doing so could go against the 
advice of utility attorneys or risk lawsuits that could immediately halt a program and cost a water 
system more in damages or legal fees.   
 
The complexity and uniqueness of each state’s grant of legal authority to water systems for 
conducting and funding service line replacement on the property owner’s side of the service line 
(private side replacement) is important for EPA to recognize. It is well established that inspections 
of private property to determine compliance with laws, codes, regulations, etc. are considered a 
search of private property and must comply with the requirements of the Fourth Amendment - 
meaning the inspection must be conducted with consent of the owner/occupant, or pursuant to an 
administrative inspection warrant.  
 
7 Goho., S. A., Saenz, M., & Neltner, T. (2019). “Rates could fund lead pipe replacement in critical states.” 
https://clinics.law.harvard.edu/environment/files/2019/04/Rates-Fund-LSL-Replacement-
States_Harvard_EDF_2019.pdf  

 
19 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
In Kentucky, water systems are either special purpose government entities (Special Districts), 
owned by municipalities, or privately owned.  In each case, the rules and authority of the water 
system vary. For Special Districts, their statutory authority is limited to furnishing a public water 
supply. Special Districts are regulated by the Public Service Commission, which specifically ends 
water system ownership at the meter pit located near or at the property line. Furthermore, the 
Public Service Commission, by statute, limits the scope of how rates can be collected and how 
funds are dispersed to ensure a particular customer or set of customers do not obtain any special 
advantage or subject to a disadvantage not experienced by the entire customer base. For private 
water systems, the authority to enter private property is similarly limited.    
 
Alternatively, Kentucky municipal owned water systems are not regulated by the Public Service 
Commission and may, depending on the type of municipality it is, have greater latitude under their 
statutory and constitutional obligations to enter private property, conduct, and fund private side 
replacement.  While some states such as Michigan and Illinois have already addressed these myriad 
legal authority concerns through legislative action, many states have not and must tackle under 
their statutory and constitutional framework that provides enumerated protections for citizens on 
their private property.  For each of our members, implementing the proposed rule will require 
significant legal analysis based on the statutory and legal constraints facing each water system and 
for many systems where state legislatures have not made a clear mandate or allowance, it could 
result in numerous legal challenges against the water system. 
 
Furthermore, AMWA is concerned EPA is downplaying the barriers that exist for water systems 
when a section of the preamble is entitled “perceived barriers,” particularly in relation to using 
ratepayer funds to conduct private side replacement. EPA intimates that water systems falsely 
believe they have these barriers and points to some states that do not have prohibitions on funding 
private side replacement. While some states do have explicit permission to use ratepayer funds and 
some water systems have developed novel funding methods to fund private replacements, EPA 
should neither diminish the serious lack of clarity available to water systems and their legal 
counsels on whether systems may use ratepayer revenue to fund private lead service line 
replacements, nor should EPA expect every water system to take on the burden of pursuing 
exhaustive measures of alternative funding or risk legal challenges to fund their replacement 
programs.  Furthermore, that kind of language makes it incredibly difficult for water systems that 
do encounter legal counsel opinions to not pursue funding private replacement or that have state 
and local laws that prevent timely LSL replacements to communicate this to the public. This only 
further erodes the public’s trust in their drinking water utility. 
 
Section 3.2: Lead Connectors 
 
AMWA supports the provision in the proposal for utilities to keep track of known lead connectors 
and appreciates EPA recognizing that the identification of all connectors will not be feasible, 
particularly for large systems. However, AMWA believes that this information is more 

 
20 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
appropriately housed in the materials evaluation, not in the LSL inventory. AMWA also supports 
the requirement to replace lead connectors as they are encountered. This will ensure lead 
connectors are not only replaced but are replaced in the most cost-effective way.  
 
AMWA does have concerns with EPA’s definition of a connector, specifically with the provision 
defining them as having a maximum length of two feet. While AMWA understands EPA must 
provide specificity as to what constitutes a connector, the EPA definition is inconsistent with 
normal practices at many utilities. For example, the New York City “Rules Governing and 
Restricting the Use and Supply of Water” definition of gooseneck requires the connector to be 
between three and five feet in length.8 If EPA finalizes the definition of connector as is, every 
connector in New York City would need to be identified, inventoried, and potentially replaced 
depending on the composition. Since EPA has stated it does not deem it feasible for this to happen, 
AMWA recommends redefining the definition of connector to be less than five feet to account for 
this.  
 
Section 3.3: Non-Lead service Line Validation 
 
EPA is proposing to require water systems to validate a pool of service lines that have been 
identified as non-lead by any other action besides records review or visual inspection of two points 
of the line. While AMWA understands the intent behind this requirement, the association has 
several reservations about it as proposed and recommends two revisions.  
 
First, many systems have already began their customer outreach campaigns to identify the private 
side of the service line. EPA requiring two visual inspections may be more than what systems have 
been doing to reach out to customers and having them perform tests (e.g., magnet test, etc.) and/or 
submit pictures to identify their service line. This may have been done only at one access point. 
These service lines deemed non-lead from customer validation should not be subject to further 
validation as they have already done the outreach to the customer, and further outreach will be lost 
in the immense amount of other public education and notification requirements included in this 
proposed rule.  
 
Second, AMWA encourages EPA to develop a flexible timeline for validation requirement, if 
retained in the final rule. AMWA agrees with EPA’s decision to not include service lines identified 
as non-lead using record reviews in the validation pool. AMWA understands why EPA would 
want to validate certain other methods used to determine non-lead status, but questions whether 
this validation process being conducted during the first seven years is the best use of water system 
and the public’s resources. As mentioned previously in this comment letter, the main goal of this 
rule is removing sources of lead through LSL replacement. Simultaneously requiring the validation 
of service lines already deemed non-lead takes precious time and resources away from a utility 
 
8 Title 15 Chapter 20; Rules of the City of New York, Rules Governing and Restricting the Use and Supply of 
Water. https://www.nyc.gov/assets/dep/downloads/pdf/about/water-and-sewer-forms/rules-of-the-city-of-new-
york/title-15-rules-city-of-new-york-chapter-20.pdf.  

 
21 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
that wants to focus on known LSL replacement. If a validation requirement is retained in the final 
rule, a timeline should be developed to let water systems concentrate on removing known LSLs 
first before spending the extra time and resources on validation requirements. AMWA 
recommends having the validations be due post-removal of all other known LSLs and GRRs.  
 
Section 3.4: Unknown Identification Timeline  
 
AMWA agrees with EPA’s decision to not establish a quicker deadline for all unknowns to be 
classified prior to the 10-year replacement compliance date. This will allow systems to focus more 
time and resources on replacing known LSLs and GRRs and identifying unknowns as quickly as 
possible. This decision provides the type of flexibility that must be incorporated throughout this 
rule, as not all systems are the same. For this reason, EPA should retain in the final rule the absence 
of a provision to complete all unknown classification before the 10-year replacement deadline.  
 
AMWA would like to take the opportunity to point out that water systems will be significantly 
limited in their ability to identify the composition of privately owned portions of service lines. In 
some cases, the water system will be completely dependent upon individual property owners’ 
willingness to cooperate with requests to inspect the line or otherwise document a line’s 
composition. Should any individual property owner not agree to this review, the water system 
would have to classify the privately owned portion of the line as an “unknown” material and 
include it within the system’s lead service line inventory and replacement calculations. EPA must 
also make it clearer what happens after the 10-year replacement period if unknowns still exist in 
an inventory due to the refusal or non-response of a property owner and not the water system.  
 
AMWA agrees that a privately owned portion of a service line whose composition is unable to be 
determined due to lack of cooperation or response by the property owner, should be considered 
“unknown” in the water system’s inventory. However, AMWA believes this line should be 
excluded from calculations used to develop system’s lead service line replacement goals. This 
exclusion would recognize that if the lack of property owner cooperation is the only impediment 
to identifying the composition of the line, no reasonable assumption can be made about the line’s 
composition; including the line in the system’s replacement calculations could artificially inflate 
the system’s required 10 percent replacement rate. 
Section 4: Tap Sampling 
 
As EPA states in the preamble, tap sampling is used to evaluate corrosion control treatment (CCT) 
performance rather than to assess human exposure to lead and copper in drinking water. AMWA 
urges EPA to keep this in mind as it revises the rule. These tap samples are important information 
for water systems to evaluate their corrosion control efficacy but are not necessarily representative 
of the water flowing to most homes in the service area. These samples often represent the most 
vulnerable locations to lead and are used to optimize CCT to prevent further corrosion of lead in 
drinking water. AMWA has comments on several of EPA’s proposed provisions including 

 
22 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
revisions to the tap sampling protocol and the use of tap sampling results for certain public 
education requirements.  
 
Section 4.1: Tiered Sampling System  
 
EPA is proposing the following revised tiered structure to better detect sites at a higher risk of 
elevated leads levels: 
 
● Tier 1 sampling sites are single-family structures with premise plumbing made of lead 
and/or are served by a lead service line. 
 
● Tier 2 sampling sites are buildings, including multiple-family residences, with premise 
plumbing made of lead and/or served by a lead service line. 
 
● Tier 3 sampling sites are sites that are served by a lead connector. Tier 3 sites are also sites 
served by a galvanized service line or containing galvanized premise plumbing that are 
identified as ever being downstream of a lead service line or lead connector in the past. 
Tier 3 for community water systems only includes single-family structures. 
 
● Tier 4 sampling sites are sites that contain copper pipes with lead solder installed before 
the effective date of the State's applicable lead ban. Tier 4 for community water systems 
only includes single-family structures. 
 
● Tier 5 sampling sites are sites that are representative of sites throughout the distribution 
system. In this case, a representative site is a site in which the plumbing materials used at 
that site would be commonly found at other sites served by the water system. 
 
EPA has included sites with premise plumbing made of lead in tiers 1 and 2, and galvanized 
premise plumbing in tier 3. AMWA cautions that many water systems do not know the 
composition of premise plumbing at many of, or any of, the properties (e.g., single-family 
structures, multiple family residences, etc.) within their distribution system. AMWA requests 
clarification, and agrees with this interpretation, that this addition does not require water systems 
to inventory premise plumbing composition. If the information is readily available, then AMWA 
would agree this would represent sites that are at risk of elevated lead, but the association would 
like to emphasize a premise plumbing inventory should not be a requirement of this rule.  
 
Water systems typically do not survey beyond the meter or examine what is in the basement where 
the meter is located. This material is not always representative of the household premise plumbing, 
and therefore could be inaccurate without further inspection that water systems do not, and should 
not (as its private property), have access to. Some homes, particularly in states like Florida, do not 
have basements and therefore meters are outside the home, so a water system would never be able 
to examine the composition of the premise plumbing. 

 
23 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
Some water systems have expressed concern that sites served by a lead connector, tier 3, are 
automatically deemed higher priority than those that may contain a service line with lead solder, 
tier 4. Sites solely served by a lead connector could be included in tier 4 if there are not also 
galvanized pipes downstream (tier 3).  
 
Section 4.2: Sampling for Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) Efficacy  
 
EPA specifically asks for comment on “whether samples from non-LSL sites that have higher lead 
concentrations than samples from LSL sites should be included and whether these higher values 
should replace lower values from LSL sites in the 90th percentile calculation.” AMWA has two 
major concerns with this concept if it were to be incorporated into the final rule.  
 
The first concern is that this would disincentivize water systems from generating more than the 
minimum data required. Large water systems may voluntarily collect samples from thousands of 
locations (as opposed to 100 or less samples collected pursuant to required monitoring). Any 
provision that would direct water systems to switch the highest samples out for required 
monitoring would pose a tremendous burden and could possibly cause many large water systems 
to cease offering voluntary sampling to customers. This sampling method as proposed would 
change tap sampling from assessing CCT efficacy to assessing the highest values of lead regardless 
of cause. 
 
The second concern is that in instances where there is not an LSL, elevated lead levels would likely 
be a result of lead solder or brass fixtures with high lead content in premise plumbing. Not only 
do water systems lack control or jurisdiction over premise plumbing, but this would also not be an 
overall indication of CCT effectiveness. In many instances, premise plumbing contains a lot of 
particulate matter, which is not necessarily reflective of a system’s CCT.   
 
Section 4.3: Addition of First Liter Sample 
 
EPA is proposing that systems must take first- and fifth-liter samples for lead from LSL sites and 
use the higher to calculate the 90th percentile lead level. In the preamble, EPA explains that samples 
from various liters have not conclusively pointed to which number liter has resulted in the most 
elevated lead levels. Because of this variability, it is impossible to really predict how this change 
will affect water systems except that it will be extremely likely to increase the number of samples 
that exceed the action level.  
 
It has long been assumed that the first liter draw is more reflective of premise plumbing and the 
fifth liter is more reflective of the service line. While this is still debated, the first liter is clearly 
comprised of water that is in the plumbing closest to the faucet or fixture used to take the sample. 
As mentioned above, elevated lead from premise plumbing is not necessarily indicative of CCT 
effectiveness. Additionally, water systems have zero jurisdiction or control over premise 

 
24 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
plumbing. If elevated levels are a result of premise plumbing, a system will consistently exceed 
the action level, resulting in a water system having to constantly notify its customers and further 
eroding the public’s trust in drinking water.  
 
CCT optimization will not always impact elevated lead levels caused by premise plumbing, and 
water systems must balance changes to CCT with other risk trade-offs, such as disinfection 
byproducts formation and nutrient pollution. AMWA will go into more detail about CCT in 
Section 6 of the comment letter, but the purpose of sampling for lead at the specified locations 
above is to evaluate sites most likely to have elevated leads levels, which can assist in assessing 
CCT efficacy. Additionally, these samples are taken after a six-hour stagnation period, which is 
meant to capture the water with the most contact time with pipes, and therefore highest 
concentrations. It is important to note that these samples are not at all representative of the water 
individuals drink throughout the day. EPA is using these samples as justification for system-wide 
public notification and education requirements when these samples do not reflect the general lead 
concentrations of the system. These public notification requirements center on health effects, but 
this action level is not a health-based requirement.   
Section 5: Lead Action and Trigger Levels  
 
As stated in section 4, the lead and copper action levels were designed to reflect a water system’s 
CCT efficacy, which in turn limited the amount of water systems that needed to complete a detailed 
demonstration of its CCT installation. The action level (AL) serves a different purpose than a 
maximum contaminant level (MCL) in that an exceedance of an action level triggers a response, 
not an MCL violation. These required responses to AL exceedances have included optimizing 
CTT, replacing lead service lines, and educating/notifying the public. The action level for lead is 
not synonymous to an MCL, since what is being measured is not exposure to lead, but the efficacy 
of corrosion control. 
 
EPA has proposed the elimination of the trigger level and lowering the action level from 15 parts 
per billion (ppb) to 10 ppb – in which a water system is in exceedance if the 90th percentile 
concentration is greater than this value. AMWA agrees that both a trigger and action level created 
more confusion, and eliminating the trigger level does reduce some of that confusion. However, 
AMWA would like to point out some concerns related to lowering the action level from 15 ppb to 
10 ppb to measure CCT efficacy and identify systems most at risk of elevated lead levels.  
 
EPA’s tiered sampling pools are designed to find the places most likely to have the highest lead 
levels and are not at all representative of the entire system. This process enables water systems to 
find areas where lead pipes/lead sources are present and determine if a system’s CCT is preventing 
leaching of lead. Selected sites are places where the highest levels are lead in a system are expected 
and are not reflective of the water most consumers in a service area drink daily. Therefore, AMWA 
urges EPA to consider how exceedances of this action level impact the public’s trust and 
perception of its drinking water.  

 
25 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
EPA has proposed to require water systems to remove 100% of LSLs over the next 10 years, 
essentially eliminating a significant source of lead exposure and a major reason for implementing 
CCT in that time. Water systems will be working toward this goal each year, with the expectation 
that action level exceedances would decrease as LSLs are replaced. If action level exceedances do 
not decrease, the next likely lead source could be the premise plumbing, of which water systems 
have no jurisdiction over and, as mentioned in Section 4, is not necessarily indicative of CCT 
efficacy. As EPA also states in the preamble, even a system with optimized CCT could be at risk 
of continually exceeding this action level. Decreasing the action level will initially result in more 
utilities exceeding the level and having to spend time and resources looking at their CCT rather 
than out replacing LSLs. EPA should ease burdens from these additional requirements to facilitate 
LSL replacement so that water systems can focus time, money, and other resources on replacement 
goals rather than other provisions that will be less impactful once the LSLs are gone.  
 
EPA is concurrently proposing that water systems sample the first and fifth liter after a six-hour 
stagnation period. It is unclear exactly how many water systems this new requirement will impact 
in terms of lead action level exceedances, but as EPA states in the preamble, it will generally 
increase the number of utilities that exceed the lead action level. Doing both first- and fifth-liter 
sampling and lowering the action level at the same time compound each other and could lead to 
many systems exceeding the action level after the first sampling period. While EPA should not 
make decisions based solely on how many systems would be affected, it should consider that this 
action level was designed to be reflective of CCT efficacy and is not a health-based standard. 
Additionally, it is unlikely that customers are drinking water of the highest concentrations found 
in the 90th percentile samples, as they are not consuming the first draw or even the fifth liter of 
water once the day’s activities using water have progressed. AMWA is concerned that having 
many water systems exceed this action level could result in widespread panic or worry for every 
consumer, rather than just those at risk for elevated lead levels.    
 
Alternatively, EPA could implement one of the provisions it has proposed, i.e. the 1st and 5th liter, 
and consider proposing a change to the action level until after the agency has seen how this addition 
affects exceedances, or vice versa. The last thing EPA should want is members of the public 
panicking and avoiding drinking water because a utility exceeds the action level when the actual 
lead concentrations in their home drinking water may be nowhere near 15 or even 10 ppb. Once 
all LSLs are replaced, the available legal avenues for both EPA and water systems to safeguard 
the public from lead become significantly limited. Therefore, it becomes imperative for this rule 
to center its focus on the comprehensive replacement of LSLs. 
 
EPA requests comments on further lowering the action level to 5 ppb. AMWA is extremely 
concerned that this action level will be unattainable for many systems, even with optimized CCT, 
and asks EPA to not decrease the action level further in the final rule. An action level of 5 ppb will 
exacerbate the issues AMWA outlined above. EPA has proposed a sampling protocol that searches 
for the highest instantaneous levels of lead in a system after a long stagnation period. EPA has not 

 
26 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
provided data that demonstrate that this action level will be achievable for water systems while 
also keeping in compliance with other EPA regulations.  
Section 6: Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) 
 
The original LCR included CCT as one of four treatment techniques used to reduce lead and copper 
in drinking water. CCT methods include alkalinity/pH adjustment or the use of corrosion 
inhibitors. Many water systems across the country are already optimizing CCT in a way that 
reduces lead leaching in plumbing material to the lowest extent possible.  
 
Section 6.1: CCT Feasibility 
 
EPA requests comment on the determination that a CCT treatment technique is feasible and 
prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible. While water systems 
are currently deploying CCT to try and ensure action level exceedances are reduced, AMWA 
would like to point out that even systems with optimized CCT currently collect samples that exceed 
the action level.  
 
In this proposal, EPA eliminates the trigger level, lowers the action level, and revises sampling 
protocols by including the first- and fifth-liter samples, which are all expected to increase the 
number of action level exceedances water systems encounter. EPA does not provide analysis on 
how all these changes will affect action level exceedances beyond saying stating they will likely 
increase; therefore, EPA has not demonstrated that CCT can feasibly be used to keep systems from 
exceeding thew 90th percentile lead and copper levels. AMWA reiterates its claim from section 5 
that implementing only one of these provisions during this rulemaking would ease burdens on 
water systems and allow EPA time to thoroughly research how these requirements would affect 
water systems.  
 
Currently, it is unclear what happens in situations where a wholesale provider supplies water to 
other systems, and at least one of those systems does not have its own treatment facility. If the 
wholesaler supplies to its own customers and does not have an action level exceedance, or it 
provides to multiple other systems and only one of them has an action level exceedance, who is 
responsible? It is not feasible for a wholesaler to alter CCT that works for all its other customers 
and/or its own customers, but not for one of its buyers if the system it sells to does not have its 
own treatment facility. EPA must make it clear what happens in this situation and recognize that a 
wholesaler cannot tailor CCT to one buyer.   
 
While many systems are using CTT, EPA must refrain from being overly prescriptive in the final 
rule. CCT is not a one-size-fits-all approach, and water systems must have some flexibility to enact 
treatment that best meets unique needs. As AMWA has emphasized throughout this comment 
letter, EPA should be allowing water systems to focus on LSL removal, while easing burdens of 
concurrent requirements.  

 
27 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
Section 6.2: Repeated Re-Optimization After Action Level Exceedances 
 
EPA is proposing that systems that have re-optimized once and continuously meet optimal water 
quality parameters would not be required to re-optimize again after subsequent action level 
exceedances. AMWA agrees that if EPA maintains the CCT optimization requirements for the 
first action level exceedance, it should not continue to do so for any exceedances that follow. Re-
optimization often takes extensive study and review, and drinking water systems need to be 
focusing on other aspects of the rule. 
 
As EPA proposes a lower action level and revised sampling protocols, it will become increasingly 
difficult for water systems to make changes to treatment without encountering other simultaneous 
compliance issues. Water chemistry in drinking water treatment is a delicate balance. Alterations 
to treatment should not be made hastily or without adequate data to demonstrate that there will not 
be unintended consequences.  
 
One method of CCT is adding additional orthophosphate, which can lead to adverse outcomes, 
such as increased disinfection byproducts and negative environmental impacts in surface waters. 
Specifically, the addition of phosphates to drinking water can lead to increased nutrient loads to 
surface waters, resulting in eutrophication and harmful algal blooms. In fact, EPA in 2019 issued 
a variance for Denver Water for the system’s phosphorous discharges to nearby surface waters, 
citing Denver Water’s plan to remove 100% of LSLs9. As removal is a central provision in this 
proposed rule, EPA should focus less on CCT requirements and more on providing assistance and 
support to water systems for LSL removal.  
 
Section 6.3: Delaying Optimized CCT Until After All LSLs/GRRs are Replaced in Five 
Years 
 
EPA is proposing to allow a system with a lead action level exceedance to defer installing or re-
optimizing CCT if the system can replace 100 percent of its LSLs and GRR service lines within 
five years of the date the system first exceeds the action level. AMWA agrees that a system that is 
focusing on LSL replacement should be able to forgo this requirement. AMWA does recommend 
using a similar three-year or cumulative average for this 20% replacement calculation. A system 
could still remove 100% of LSL/GRRs in 5 years even if it’s replacing an average of 20% of lines, 
rather meeting 20% or more yearly.  
 
Additionally, AMWA asks for more clarification on what happens when a utility has replaced all 
the LSLs and GRRs in its system and has identified all unknowns, but, due to refusals from 
 
9 EPA. (December 20, 2019). Approval of variance decision pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act; Alternative 
treatment technique for national primary drinking water lead and copper regulations for Denver Water. 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/12/20/2019-27487/approval-of-variance-decision-pursuant-to-the-
safe-drinking-water-act-alternative-treatment  

 
28 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
property owners, still have LSLs or GRRs in their inventory that cannot be replaced. AMWA 
believes water systems should not be held accountable for property owners’ refusal to allow water 
systems to replace privately-owned lines. Additionally, water systems should not be punished if 
they are barred by state or local statute or attorney recommendations from using ratepayer funds 
to replace privately-owned LSLs and therefore cannot replace a line a property owner cannot or 
will not finance. If an LSL is out of the control of a water system, the system should still be eligible 
for this deferment.  
Section 7: Public Education  
 
AMWA appreciates that the proposed rule makes great strides in ensuring timely public 
notification of testing results that indicate elevated levels of lead in the system. Transparency and 
education of risk are an important part of a drinking water system’s communication strategies. 
While AMWA recognizes public education and communication as critical components of 
consumer service, AMWA asks EPA to carefully consider the purpose of public education as a 
component of the treatment technique requirements of the LCRI. AMWA believes the purpose of 
the public education is to educate customers in a utility’s service area, particularly those with LSLs 
and GRRs, that they can take steps to reduce potential exposure to lead in water from either LSLs 
or premise plumbing. There is a critical need to balance providing enough timely and specific 
education for consumers without sharing too much or too frequently to cause consumers to ignore 
messages. In this section, AMWA offers suggestions to ensure effective communications to 
consumers.  
 
Section 7.1: Public Education Feasibility 
 
EPA requests comment on whether “the proposed determination that the public education 
treatment technique is feasible and prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the 
extent feasible.” AMWA believes that EPA mischaracterizes “treatment technique” in this request 
for comment by describing public education as one of the components of a “treatment technique” 
required for an elevated action level. AMWA believes that the overall treatment technique, which 
combines optimized corrosion control, lead service line replacement and galvanized line requiring 
replacement, is “infeasible” as proposed, which we have discussed throughout these comments.  
 
Regarding public education provisions in the LCRI specifically, the proposed rule includes 
timelines and deadlines that are currently infeasible for many water systems. EPA includes 
multiple forms of public education in multiple situations that could overwhelm customers, either 
causing undue panic, or resulting in communications being ignored as they are too frequent and 
repetitive.  
 
For example, 88FR85067 (§141.84(h)) of the proposed rule, Protocols for notification and 
mitigation for partial and full-service line replacements, requires written notice “to the owner of 
the affected service line, or the owner’s authorized agent, as well as non-owner occupants.” It is 

 
29 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
unclear how a utility would identify an “owner’s authorized agent,” and it is unclear to AMWA 
which party EPA is referring to in this section. Additionally, this requirement could be impossible 
or unduly burdensome to fulfill in several instances, including: 
 
● The property owner (landlord) does not pay the water bill and is not part of the utility’s 
recordkeeping for any number of reasons; and 
● The non-owner occupant does not pay the bill and is not known by the utility (such as 
multi-unit properties with a single meter).  
 
EPA also proposes to require water systems to repeat certain notification upon change of property 
ownership. This requirement is not feasible as many water systems do not become notified of 
ownership changes. Under this rule as proposed the burden falls upon the water system to somehow 
track property ownership in addition to its other obligations. EPA should not require water systems 
to track property sales, especially as it proposes a myriad of other public notification requirements 
that will reach customers to provide information on lead.  
 
Section 7.2: Capacity of Water Systems to Conduct all the Required Public Education 
Activities in 30 days 
 
AMWA believes that requirements for systems to conduct the required public education within 60 
to 90 days following a lead AL exceedance is more realistic particularly as the list of required 
education activities is long, and coordination with states will need to occur. This coordination 
includes the initial notification by the primacy agency to the utility that an exceedance has 
occurred, prompting the public education requirements, and AMWA assumes that the notification 
by the state to the utility is when the clock would begin.  
 
EPA is proposing that water systems must conduct public education activities within 60 days of 
the end of the tap sampling period in which the action level exceedance occurs, regardless of 
whether the exceedance is a consecutive one or not. These education activities include several 
activities that will require internal coordination and approvals, which in larger, more complex 
organizations would take more time and include the following:  
 
● Delivering written materials to each bill paying customer and delivering to multifamily 
dwellings either to each unit or posted in conspicuous location. 
● Communicating with customers most at risk - doing so by contacting the local health 
agencies and other organizations listed in the proposed rule. 
● Including the information, no less often than quarterly, on each water bill for as long as the 
system exceeds the action level.  
● Post the information to the water system website. 
● Submit a press release to media outlets. 
● Three additional activities from the following list: 
o Public service announcement; 

 
30 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
o Paid advertisements; 
o Public area information displays; 
o Emails to customers; 
o Public meetings; 
o Household deliveries; 
o Targeted individual customer contact; 
o Direct material distribution to all multifamily homes and institutions; 
o Contact organizations representing plumbers and contractors; or 
o Some other method approved by the state.  
 
AMWA generally agrees with EPA that the time it takes to develop materials, coordinate with 
state primacy agencies, and carry out the delivery of materials would be extremely difficult if not 
impossible in 30 days. Even 60 days can be difficult depending on the activities chosen from above 
and the delivery method. Therefore, AMWA recommends that EPA keep the timeline at 60 days 
and consider raising it to 90 days.  
 
Individuals whose drinking water testing results were elevated are already getting notified of this 
through other proposed provisions, and EPA has also proposed to require water systems to offer 
supplemental tap sampling for customers served by LSLs, GRRs, or unknowns. Most individuals 
whose drinking water test results reveal elevated lead levels will have already been notified prior 
to this proposed public outreach protocol because compliance sampling is based on sites most at 
risk of elevated lead concentrations and utilities must inform customers of sample results sooner 
than they report system-wide exceedances.  
 
AMWA is concerned that this increased amount of public notification will lead to customers either 
becoming desensitized to communications from the water system, or that it will deter them from 
consuming tap water entirely. When people receive the same information over and over, the 
message loses its urgency. This has implications far beyond the LCRI. Consider that under this 
rule proposal, customers could potentially receive in one year (two sampling periods), from this 
one proposed requirement alone: 
 
● Two direct mail deliveries;  
● Four water bills with the information;  
● Two emails;  
● Two targeted individual customer contacts; and 
● Several printed or television notifications. 
 
Consumers could start to ignore communications from the water systems. Public notification is 
important, but EPA should not require water systems to overwhelm customers with dozens of 
contacts a year when fewer could be more effective and, therefore, more protective of public 
health.  
 

 
31 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Importantly, action level exceedance outreach comes in addition to various other public outreach 
requirements in the LCRI. There are notifications of service line material, notifications for failing 
to meet the replacement rate, compliance tap sampling results, supplemental monitoring results, 
notification of a service line disturbance, and required language and information in consumer 
confidence reports. EPA should re-evaluate the number of outreach materials that are required and 
create a more condensed and streamlined approach to reduce the amount of communication 
materials customers receive while still being provided this information.  
 
EPA should refrain from imposing too many public outreach requirements that are 
overburdensome without any public health gain. For example, as proposed, constant notification 
of action level exceedances may not be very effective since this entails multiple forms of 
communication that would reach the same customers in several times. EPA could keep this 
requirement for the first lead action level exceedance, but if a system continues to have lead action 
level exceedances, reduce the number and frequency of materials that need to go out.  
 
Section 7.3: Capacity of Water Systems to Provide Individual Tap Sampling Results in 
Three Days 
 
EPA is proposing that water systems provide consumer notices of individual tap sampling results 
within three calendar days of obtaining them, regardless of whether those results exceeded the 
action level. EPA requests comment on whether this is feasible, or if a longer time frame is needed 
(e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 calendar days).  
 
One major uncertainty is whether both lead and copper samples apply to this three-day time frame, 
as EPA does not specify a timeframe in the “copper” section of the “Individual Notification of Tap 
Sample Results” portion of the preamble. The preamble simply says, “EPA is proposing to require 
water systems to provide consumer notice of an individual’s copper tap sampling results,” and 
adds that lead and copper sampling results can be combined into one single notice if both sample 
results are available. AMWA requests EPA make it clear if the three-day window applies to both 
lead and copper sample results and suggests EPA make it clear throughout the proposed rule which 
provisions apply to lead and which apply to copper. The most direct way EPA can address this is 
by developing a table that includes each provision in rows and whether the provisions apply to 
lead, copper, or both in columns.  
 
Regarding the timeframe, AMWA is concerned that a three-calendar day notice is infeasible. For 
example, many AMWA members indicated they batch samples to be run on Thursdays, and often 
receive sample results Friday afternoon. If the following Monday was a holiday, or an observed 
holiday that fell over the weekend, water systems would potentially be out of compliance with this 
notice, as they would not be able to send notices until the following Tuesday. AMWA suggests 
five business days as an adequate turnaround time that will ensure timely delivery of results in a 
realistic timeframe for water systems. If EPA is adamant that the provision stays three days, 
AMWA urges the agency to consider changing it to three business days. While this is not the 

 
32 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
association’s first preference, three calendar days is not feasible given standard five-day work 
week schedules that many water system laboratories and offices follow.  
 
AMWA would like to emphasize that this time frame is not dependent on whether the samples 
exceed the action level or not. Therefore, this incredibly short turnaround time will have very little 
public health benefit, as most samples will likely be below the action level. In addition, the water 
system already must provide many public education and outreach materials to households at risk 
of elevated lead levels. Sites that must be sampled include those with LSLs and other situations 
where elevated lead might occur, but these households would already be aware of these risks 
through other communication materials. Consequently, a five-business day notice of results is 
sufficient and would account for times when a three-calendar day turnaround is not possible.   
 
Section 7.4: Types and Timing of Outreach Activities Proposed for Failing to Meet LSL 
Replacement Rate 
 
EPA is proposing to require outreach activities for systems that fail to meet the mandatory service 
line replacement rate. Systems serving over 3,300 individuals would be required to do one of many 
activities at least once in the year after failing to meet the replacement rate, and annually after that, 
until the rate is reached, or all LSLs, GRRs, and unknowns are identified. The list of activities is 
below: 
 
● Conduct a townhall meeting; 
● Participate in a community event to provide information about the service line replacement 
program; 
● Contact customers by phone, text message, email, or door hanger; or 
● Use another method approved by the State to discuss the service line replacement program 
and opportunities for replacement. 
 
Alternatively, if a system fails to meet the mandatory replacement rate, systems would be required 
to conduct at least two of the following activities: 
 
● Send certified mail to customers and persons served by LSLs or GRR service lines; 
● Conduct a social media campaign; 
● Conduct outreach via the media including newspaper, television, or radio; and/or 
● Visit targeted customers (e.g., customers in areas with lower service line replacement 
participation rates) to discuss the service line replacement program and opportunities for 
replacement. 
 
While AMWA does not dispute that notification may be necessary in this case, the association 
again emphasizes the sheer amount of public education and notification requirements included in 
this proposed rule and cautions EPA against diluting the message of LSL replacement. EPA should 
also consider how successful water systems have been using public education to promote and 

 
33 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
obtain public support for voluntary lead service line replacement programs. If every provision in 
the proposed rule results in some sort of notification or outreach, the messages could potentially 
lose meaning, cause consumer confusion, or negatively affect utility communication for current 
programs that have occurred outside of EPA’s proposed regulatory construct.  
 
AMWA also requests clarification as to when a water system stops providing notice of failure to 
meet the replacement rate. AMWA asks EPA to clarify what it means by, “The water system must 
conduct the activity in the year following the deadline for calculating the rolling average and 
annually thereafter until the water system meets the replacement rate... [emphasis added].” Does 
this mean if the system meets a 10% replacement in the following year, regardless of its rolling 
average over the past three years, it is able to terminate the annual notices? AMWA believes this 
should be the case, as a system that returned to replacing at or over 10% of LSLs (or meeting the 
cumulative average replacement rate that AMWA advocates for in these comments) should be 
relieved of this requirement to reduce public notifications.  
 
EPA describes examples in the preamble of how community outreach events and activities are 
consistent and able to achieve high levels of success, with examples from the American Water 
Works Association, LSL replacement collaborative, and Clean Water Fund. AMWA would like to 
point out that community partnerships are successful when they are able to be tailored to individual 
localities, and not with overly prescriptive steps and language provided from a national standpoint. 
Generally, these example programs achieved success following persistent, hard work with many 
partners working together. Allowing water systems the flexibility and ownership of outreach 
activities could result in increased partnerships with local community groups, as water systems 
will have more time and resources to devote to these efforts. Ultimately, water system community 
needs are unique, and public outreach and education cannot be viewed with a one-size-fits-all 
approach.  
 
Section 7.5: Notification of a Service Line Disturbance 
 
EPA is proposing to require water systems that cause a disturbance to an LSL, GRR service line, 
or unknown service line to notify persons at the connection and provide them with information to 
reduce lead exposure from this disturbance. In addition, water systems must provide pitcher filters 
or point of use devices and replacement cartridges to last 6 months. This provision is triggered by 
“actions that result in a shut off or bypass of water to an individual service line or a group of service 
lines, or other actions that cause a disturbance…such as undergoing physical action or vibration 
that could result in pipe-scale dislodging and associated release of particulate lead.” Some 
examples of disturbances covered under this provision that EPA includes in the preamble are 
replacement of an inline water meter, a water meter setter, or connector.  
 
AMWA supports customer notification when the water system conducts work that would result in 
a significant disturbance to a line, such as the replacement of a water main or connector. EPA has 

 
34 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
covered disturbances due to LSL/GRR placement in a different section of this proposed 
rulemaking.  
 
Additionally, while pitcher filters may be warranted in some cases, AMWA does not believe 
pitcher filters are always necessary (e.g., in instances like water meter replacements). Some 
AMWA members do thousands of water meter replacements a year and providing pitcher filters 
would be costly and at times difficult given limited availability. Some disturbances may only 
require other actions, like an aggressive flushing protocol, that could similarly reduce risks to lead 
exposure from the disturbance. AMWA addresses pitcher filter availability in section 8.2 of this 
comment letter but emphasizes to EPA that provisions that require making pitcher filters available 
could put strains on a water system’s ability to obtain them. To maintain availability and the cost-
effectiveness of pitcher filters, EPA should require their distribution only in times they are needed, 
not in circumstances where other, less costly, options will produce the same result.  
 
Section 7.6: Increased Frequency of Public Education Requirements 
 
EPA requests comment on whether additional public outreach and education requirements should 
be included to incentivize LSL replacement. Specifically, EPA asks if water systems that have 
LSLs, GRRs, and/or unknowns five years after the compliance date for the LCRI should be 
required to increase frequency of the notification of service line materials from annual to every six 
months.  
 
AMWA does not believe that water systems should have to increase frequency of the notification 
of service line materials from annual to every six months after the compliance date. Water systems 
should be encouraged to focus efforts on LSL/GRR replacement efforts rather than ramping up 
notification requirements just as water systems are running out of time to complete service line 
replacement plans. Increasing the notification of service line material from annual to every six 
months would not provide any further protection to public health. The information would not be 
changing, and customers would have already received it five times previously (the first five years 
of compliance). Customers would likely be annoyed with multiple mailings and other forms of 
communication repeatedly including the same information. Furthermore, EPA does not point to a 
solid collection of research supporting that increased communication notices improve consumer 
outcomes and actions.  
 
EPA does not need to include more “incentives” for water systems to complete their LSL/GRR 
replacement in the required compliance period. This implies that the proposed requirement to 
replace LSLs/GRRs in 10 years is somehow not enough to incentivize water systems to remove 
LSL/GRRs. AMWA members want to reduce consumer exposure to lead and protect public health, 
so to imply that they need further incentive to do so undermines the immense amount of work 
many water systems have already accomplished toward this goal. Implying water systems need 
“incentives” to comply with regulations only serves to communicate to the public that water 
systems do not have their best interest in mind.  

 
35 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
 
EPA should use communication techniques that highlight its partnerships with water systems, 
support water system’s efforts toward LSL replacement, and recognize that public water systems 
take all possible actions to provide the best quality drinking water to their consumers. AMWA 
asks EPA to rethink some of the language it uses in the preamble, and in other publicly available 
materials, that may inaccurately or unintentionally imply otherwise.  
 
Section 7.7: Streamlining Public Education Requirements 
 
EPA is seeking comment on additional ways to streamline public education and associated 
certification requirements. AMWA is significantly concerned with the time and resources that 
water systems will have to dedicate to the public education and outreach requirements and urges 
EPA to streamline processes and ease burdens associated with these requirements.  
 
EPA should refrain from having water systems supply customers with the same information too 
often. This happens when water systems must continually notify customers of their service line 
material, notify certain customers that may continually get their tap sampled due to their service 
line composition, include comprehensive information in consumer confidence reports, and provide 
annual notifications based on action level exceedances or failure to meet the replacement rate. 
These public outreach protocols also include reaching people through numerous methods of 
communication for the same notification requirement.  
 
Since EPA intends to finalize revisions to the Consumer Confidence Report (CCR) rule by March 
2024, the agency should assess how these revisions will also impact a water system’s 
communications strategy. Water systems must plan and devote additional resources to compliance 
with this upcoming rule, including the potential to have to supply CCRs twice a year. AMWA 
recommends EPA use the CCR rule to streamline some of the public notification and education 
requirements included in this proposal based on what the agency includes the final rule. 
 
An example where EPA’s public notification requirements can be viewed as overly prescriptive 
can be found in § 141.85 (a): 
 
(a) Content of written public education materials — (1) Community water systems and non-
transient non-community water systems. Water systems must include the following elements in 
written materials (e.g., brochures and pamphlets) in the same order as listed in paragraphs 
(a)(1)(i) through (vii) of this section. In addition, language in paragraphs (a)(1)(i), (ii), and (vii) 
of this section must be included in the materials, exactly as written, except for the text in brackets 
for which the water system must include system-specific information. States may approve changes 
to the content requirements if the State determines the changes are more protective of human 
health. Any additional information presented by a water system must be consistent with the 
information in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through (vii) of this section and be in plain language that can 
be understood by the general public. Water systems must submit a copy of all written public 

 
36 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
education materials to the State prior to delivery. The State may require the system to obtain 
approval of the content of written public education materials prior to delivery. 
 
This requirement as proposed in the LCRI will result in a dense text (language in paragraphs 
(a)(1)(i), (ii), and (vii) of this section that be included in the materials, exactly as written) that is 
not widely read, which would increase the risk of exposure rather than decreasing it. The proposed 
rule language does not seem to give any indication that context can be added, e.g., graphics on 
service lines, explanation of what a service line is, etc., since all information must be included “as 
written” and “in the same order as listed in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through (vii) of this section.” Any 
changes, including adding graphics or additional information, must be approved by the state. If 
this needs to happen for every communication, will the states have the capacity to turn these 
materials around in a timely manner? Will these brochures be helpful to customers if they contain 
only text with no graphics? If information must be put in order, what is the correct order to place 
the information in a three-column brochure (is it left column, top to bottom then center column top 
to bottom, or is it top left to top right then bottom left to bottom right)? These are the questions 
that will remain if EPA retains these overly prescriptive requirements for public education, 
notification, and outreach in the final rule.  
 
AMWA believes it is not EPA’s intent to discourage the public from drinking tap water. However, 
many actions EPA is proposing in the LCRI may inadvertently do that. Additionally, the 
alternatives to tap water – particularly tap water that is in compliance with current EPA regulations 
– are not demonstrably better, or in fact could be worse, for public health. Bottled water 
alternatives to tap water are also more expensive than tap water.  AMWA is concerned that the 
inclusion of the line, “There is no safe level of lead in drinking water,” at the beginning of the 
mandatory lead health effects language will erode public trust in drinking water systems, because 
it is impossible for a water system to certify that there is absolutely “no” lead in the water provided 
to customers. This is particularly worrisome in cases where water systems have replaced 100% of 
its LSLs/GRRs but still have very low levels of lead in tap samples due to components in premise 
plumbing. EPA should consider contextualizing this statement to say something along the lines of, 
“The goal is to reach undetectable levels of lead in drinking water and remove all lead service 
lines.”  
Section 8: Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead 
Action Level Exceedances 
 
EPA is proposing to require additional actions be taken by systems with multiple lead action level 
exceedances, specifically three or more in a five-year rolling period. Systems that fall into this 
provision would be required to conduct at least one more outreach activity every six months until 
the water system no longer meets the criteria for multiple lead action level exceedances. 
Additionally, water systems would be required to make pitcher filters available to all consumers 
within 60 days of having met this criteria.  
 

 
37 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Section 8.1: Definition of Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances 
 
EPA’s proposed requirements for water systems that exceed the lead action level three or more 
times in a five-year period will create many compliance issues. To start, EPA has not provided an 
analysis of how many systems are going to be triggered under this proposed requirement. The 
agency proposed to remove the trigger level, reduce the action level, and include first- and fifth-
liter draw for sampling, and there is not an accurate estimation of how many water systems will 
be impacted. Since these proposed actions are assumed to increase the number of action level 
exceedances, we could see the unfortunate situation where, 18 months after the compliance date 
(three monitoring periods), countless water systems could have three consecutive action level 
exceedances, triggering these additional requirements. These water systems would then be 
required to issue notices to customers every six months for the next 3.5 years (the remainder of the 
five-year rolling period), even if the system subsequently comes into compliance with the action 
level through future sampling.   
 
EPA should not create a situation in which a system must continue telling the public it has an 
action level exceedance for 3.5 years if the water system is not actually exceeding the action level 
during that time. Even further, the action level exceedance is not a health-based indicator. If a 
water system can reduce lead exposure to customers and not have any more action level 
exceedances, they should not have to needlessly worry the public with the false notion that the 
water isn’t safe. EPA should allow systems to stop these public notifications after two consecutive 
monitoring periods (one year) without a lead action level exceedance.  
 
The lead action level is meant to be reflective of a system’s CCT. If a system has optimized its 
CCT once and is within the specified range of water quality parameters, then a system no longer 
needs to re-evaluate its CCT. If a system cannot optimize its CCT anymore to reduce lead levels 
further, then this constant public education should not be in effect. EPA should not require water 
systems to notify the public of exceedances if there is nothing it can do to further optimize its CCT. 
Instead, water systems should be allowed to focus on the goal of removing LSLs and not diverting 
resources away from this with unnecessary public education requirements. It is incredibly difficult 
for a water system to focus on LSL replacement while simultaneously developing several public 
notification and outreach plans.  
 
AMWA agrees that an initial notice of the first exceedance may be warranted, however, EPA must 
remember the action level is not a health-based limit. Sample pools are derived from the places 
were lead levels are most likely to be elevated, so action level exceedances are not necessarily 
representative of a water system’s overall drinking water quality. Additionally, individuals with 
LSLs/GRRs are already receiving information on ways to reduce lead with the requirement to 
notify customers of service line materials. EPA is piling on notifications that are redundant in some 
situations and create unnecessary burdens for water systems and the public who receives them.  
 

 
38 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Section 8.2: Providing Filters to all Consumers After Multiple Lead Action Level 
Exceedances 
 
EPA has proposed that, in the event of three action level exceedances in a five-year rolling period, 
water systems must make pitcher filters and six months’ worth of replacements available to all 
consumers – not only those with documented lead service lines, or service lines of unknown 
composition. One of AMWA’s biggest concerns with this proposed provision is the unlikely 
availability of the number of filters this requirement will force water systems to procure and/or 
have on hand in the event of multiple action level exceedances. For example, in a city like New 
York City (NYC), the NYC Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) provides drinking 
water to approximately 8.5 million people within the city. If this system were to have three action 
level exceedances in the first 18 months from the compliance date, or three monitoring periods, 
then the city would have to make filters available to all 8.5 million residents. Even if only a fraction 
of consumers in NYC made the effort to procure these filters, the city would still need to have 
millions on hand to meet the potential demand. In addition, they must do this every six months for 
the remainder of the five-year rolling period, meaning for a total of seven monitoring periods. EPA 
in its cost benefits analysis estimates only 20% of consumers will request filters10. Even with this 
likely low estimate, NYCDEP would need to provide almost 12 million filters and/or replacements 
over that 3.5-year period following three lead action level exceedances.  
 
While NYC is one of the largest examples, this will be true for every water system. Not only is the 
sheer number of filters this provision could require infeasible, but to supply these within 60 days 
following the third lead action level exceedance would be impossible. One AMWA member 
indicated that they have been waiting four months to obtain just 500 filters. The large number of 
filters that would need to be acquired quickly by several water systems would drive up costs and 
leave some water systems waiting months, or even years, to get the amount they need in stock. 
After the first three monitoring periods, there will likely be many water systems struggling to 
procure the number of filters needed to supply to all interested consumers if they had an action 
level exceedance each period.  
 
EPA must drastically reduce the number of filters that are required to be distributed in these 
circumstances. At the very least, EPA should reduce it to just those with LSLs, GRRs, or 
unknowns. EPA even insinuates that this is what should be in the proposed rule in figure 23 of the 
preamble. In the “Proposed LCRI” column it reads “Systems with multiple ALEs must make filters 
available to all customers with service lines of known or potential lead content.” In this table, the 
delivery to all consumers is listed under “other options considered.” However, pitcher filters 
should not be a blanket requirement and may be beneficial in situations mutually agreed upon 
between a water system and its primacy agency. The term “potential lead content” could be used 
for classifying unknowns as “potentially lead” or “not likely lead” to better allocate resources to 
 
10 EPA. (2023b). Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. 

 
39 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
service lines that are likely to include lead. EPA is again trying to apply a one-size-fits-all approach 
to situations where this is not feasible.  
 
AMWA urges EPA to refrain from provisions that take away resources from LSL and GRR 
replacement activities. Removing LSLs is a more effective way of reducing lead exposure in most 
cases than providing pitcher filters and also addresses the root problem (a more permanent 
solution). One study suggests that these pitcher filters do not always work properly, and in some 
instances the pitcher filter treated water still exceeds the 10 ppb action level of lead11. This study 
underscores the importance of EPA letting water systems focus on LSL replacement rather than 
spending precious time and resources acquiring and distributing pitcher filters.  
Section 9: Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities  
 
AMWA recognizes that the presence of lead in the drinking water of schools and licensed childcare 
facilities is an issue of the highest concern to the public. While virtually all lead that is present in 
the drinking water of these facilities comes from premise plumbing, we understand that school 
officials and parents may look to their local water systems for guidance in identifying the scope of 
lead contamination in the water of a given school or licensed childcare facility building. AMWA 
believes that water systems should be willing to help school officials carry out water quality 
testing, upon request, as water systems have no authority to enforce mandatory testing 
requirements on schools and childcare facilities.  
 
Section 9.1: Previous Non-Regulatory Efforts to Promote School Testing 
 
In 2019, AMWA was a signatory with EPA and other federal agencies and water sector 
stakeholders to a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on “Reducing Lead Levels in Drinking 
Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities.”12 As part of this MOU, AMWA and EPA agreed “to 
facilitate actions that reduce children’s exposure to lead from drinking water at schools and child 
care facilities.” Agreed-upon actions included “encourag[ing] schools and child care facilities to” 
test their drinking water for lead, and “encourag[ing] the drinking water community to assist 
schools and child care facilities in their efforts to understand and reduce lead exposure from 
drinking water.” 
 
11 Jeannie M. Purchase, Rusty Rouillier, Kelsey J. Pieper, and Marc Edwards. (2021). Understanding Failure Modes 
of NSF/ANSI 53 Lead-Certified Point-of-Use Pitcher and Faucet Filters. Environmental Science & Technology 
Letters, 8(2), 155-160. DOI: 10.1021/acs.estlett.0c00709  
12 EPA. (2019). MOU on Reducing Lead Levels in Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities between 
EPA, AMWA, and others. 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/201910/documents/mou_reducing_lead_in_drinking_water_in_schools_final.
pdf  

 
40 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Additionally, in 2018 EPA published a revised manual entitled 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking 
Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities: A Training, Testing, and Taking Action Approach.13 
According to EPA, this 3Ts manual “is intended to serve as a resource to help schools and child 
care facilities implement a voluntary program for reducing lead in drinking water.”12 The manual 
recommends that schools and child care facilities follow a prescribed “2-step sampling 
procedure”12 when testing individual outlets. 
 
Both the MOU and 3Ts manual recognize that local school officials are primarily responsible for 
testing the quality of their buildings’ drinking water, but AMWA appreciates that public drinking 
water systems are in a unique position within their communities to provide guidance and facilitate 
effective testing. However, while local water systems should be available to help individual 
schools and licensed childcare centers carry out water testing and understand the results, AMWA 
has concerns that the proposed rule promotes unrealistic expectations and goes too far in 
transferring the responsibility for school testing onto individual water systems. 
 
Section 9.2: List of School and Child Care Facilities 
 
EPA is proposing to require water systems to compile and submit to the state a list of all schools 
and childcare centers within the service area. The process, as described, is challenging for several 
reasons. Particularly, in the case of large metropolitan water systems, a comprehensive and 
accurate list of all schools and licensed childcare facilities in the system’s service area will number 
in the thousands.  
 
For example, Greater Cincinnati Water Works, a water system serving more than 240,000 
residential and commercial accounts, provides water to roughly 400 schools and an estimated 
1,000 licensed childcare centers. While that system currently carries out a program to assist these 
facilities with lead testing, it reports that identifying licensed childcare facilities for testing is a 
significant challenge, in part because the precise number of such facilities is always in flux as 
licensed childcare centers open and close regularly within the city. Similarly, most water systems 
would have no existing inventory of such schools and facilities, so it would be a tremendous 
exercise to initially develop such a list. Under the proposed rule, this exercise would have to be 
repeated every five years as water systems would be required to “submit a revised list” of school 
and licensed childcare facilities to the state. 
 
AMWA recommends EPA instead allow water systems the option to instead communicate with 
the local educational or regulatory agencies charged with operation or oversight of the 
community’s schools and licensed childcare facilities. Even if the final rule does not include the 
requirement to test a certain percentage of facilities each year, AMWA believes that outreach to 
schools and licensed childcare facilities about opportunities for testing could be more successful – 
 
13 EPA. (2018). 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities: A Training, 
Testing, and Taking Action Approach. https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-07/epa-3ts-guidance-
document-english.pdf. 

 
41 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
particularly in metropolitan communities that may host hundreds of different schools – if 
coordinated through local educational or regulatory oversight agencies. 
 
Under AMWA’s alternative approach, a water system would have the option to provide the 
appropriate regulatory agencies with a notice about the opportunity to have schools and licensed 
childcare facilities tested for lead in drinking water by the water system. A water system utilizing 
this option should further request the agency to share this information with each school or licensed 
childcare facility. This agency could also provide a representative list of such facilities that should 
be tested each year if EPA maintains certain quantified testing requirements in the final rule.  
 
Section 9.3: Testing Requirements 
 
EPA is proposing to retain most of the LCRR requirements for water systems to conduct public 
education and sample in schools and childcare facilities. Water systems must notify elementary 
schools and childcare facilities that they are eligible to be sampled for lead by the water system 
and for the first five years sample 20 percent annually of all elementary schools and childcare 
facilities. Secondary schools must also be notified of the availability of lead testing annually.   
 
AMWA understands the importance of identifying elevated lead levels at schools and childcare 
centers. However, the proposed rule makes the mistake of designating water systems as the 
appropriate entity to compel schools and licensed childcare facilities to carry out testing to detect 
lead in the water of their buildings. In attempting to encourage schools and childcare facilities to 
test their water for lead, the proposal charges water systems with the task, while also holding water 
systems accountable for a school or childcare facility’s compliance. Because the Safe Drinking 
Water Act includes no authority for EPA to require schools and childcare facilities to test their 
water for lead – unless that school or childcare facility is itself a non- transient non-community 
water system – it is patently unfair for the proposed rule to create a school and childcare facility 
testing regime that is only enforceable against community water systems. This lack of authority is 
precisely why EPA has worked with the Department of Education, Department of Health and 
Human Services, and several other federal agencies to create the MOU noted above.  
 
AMWA therefore believes that the final rule should eliminate all annual school and childcare 
facility testing benchmarks, and only require water systems to assist in the testing of a school or 
childcare facility’s water when requested to do so by that facility. AMWA does appreciate EPA’s 
recognition that water systems will likely not get responses from all facilities and that this should 
not be counted against the system’s 20 percent annual goal. AMWA members have reported 
immense difficulties in obtaining sufficient engagement from schools and childcare centers. 
Having flexibility in this area will ensure utilities are not held responsible for things outside of 
their control. While AMWA appreciates EPA allowing nonresponse and refusals to count toward 
the 20 percent, the entire provision adds to the immense records water systems must develop and 
state primacy agencies must review.  
 

 
42 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
AMWA proposes another approach to identifying and interacting with schools and licensed 
childcare facilities that should be more aligned with the testing process highlighted in the MOU 
and the 3Ts manual. Primarily, AWMA believes that rather than requiring water systems to attempt 
to conduct testing in 20 percent of schools and 20 percent of licensed child care facilities in the 
system’s service area each year, the final rule should require water systems to conduct outreach to 
local schools and licensed child care facilities to make them aware of the water system’s 
availability to carry out water testing in a school or licensed child care facility upon request. 
 
This approach is justified based on EPA’s own data. In the preamble to the proposed LCRR, EPA 
stated that the amount of testing conducted under the “upon request” option “is highly dependent 
on the percentage of facilities that request to participate in the sampling program.” EPA goes on 
to estimate that only five percent of schools and licensed childcare facilities would volunteer for a 
sampling program offered by a community water system. However, the mandatory 20 percent 
testing program would be equally dependent on schools positively responding to outreach from 
the water system, and there is no reason to think that the response rate under one scenario would 
dramatically differ from the other. In each case, the water system would have to alert schools and 
licensed childcare facilities to the opportunity for testing, and school or facility administrators 
would have to agree to allow the testing to occur. 
 
It is therefore unclear how the agency would expect every water system to achieve a mandate to 
conduct testing at 20 percent of schools and 20 percent of licensed childcare facilities each year. 
A higher level of participation on the part of schools and licensed childcare facilities cannot be 
expected simply because of a mandate. So, following EPA’s own assumptions, even if a water 
system was required to attempt to test 20 percent of schools in a year, only a small subset of those 
schools will agree to the testing. 
 
An “upon request” school and licensed childcare facility testing program should be consistent with 
the MOU and the 3Ts manual, while also establishing a recurring pattern of communication 
between local school and water system officials. Under this option, water systems should be 
required to periodically conduct outreach to schools and licensed childcare facilities, encouraging 
them to take advantage of the option to have water system officials test their facility’s water for 
lead. With time, schools and licensed childcare facilities will come to know that they have an 
opportunity for their local water system to assist with the testing of their water, while water systems 
will be relieved from (as the rule currently proposes) spending significant resources attempting to 
attain participation from 20 percent of schools and 20 percent of licensed child care centers on an 
annual basis. AMWA strongly believes that this is the most practicable and beneficial approach 
and encourages EPA to incorporate the “upon request” school testing structure into the final rule. 
 
This would reduce burdens on water systems that would have to keep track of outreach attempts, 
and ensure the system either tested, or received no response/refusal, from 20 percent of facilities. 
Both options involve water systems providing education to facilities and offering to test for lead, 
and both options completely rely on the school or childcare facility to be responsive. The 

 
43 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
alternative AMWA supports here includes the bonus of reducing burdens on water systems while 
still being protective of public health.  
 
Section 9.4: Sampling Protocol 
 
AMWA appreciates that the school and licensed childcare facility testing procedures outlined in 
the proposal reflect many of those recommended in the 2018 3Ts manual.12 It is, however, not 
clear why the proposed rule requires samples to be collected from five different locations in 
schools and two different locations in licensed childcare facilities. AMWA requests further 
information as to how these sample locations were determined. Furthermore, the 3Ts manual 
recommends that a school collect a subsequent 250 ml “30-second flush sample” if the initial test 
results indicate elevated levels of lead. This second test is recommended “to determine if the lead 
contamination results are from the fixture or from interior plumbing components,” but this step is 
absent from the testing requirements of the proposed rule. To help ensure that schools nationwide 
are receiving consistent testing advice and assistance from EPA and their local water systems, 
AMWA suggests amending the school testing procedures in the proposed rule to conform with the 
recommendations in the 3Ts manual. 
 
Section 9.5: Waivers  
 
EPA is proposing to allow states to exempt water systems from the school and daycare facility 
sampling requirements if said facilities are sampled for lead in drinking water under a state or local 
law or program that meets the frequency requirements for elementary schools, childcare facilities, 
and secondary schools, and includes the associated sampling protocol requirements. States may 
also issue a waiver for samples taken at school and childcare facilities sampled between January 
1, 2021, and the compliance date of this rule. 
 
AMWA appreciates EPA’s willingness to provide the option for waivers of these testing 
requirements and asks the agency to simplify and maintain waivers in the final rule. AMWA is 
concerned that the intricate sampling protocol that EPA has constructed for this rule will result in 
other state or local programs not qualifying for this waiver because they developed a different 
sampling protocol. EPA includes specific locations and number of samples that must be taken at 
facilities that are not based on any protocols in the 3Ts manual (the manual details possible 
sampling sites but does not define what a representative sampling protocol would entail), and 
therefore existing programs may not qualify water systems for waivers. AMWA requests that EPA 
make this protocol simpler and more streamlined, or at the very least, allow other state and local 
testing programs that have their own protocols to still qualify a water system for a waiver.  
 
EPA proposes that only school sampling programs conducted between January 2021 and the 
compliance date of the rule are eligible for waivers. We recommend EPA broaden this date. In 
California, all water systems were required to conduct sampling from all schools in their service 
area. Sampling was completed during 2018 – 2019. The 3Ts protocols and analytical methods were 

 
44 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
used, and there have been no changes in plumbing codes related to lead-free materials between 
2017 and 2021. There is no reason not to count this large sampling effort as the first round, and 
then offer “as requested” sampling moving forward. Therefore, AMWA recommends that EPA 
allow for any water system that has conducted sampling in 2017 or later, using the 3Ts protocol, 
to be eligible for waivers. 
 
Again, AMWA appreciates that the proposed rule strives to promote water testing at schools and 
licensed childcare facilities, and we maintain our support for the MOU and 3Ts manual outlining 
how to best accomplish this goal. We further believe that water systems can and should actively 
engage with local schools, licensed childcare facilities, and the local regulatory agencies that 
oversee them to make certain that the owners and administrators of these facilities are informed of 
opportunities for assistance in testing their water for lead. The above suggestions will provide for 
an implementable rule that facilitates school and childcare facility testing while simultaneously 
reducing burdens on water utilities.   
Section 10: Compliance Dates 
 
EPA proposes an LCRI compliance date of three years following rule promulgation. Additionally, 
EPA proposes that systems comply with the LCR until this date, except for the following 
provisions included in the LCRR that will go into effect October 16, 2024: 
 
● The initial LSL inventory; 
● Notification of service line material;  
● Associated reporting requirements; and 
● Tier 1 public notification for a lead action level exceedance. 
 
In section 2 of this comment letter, AMWA highlighted the formidable challenge, if not 
impossibility, of achieving a 100% Lead Service Line (LSL) replacement for certain water 
systems. The period between promulgation and compliance is crucial, affording systems limited 
time to initiate planning, preparation, and, in some cases, execution of necessary requirements 
within this condensed time frame. EPA has solicited comments on the possibility of shortening 
this period; AMWA does not support a shorter timeframe. This timeframe is critical for systems 
facing difficulties due to their state having a "no more stringent than clause" concerning EPA 
regulation. These systems in particular require time to allocate resources and gear up for 
compliance with this rule within the three-year timeframe. 
 
EPA also requests comment on if there are any other LCRR provisions besides those listed above 
for which the October 16, 2024, date should be retained. AMWA agrees with EPA that allowing 
states and water systems this time to focus on preparing to comply with these provisions is 
necessary “because of the significant level of effort required by water systems to plan for 
compliance with LCRI, coupled with the complexity of the LCRR.” AMWA agrees with EPA’s 
determination that its focus on its LSL replacement accelerator initiative and other technical 

 
45 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
assistance programs will be more effective than implementing LCRR provisions that will be 
replaced in just a few short years. AMWA asks EPA to give water systems as much time in 
between promulgation and compliance as possible, but no less than three years.  
 
AMWA is very concerned about the potential scenario where the LCRI is not promulgated before 
the LCRR's compliance date. After the LCRI public comment period, ending on February 5, 2024, 
EPA has approximately five months for reading, analyzing, and incorporating edits from the 
submitted public comments, followed by roughly 90 days of review usually taken by the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB). This brief window poses a challenge for EPA to promulgate the 
rule while incorporating meaningful public input, particularly as its LCRI proposal is significantly 
more complex than the LCRR it would replace. AMWA recommends delaying the LCRR's 
compliance date to prevent potential confusion. Otherwise, water systems will need to prepare for 
LCRR compliance until confirmation that the LCRI is finalized, utilizing valuable time and 
resources leading up to October 2024. 
Section 11: Economic Analysis and Affordability  
 
An accurate and comprehensive economic analysis is essential for the public and regulatory 
agencies to fully understand the financial impacts of agency actions. As individuals across the 
country continue to struggle financially, EPA should account for the massive financial implications 
a rulemaking of this nature will have on the public, particularly on vulnerable communities. 
Because publicly owned water systems are not-for-profit agencies, any substantial costs associated 
with this rulemaking will unfortunately be the responsibility of the ratepayers, or in the event of 
local, state, and federal funding, the taxpayers.  
 
Public water systems are financed primarily through ratepayer funds, so the costs of new 
rulemakings are passed off nearly completely to each water system’s population. In some cases, 
public water systems may receive funding from a limited pool of federal financial support in the 
form of low-interest loans and grants. In rare cases, public water systems may receive funds from 
unique or limited state or local taxes or other programs. This limit on available funds outside of 
rates means that in nearly all cases, public water systems must pass off the costs of new 
rulemakings to ratepayers. When a system passes on new required costs to ratepayers, low-income 
and other economically disadvantaged households face the highest disproportionate burden.  
 
Moreover, costs from new rulemakings come in addition to greater concerns about water 
affordability in the United States. American water infrastructure requires billions of dollars to 
maintain adequate infrastructure, prepare for climate change resilience, and protect public health. 
EPA’s 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment14 report to Congress 
estimated that drinking water systems alone will need $625 billion to replace pipes, upgrade 
treatment plants, improve storage tanks, and enhance other critical assets to ensure the public 
 
14 EPA. (September 2023). Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment 7th Report to Congress. 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-09/Seventh%20DWINSA_September2023_Final.pdf 

 
46 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
health, safety, and economic well-being of communities. These costs do not include any proposed 
rulemakings and will ultimately be passed on to all ratepayers but will be felt most severely by 
those with limited incomes. Furthermore, in April 2023, AMWA was one of five water sector 
organizations that released a report15 including a first-of-its-kind needs assessment that found that 
many as 21.3 million households nationwide may have trouble paying their water and wastewater 
bills now; this figure does not account for water systems adhering to the LCRI. 
 
EPA is estimating that this rulemaking will cost between approximately 2.1 (3 percent discount 
rate) and 3.6 (7 percent discount rate) billion dollars annually. The agency estimates that these 
costs will accrue over a 35-year period. In the preamble, EPA says it does not capture the costs of 
compliance after this period but does account for future benefits occurring after this date.  
 
Section 11.1: Overall Costs 
 
AMWA is concerned with the cost increases that will result from transitioning from the LCRR to 
the much more complex LCRI framework. EPA is aware that absent additional funding from the 
federal government, the overall costs for the rule and removal of all LSLs will primarily be borne 
by thousands of water systems, and by extension, their ratepayers. As the largest publicly owned 
water utilities that will have the most LSLs of all the utility population size categories, AMWA 
members will by-and-large experience the highest overall costs. Many commenters outside of the 
water sector community suggest that water utilities should “pay” for lead service line replacement 
– however, these commenters neglect to acknowledge that without additional grant funding, this 
payment ultimately is built into the rates – or in rare cases, taxes or other fees – which fund the 
operations of a water system. 
 
EPA recognizes the need for federal funding and other grant money to help water systems pay for 
the cost of replacing LSLs. Despite that acknowledgement, EPA is greatly underestimating the 
costs of implementing this rule. Therefore, AMWA encourages EPA to reconsider its cost 
estimates in the final rule, particularly in light of continued inflation and known escalation in water 
system treatment and materials cost as noted in AMWA’s May 30, 2023, comments to EPA on the 
proposed PFAS national primary drinking water regulations (NPDWR).16  In all likelihood, the 
increased demand for materials and labor from this rulemaking and others like PFAS will drive up 
already increasing costs, putting further strain on how far water system’s resources can go. 
Additional requirements like those from Build America, Buy America (BABA) will only 
exacerbate the issues.  
 
 
15 Low-Income Water Customer Assistance Program Assessment. (April 20, 2023). 
https://www.amwa.net/publication/low-income-water-customer-assistance-program-assessment 
16 AMWA. (May 30, 2023.) AMWA comments on PFAS National Primary Drinking Water Regulations. 
https://www.amwa.net/testimonycomments/amwa-comments-proposed-pfas-national-primary-drinking-water-
regulation.  

 
47 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
The sheer cost of this rulemaking is like no other EPA has proposed in recent years. Looking 
toward the future, this rulemaking and the PFAS NPDWR are set to be finalized this year, with a 
three-year compliance period ending in 2027 as proposed. In total, water systems nation-wide can 
expect costs to increase $2.87 to $4.8 billion a year to comply with both the LCRI and the PFAS 
NPDWR, both of which EPA aims to finalize in 2024. In reality, these costs will not be borne 
evenly among water systems, and some with large numbers of LSLs and concentrations of PFAS 
above the MCL will see astronomical increases in cost of compliance. At a time when the 
Administration has focused on environmental justice, it seems antithetical to ignore the reality that 
such rules will impose enormous costs onto water systems, which will have to increase customer 
rates to fund compliance with these rules. Even further, these two proposed rules are not the only 
actions that water systems need to invest in. 
 
A more refined and accurate cost analysis/estimate would help inform future budget requests by 
the White House, in particular to support President Biden’s goal of 100% removal of LSLs and 
assist appropriators in Congress, who have the ability to provide the level of support water systems 
need.  
 
Section 11.2: HRCCA/Economic Analysis for the Proposed Rule  
 
EPA’s methodology in its proposal falls short of the best practices its 2010 Guidelines for 
Preparing Economic Analyses.17 Specifically, EPA neglected to consider all the opportunity costs 
of its proposal. Per EPA’s Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses, the social costs of a 
rule represent the total burden that a regulation will impose on the economy. Social costs are 
defined “as the sum of all opportunity costs incurred as a result of a regulation where an 
opportunity cost is the value lost to society of any goods and services that will not be produced 
and consumed as a result of a regulation.”18  
 
EPA’s analysis underestimates the costs of the rule in several ways, including not accounting for 
the social cost of carbon dioxide (SC-CO2). Additionally, in EPA’s 2023 Proposed Rule: New 
Source Performance Standards for Greenhouse Gas Emissions from New, Modified, and 
Reconstructed Fossil Fuel-Fired Electric Generating Units the Regulatory Impact Analysis 
includes an appendix with economy-wide modeling results.19 EPA finds that including these 
additional costs for the social cost of carbon increases the social cost of the rule by 35 percent. 
This is a significant amount and should be accounted for in the cost analysis for this rulemaking. 
In the preamble, EPA includes many non-quantified, non-monetized benefits but neglects to 
include opportunity costs that will be associated with the provisions in this proposal.  
 
 
17 EPA. (2010). Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses. Chapter 8: Analyzing Costs. 
https://www.epa.gov/environmental-economics/guidelines-preparing-economic-analyses.  
18 Ibid. 
19 EPA. (2023, May 5). https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-05/FRL-8536-02-
OAR%20111EGU%20NPRM%2020230504_Admin.pdf.  

 
48 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
As with EPA’s analysis under the proposed PFAS NPDWR, for the LCRI cost analysis, EPA did 
not quantify real market costs that are affecting the water utility community, such as the near-term 
additional costs water systems face due to scarcity in the labor force and supply chain constraints; 
the opportunity costs associated with periods of time required to remove LSLs and GRRs; site 
restoration, time to distribute , etc.; and the economy-wide general equilibrium (GE) effects as the 
regulation shifts resources from consumption of other goods and services to very specific capital 
investments. 
 
EPA modeled the GE effects of a $100 million regulation in different sectors of the economy to 
measure how higher prices and capital shifts affected the entire economy.20 For the water sector, 
the report found the economy-wide reduction in consumption is 15 to 18 percent. In other words, 
the social costs of a regulation in the water sector are expected to be 15 to 18 percent higher than 
the engineering costs. 
 
EPA includes about five pages of cost components that water systems will incur each step of the 
way as it implements the requirements of this proposed rule. When calculating this total, a pivotal 
first step is knowing approximately how many systems will be triggered into these requirements. 
So far, EPA has not been able to show that it has an accurate number. For example, without 
knowing how many systems will be triggered by a lowered action level and the inclusion of first- 
and fifth-liter sampling, EPA cannot provide an accurate estimate of costs associated with this 
rulemaking.   
 
Many of the costs EPA does estimate have an incredibly wide range based on the amount of 
assumptions EPA makes. EPA pieces together a long line of unknowns of what will happen when 
new requirements of this proposed rule are finalized. If the agency must make so many 
assumptions, it would make sense to perform additional data and information collection to close 
these gaps. EPA should not be imposing enormous costs on the public if it has not done the research 
and information collection needed to provide an accurate cost analysis. The amount of financial 
strain EPA is teeing up for water systems could have unintended consequences. Water systems 
will need to prioritize projects in order to stay in compliance, and potentially put off important 
projects that could have negative implications on public health and safety.   
 
Section 11.3: Annualized costs not representative of compliance timeframe 
 
EPA’s cost analysis annualizes the costs of the critical components of the rule – including LSL 
and GRR replacement, filter provisions, public notifications, and others – over 35 years. In reality, 
these costs will be borne over a much shorter time frame as the rule lays out a framework to have 
most of the proposed rule’s major requirements done in 10 years. Therefore, it is extremely 
misleading to say it will $2.1-$3.6 billion annually ($73.5-$126 billion over 35 years). If most of 
 
20 Marten, A. L., Garbaccio, R., and Wolverton, A. (2018). Exploring the General Equilibrium Costs of Sector-
Specific Environmental Regulations. https://www.epa.gov/environmental-economics/exploring-general-equilibrium-
costs-sector-specific-environmental.  

 
49 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
the work to comply with this proposed rule occurs in the first 10 years, water systems could 
potentially see costs of $7.35 to $12.6 billion dollars annually for the first 10 years.  
 
While water systems may incur debt service for LSL replacement, for which the overall costs can 
be spread according to bond terms, the vast majority of other components are operational costs 
that will be incurred in the first 10 years after the compliance date, not 35 years. EPA must do 
more to communicate this to the public, as stretching these costs over 35 years deceives the public 
into thinking this rule is less costly annually than it is. EPA must address this discrepancy in the 
final rule.  
 
In the case of delivering filters in particular, the useful life for those filters is much shorter than 
the 10-year timeframe after the compliance date that AMWA anticipates the vast majority of costs 
occurring (and certainly not 35 years). Pitcher filters have a lifespan of much less than 10 years 
and the proposed rule requires water systems to provide pitcher filter cartridges that last only six 
months. EPA then annualizing these costs over the next 35 years is misleading, as the amount of 
pitcher filters that will need to be distributed will likely severely decrease as the 10-year deadline 
approaches and many water systems are near completion of their LSL replacement plans.  
 
Section 11.4: Cost of Orthophosphate Removal and Clean Water Act (CWA)/ Safe Drinking 
Water Act (SDWA) Connection 
 
In the economic analysis, EPA estimates an annual cost of $4.2 to $5.9 million for the addition of 
orthophosphates as a form of CCT. However, this estimation significantly underestimates the 
efforts required to prevent potential harm to waterways from increased nutrients, such as 
phosphates. The EPA's assumption of negligible costs associated with wastewater removal of 
nutrients is flawed, as any expenses incurred will ultimately be shouldered by the same ratepayers 
funding the proposed rulemaking. 
 
A pivotal aspect of the Clean Water Act (CWA) involves reducing nutrient pollution, and the EPA 
has allocated substantial resources toward achieving this objective. States, mandated by the Clean 
Water Act, must develop total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) for all waters identified on their 
Section 303(d) list of impaired waters. A notable example is the collaborative effort among states 
within the Chesapeake Bay watershed, working jointly to reduce nutrient pollution and address 
issues like eutrophication. The introduction of orthophosphates poses a challenge to these ongoing 
goals, and the EPA must acknowledge the associated costs of mitigating these adverse 
consequences. 
 
Moreover, EPA regulates nutrient pollution through the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination 
System (NPDES) permitting. The costs linked to nutrient removal at wastewater treatment plants 
should be considered, as these financial burdens will be borne by the same ratepayers responsible 
for covering the expenses of the LCRI. It is imperative for the EPA to recognize, in the final 

 
50 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
rulemaking, the substantial costs associated with mitigating nutrient pollution and not overlook 
the considerable efforts undertaken by its own agency to address this environmental concern. 
 
Section 11.5: Feasibility 
 
A major component of regulating something under the Safe Drinking Water act (SDWA) is 
determining when actions are feasible. The term “feasible” is defined as “mean[ing] feasible with 
the use of the best technology, treatment techniques and other means which the Administrator 
finds, after examination for efficacy under field conditions and not solely under laboratory 
conditions, are available (taking cost into consideration).”21 The last piece, “taking cost into 
consideration,” is an extremely important, often seemingly forgotten, portion of this definition. 
 
Assigning a timeline to 100% LSL replacement automatically increases the price tag of this 
rulemaking. Time sensitive actions often cost more money, cause increasing demand, and create 
shortages of necessary materials and labor. If water systems were allowed more flexibility with 
the timeline of LSL replacement, costs would ultimately go down and these systems would be able 
to couple other projects with replacement, cutting on costs to excavate and pay crews to do the 
work. The massive price tag of this rulemaking has been deemed “feasible” by the Administrator, 
but neglects to provide any assurance for disadvantaged and underserved communities that will be 
forced to foot the bill for these efforts. AMWA asks EPA to take into consideration some of the 
recommendations the association has included throughout this comment letter to reduce the 
financial burdens this rulemaking will have.  
 
EPA also seems to look at this rulemaking through a singular lens. The LCRI is far from the only 
significant rulemaking EPA is considering now. This year, EPA also intends to finalize the PFAS 
NPDWR that it estimates will cost ratepayers $770 million to $1.2 billion. Even further, other 
estimations of the cost of that rulemaking are 3-6 times higher.22,23 Meanwhile, EPA is intending 
to utilize, or already is using, SDWA to revise the Microbial and Disinfection Byproduct (MDBP) 
rules,24 revise the Consumer Confidence Report (CCR) rule,25 regulate perchlorate in drinking 
 
21 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(4)(D). 
22 American Water Works Association. (2023 March 7). WITAF 56 Technical Memorandum. PFAS National Cost 
Model Report. 
https://www.awwa.org/Portals/0/AWWA/Government/2023030756BVFinalTechnicalMemoradum.pdf?ver=2023- 
03-14-102450-257.  
23 AMWA. (2023). AMWA comments on PFAS NPDWR. https://www.amwa.net/testimonycomments/amwa-
comments-proposed-pfas-national-primary-drinking-water-regulation.  
24 EPA. (July 24, 2023). Potential revisions of Microbial and Disinfection Byproducts Rules. 
https://www.epa.gov/dwsixyearreview/potential-revisions-microbial-and-disinfection-byproducts-rules.  
25 EPA. (April 5, 2023). National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Consumer Confidence Report Rule 
Revisions. https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0015.  

 
51 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
water,26 and implement the Unregulated Contaminate Monitoring Rule (UCMR 5).27 Complying 
with all of these proposed and finalized rules will add significant costs to  water systems planning, 
operations, and maintenance. Outside of SDWA, EPA is taking actions through other authorities 
that will also financially impact water systems: designating PFOA, PFOS, and additional PFAS as 
hazardous substance under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act (CERCLA),28,29 amending the Risk Management Program regulations,30 and Clean 
Water Act worst case discharge planning,31 to name a few.  
 
In addition, our economic development has simply outpaced our capacity for workers to fill open 
positions. There simply haven’t been enough people born to fill the jobs that are being created. 
The idea that the “market will correct” and support the existing labor/workforce concerns with 
LCRI is simply unfounded when you consider the findings and data included in The Demographic 
Drought: Bridging the Gap in Our Labor Force.32 
 
While AMWA recognizes the importance of many of these actions, the association seeks to 
illustrate to EPA the importance of implementing requirements in a cost-effective and less 
burdensome way. These proposed and intended rulemakings listed above are but a snapshot of 
some of the current actions EPA is taking, and AMWA is concerned the compounded costs of all 
of them are going to make compliance with EPA regulations infeasible.  
 
Section 11.6: Affordability 
 
Despite the much appreciated $50 billion dollars of federal investment in the water sector from 
recent legislation, our country’s water infrastructure still requires billions more to maintain 
adequate infrastructure, prepare for climate change resilience, and protect public health. The 
American Society of Civil Engineers’ (ASCE) Failure to Act study33 found that the U.S. water 
 
26 EPA. (January 5, 2024). Perchlorate in Drinking Water. https://www.epa.gov/sdwa/perchlorate-drinking-water.  
27 EPA. (February 1, 2024). Fifth Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule. https://www.epa.gov/dwucmr/fifth-
unregulated-contaminant-monitoring-rule.  
28 EPA. (September 6, 2022). Comprehensive environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act Hazardous 
Substances: Designation of Perfluorooctanoic Acid. https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OLEM-2019-
0341-0001.  
29 EPA. (April 13, 2023). Addressing Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in the Environment.  
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OLEM-2022-0922-0001.  
30 EPA. (August 31, 2022). Accidental release prevention requirements: risk management programs under the Clean 
Air Act; Safer Communities by Chemical Accident Prevention. https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-
OLEM-2022-0174-0003.  
31 EPA. (March 28, 2022). Clean Water Act Hazardous Substance Worst Case Discharge Planning. 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OLEM-2021-0585-0001.  
32 ESMI. (2021). The Demographic Drought. https://lightcast.io/resources/research/demographic-
drought#Download.  
33American Society of Civil Engineers. (2021). 2021 Report: Economic impacts of status quo investment across 
infrastructure systems. https://infrastructurereportcard.org/the-impact/failure-to-act-report/.  

 
52 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
sector in 2021 needed over $400 billion to meet engineering standards, and these costs will only 
increase with additional treatment, climate change, and inflation. The existing water system 
financing model assumes that most of the money for addressing local water supply issues, whether 
that issue is aging infrastructure, water quality, lead pipes, cybersecurity, or water supply 
reliability, can be dealt with largely with local resources (i.e., customer water rates, or other local 
funding mechanisms). Given the large funding gap needed without the LCRI, it is essential that 
the EPA adequately assess costs in its final rulemaking and create the NPDWR with accurate 
estimates. 
 
As stated in section 11.3, over the 35-year period, this rulemaking can expect to cost a total of 
$73.5-$126 billion. This far exceeds the $15 billion allocated for LSL replacement funds in the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) of 2021. Therefore, AMWA is concerned that an EPA 
requirement for water systems to carry out full lead service line replacements would represent a 
massive unfunded mandate for communities that do not receive BIL funding. These communities 
would likely have to turn to increased customer water rates to cover these replacement costs, which 
could be expected to disproportionately impact low-income customers. The overwhelming 
majority of water systems are limited to grants, loans, and user rates to cover the costs of providing 
drinking water service, and federal funds to date alone will not cover the full costs. 
 
Customer bills will not only be impacted by rising operating expenses due to inflation but also 
higher interest rates that accompany periods of higher inflation. AMWA conducts a biennial 
survey of its members on financial trends, and a 2022 analysis by Raftelis Financial Consultants 
indicated that “on average, utilities are projecting to increase rates by almost 5% per year over the 
next five years. This increase is 37% higher than the expected future increases reported in the 2020 
survey (4.94% compared to 3.6%) and 25% higher than expected future increases reported in the 
2018 survey (4.94% compared to 3.94%), indicating that while future expected rate increases are 
anticipated to be on average fairly moderate, these increases are also anticipated to be higher than 
in previous years.”34   
 
Community water systems face additional challenges in their authority to increase rates and in 
their ability to assist low-income customers most affected by increased rates. AMWA represents 
publicly owned drinking water utilities, which are often governed by boards or other elected 
officials that may restrict the degree to which utilities can increase rates or whether they may 
establish lower rates for low-income customers. In other cases, publicly owned utilities may 
require voter permission to authorize funding for major infrastructure projects. The LCRI must 
recognize the unique challenges faced by water utilities in acquiring and distributing funds to 
replace lead service lines and recognize potential increased water rates as an intended consequence 
of funding lead service line replacement. 
 
34 Sapone, P. and Craley, R. of Raftelis. (January 25, 2024). What AMWA’s INSIGHT Survey tells us about 
inflation’s impact on water utilities. https://www.raftelis.com/insight/what-amwas-insight-survey-tells-us-about-
inflations-impact-on-water-utilities/.   

 
53 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Section 12: Conclusion 
 
AMWA thanks EPA for the opportunity to provide input on these long-awaited revisions to the 
Lead and Copper Rule. AMWA’s members are public health leaders in their communities, and the 
protection of their customers is their highest priority. While AMWA supports many of the 
ambitious requirements under this proposal, the concerns outlined in these comments highlight the 
multitude of complications which could hinder the implementation of this rule. EPA must work to 
resolve the components of this rule that have placed unrealistic expectations on water systems, 
particularly those which hold water systems accountable for achieving benchmarks which may be 
outside of their control. Requiring water systems to meet standards that rely significantly on the 
cooperation of schools, licensed child care centers, and homeowners may set up water systems to 
fail through no fault of their own, despite making their best effort to comply. 
 
The association believes that our comments will help the agency ensure the final rule is achievable, 
practical, and enforceable. AMWA is appreciative of EPA’s efforts to bring this proposal to 
fruition and looks forward to working with EPA to best protect the health of the millions of people 
that depend on their local water systems for safe and reliable drinking water. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Appendix A 
 
 
 
 
 
AMWA Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESIDENT 
Steve Schneider 
Saint Paul Regional Water 
Services 
 
Mike Armstrong 
WaterOne 
 
Kevin Gertig 
Fort Collins Utilities 
 
Ron Lovan 
Northern Kentucky Water 
District 
 
VICE PRESIDENT 
Angela Licata 
New York City Department of 
Environmental Protection 
 
Shane Chapman 
Metropolitan Water District of 
Southern California 
 
Richard Harasick 
Los Angeles Department of 
Water and Power 
 
Sue McCormick 
Great Lakes Water Authority 
 
 
 
TREASURER 
John Entsminger 
Las Vegas Valley Water 
District 
 
Robert L. Davis 
Cleveland Department of Public 
Utilities 
 
Robert Hunter 
Municipal Water District of 
Orange County 
 
Jeffrey Szabo 
Suffolk County Water Authority 
 
 
SECRETARY 
Kathryn Sorensen 
Phoenix Water Services 
 
 
Scott Dewhirst 
Tacoma Water  
 
Ghassan Korban 
New Orleans Water and Sewer 
Board 
 
John P. Sullivan, Jr. 
Boston Water and Sewer 
Commission 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER 
Diane VanDe Hei 
 
 
Steve Edgemon 
Fairfax Water 
 
Carrie Lewis 
Portland Water District 
 
Douglas Yoder 
Miami-Dade Water and Sewer 
Department 
 
 
 
 
 
Yvonne Forrest 
Houston Public Utilities 
Division  
 
James S. Lochhead 
Denver Water  
 
 
 
 
 
February 12, 2020 
 
The Honorable David P. Ross 
Assistant Administrator  
Office of Water  
Environmental Protection Agency 
 
Re: Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead 
and Copper Rule Revisions 
 
Dear Assistant Administrator Ross, 
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) is an organization representing CEOs and 
general managers of the largest publicly owned drinking water systems in the United States. Any changes 
to national primary drinking water regulations will significantly impact our members. AMWA appreciates 
the opportunity to comment on the Environmental Protection Agency’s proposed rule, National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300).  
 
The association has been involved with the Lead and Copper Rule since its inception and values all the 
work that EPA has done to decrease the risk of lead and copper to public health. The proposed revisions are 
an important next step and AMWA appreciates EPA’s efforts to update the rule. Due to the importance of 
this rulemaking, AMWA is pleased to submit the attached comments for EPA’s consideration. If you have 
any questions, please contact me at 202-331-2820 or Stephanie Hayes Schlea (schlea@amwa.net), 
AMWA’s Director of Regulatory and Scientific Affairs. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Diane VanDe Hei 
Chief Executive Officer 
 
Attachment 
 
cc: Jennifer McLain, Director, Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water;  
      Eric Burneson, Standards and Risk Management Division Director, OGWDW  

1 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Introduction 
2 
Lead service line definition (Section 141.2) 
4 
24-hour notification following a 90th percentile lead action level exceedance (Section 
141.80(h)(3)) 
7 
Find-and-Fix (Section 141.82(j)) 
12 
Lead service line inventory and replacement requirements (Section 141.84) 
18 
Lead service line inventories 
19 
Lead service line replacement 
23 
Customer-initiated lead service line replacement 
26 
Filter requirements (Sections 141.84 and 141.86) 
30 
Public education and supplemental monitoring requirements (Section 141.85) 
33 
Monitoring for lead in schools and licensed child care facilities (Section 141.92) 
35 
Economic Analysis 
43 
Conclusion 
45 
 
 

2 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) is pleased to offer these comments 
on EPA’s National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Revisions. AMWA acknowledges the thought and hard work that EPA has put into the proposed 
revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule and supports EPA’s efforts to address this complicated 
issue. AMWA has been involved with the Lead and Copper Rule since its inception and values 
all the work that EPA has done to decrease the public’s exposure to lead through drinking water. 
We were pleased to identify a number of strengths in the proposed rule, but we also encourage 
EPA to make a number of changes to improve its clarity and the ability of water systems to 
implement and comply with the rule’s requirements. 
 
Among the strengths of the rule is the new requirement for water systems to complete an 
inventory that specifies the composition, if known, of public and privately owned service lines 
connected to the distribution system. While many water systems will face challenges in 
accurately determining the makeup of some service lines – particularly those on private property 
– on balance it is important and worthwhile for water systems to document what materials are in 
the service lines that deliver water to their customers. Once an inventory is completed, we agree 
that all water systems serving more than 100,000 people should make their inventories available 
to the public online. Our comments include several constructive suggestions to improve the 
inventory requirements, but overall we welcome its addition to the Lead and Copper Rule.   
 
AMWA appreciates that the proposal avoids setting unattainable mandates such as a deadline for 
the replacement of all lead service lines nationwide. Compliance with such a mandate would take 
decades, cost billions of dollars, and would prevent water systems from allocating their limited 
budgets to other projects and initiatives that may deliver greater public health benefits. However, 
the rule also empowers individual homeowners to compel their water system to replace the 
publicly owned portion of a lead service line when the homeowner simultaneously replaces their 
privately owned lead line. AMWA has a number of suggestions to make this process as seamless 
as possible, but giving homeowners a pathway to have their water system replace a lead service 
line connected to their property is one of the most important new features in the proposed rule. 
 
AMWA also agrees with steps the proposal takes to discourage partial lead service line 
replacements – such replacements carry few public health benefits and allow lead pipes to 
remain in the ground. But a total ban on partial replacements, as some would advocate, is ill-
advised and not feasible. For example, emergency water main replacement work may offer an 
opportunity for a water system to simultaneously replace the publicly owned portion of a 
household’s lead service line. Likewise, a planned water main replacement project may result in 
a new alignment or spacing of the main, necessitating replacement of at least part of a lead 
service line. Ideally the privately owned portion of the lead line would be replaced at the same 
time, but a water system’s ability to do so is often contingent upon that customer’s willingness to 
allow work on his or her property (and, in many cases, for the customer to pay the costs 
associated with replacing the privately owned portion). The proposal recognizes that there will 
be situations where customer consent cannot be quickly obtained, and in those limited cases 

3 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
permits a water system to at least remove the publicly owned portion of a lead service line when 
the emergency main repair projects or other scheduled infrastructure work has provided an 
opportunity to do so. 
 
AMWA further appreciates that the proposed rule would not require water systems to cover costs 
associated with the replacement of privately owned service lines, though they would retain the 
option to do so. While some water systems are able to subsidize private-side replacement, the 
ability of many others to do so is legally questionable or banned outright. In fact, a 2017 
University of North Carolina Environmental Finance Center report commissioned by AMWA 
and other water sector organizations found that the laws of three states expressly prohibit water 
systems from using ratepayer funds on initiatives that benefit specific customers, and laws in at 
least 19 others make the practice highly questionable.1 A mandate in the Lead and Copper Rule 
for a water system to pay the cost of replacing a privately owned portion of a lead service line 
would therefore leave many water systems in the position of either violating the rule, or violating 
state or local laws barring the use of ratepayer dollars for infrastructure projects that benefit 
individual residents. The proposed rule wisely avoids this scenario. 
 
However, other parts of the proposed rule fall short of recognizing that any successful effort to 
address lead in drinking water must be the result of collaboration and cooperation between water 
systems and their customers. AMWA has strong concerns with aspects of the proposed rule that 
would penalize water systems for failing to achieve full service line replacement targets that can 
only be met with the cooperation of individual property owners.  
 
We have also identified a number of shortcomings with portions of the proposed rule related to 
testing water in school and child care facilities. These deficiencies include the failure to 
recognize that significant numbers of school administrators and licensed child care center 
employees may very well not respond at all to water system outreach regarding water testing 
opportunities – in which case AMWA believes a water system should not be penalized for failing 
to meet an arbitrary testing target proposed by the rule. As a signatory on EPA’s Memorandum 
of Understanding on Reducing Lead Levels in Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care 
Facilities, AMWA agrees with EPA’s prioritization of protecting our children from lead 
exposure and applaud EPA for taking further steps to accomplish this goal. However, EPA has 
not considered crucial aspects and restrictions related to the proposed rule and risks holding 
water systems out of compliance for reasons outside of their control. 
 
AMWA’s comments offer suggestions on these and several other areas of the proposed rule 
which we believe should be improved. These include: 
 
• The definition of “lead service line” (Section 141.2) 
• 24-hour notification following a 90th percentile lead action level exceedance (Section 
141.80(h)(3)) 
 
1 Navigating Legal Pathways to Rate-Funded Customer Assistance Programs: A Guide for Water and Wastewater 
Utilities. https://efc.sog.unc.edu/sites/default/files/2018/FINAL_Pathways%20to%20Rate-Funded%20CAPs.pdf.  

4 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
• Find-and-Fix (Section 141.82(j)) 
• Lead service line inventory and replacement requirements (Section 141.84) 
• Customer-initiated lead service line replacement (Section 141.84(d)(3)-(5)) 
• Provision of filters to customers (Sections 141.84 and 141.86) 
• Public education and monitoring requirements (Section 141.85) 
• Monitoring for lead in schools and licensed child care facilities (Section 141.92) 
 
Finally, our comments offer several suggestions on portions of EPA’s economic analysis 
accompanying the proposal that we believe require additional consideration. 
 
Beyond these components, we believe further explanation and clarification is necessary for 
Sections 141.81 and 141.82 of the proposed rule, which govern when a water system would have 
to install or re-optimize corrosion control treatment based upon the 90th percentile results of tap 
water monitoring. Based on our reading of the proposal, a water system with corrosion control 
treatment that exceeds the lead trigger level of 0.010 mg/L at the 90th percentile – but not the 
action level of 0.015mg/L – would have to study and re-optimize its corrosion control. This 
would effectively make the trigger level the new standard at which a water system would have to 
take further action related to corrosion control – leaving the action level somewhat less relevant. 
We therefore request that EPA more fully explain its reasoning for having corrosion control 
changes contingent upon a trigger level exceedance rather than an action level exceedance. 
 
Overall, AMWA believes our comments will provide EPA with valuable suggestions which, if 
adopted, will ensure the proposed rule is achievable, practical, and enforceable. We thank you in 
advance for your consideration. 
 
 
 
Lead service line definition (Section 141.2) 
 
Summary: 
 
• EPA’s proposed definition for “lead service line” is imprecise and should be modified to 
ensure that the agency’s intention is clear, and the definition can be implemented 
throughout the rule. 
 
• AMWA is concerned with the inclusion of “ever was” within the determination of 
galvanized pipe which is downstream of a lead service line or a pipe of unknown 
material. This distinction is problematic as water systems may not have specific records 
for service lines that go back to the initial installation, and may be unable to definitively 
prove or disprove what material may have been upstream of the galvanized line 
throughout the life of the service line.  
 

5 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
• AMWA suggests a revised definition of “lead service line” that provides clarity that a 
galvanized service line that is not otherwise considered a lead service line, and that is 
downstream of a lead gooseneck, pigtail, or connector, will not be considered a lead 
service line. AMWA also suggests allowing a water system to use tools such as water 
system records, city codes, and building records to draw a reasonable conclusion about 
whether a galvanized service line is likely to have been connected to a lead line at some 
point in the past, and use this information to determine whether that galvanized line is to 
be treated as lead. 
 
• EPA should include more information within the preamble, including visual 
representations, to better inform the public, regulating entities, and water systems as to 
the classification of the different real-world scenarios these entities might find when 
working with service lines.  
 
 
Comments: 
 
AMWA appreciates EPA’s attempt to better clarify what constitutes a lead service line under this 
rule. The proposed language improves upon the definition used in the current Lead and Copper 
Rule, as seen below. AMWA also supports the addition of galvanized lines downstream of lead 
pipe to the definition of lead service line due to the fact that galvanized pipe can absorb lead 
particles, as this designation is the most protective of public health.  
 
However, as currently written, the circumstances when a service line is considered a lead service 
line is still not entirely clear. As this definition informs all other parts of this rule, it is critical 
that the definition be as clear and detailed as possible. 
 
Present Lead and Copper Rule definition: 
 
Lead service line means a service line made of lead which connects the water main to the 
building inlet and any lead pigtail, gooseneck or other fitting which is connected to such 
lead line. 
 
Definition in proposed rule: 
 
Lead service line means a service line made of lead, which connects the water main to the 
building inlet. A lead service line may be owned by the water system, owned by the 
property owner, or both. For the purposes of this subpart, a galvanized service line is 
considered a lead service line if it ever was or is currently downstream of any lead service 
line or service line of unknown material. If the only lead piping serving the home or 
building is a lead gooseneck, pigtail, or connector, and it is not a galvanized service line 
that is considered an LSL the service line is not a lead service line. 
 
 

6 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
 
AMWA suggests the following language as a substitute: 
 
Lead service line means a service line, which connects the water main to the building 
inlet, comprised in any part of lead, excluding a service line where the sole component of 
lead is either a lead gooseneck, pigtail, or connector. A lead service line may be owned 
by the water system, owned by the property owner, or both. 
 
For the purposes of this subpart, a galvanized service line is considered a lead service line 
if it is currently, or is known or likely to have been in the past, downstream of a lead 
service line or service line of currently unknown material. If the only lead known, 
presently or in the past, to be upstream of a galvanized service line is either a lead 
gooseneck, pigtail, or connector, then the galvanized line is not considered a lead service 
line. If a galvanized line is downstream of a service line of unknown material, the 
galvanized line shall no longer be considered a lead service line if the upstream unknown 
material is subsequently determined to be nonlead, unless the galvanized line is otherwise 
determined likely to have been downstream of a lead service line in the past. 
 
The above language maintains the majority of EPA’s intent while providing a clearer and more 
defensible definition. The language is also consistent with the language used to categorize 
service lines for purposes of an inventory in Section 141.84. 
 
The most significant change within the suggested language involves the replacement of text 
regarding if the portion of the service line upstream of a galvanized line “ever was” lead, or an 
unknown material. The “ever was” standard is problematic because if a water system does not 
have a complete record for a service line that dates back to the initial installation, it would not be 
able to definitively prove or disprove what material may have been upstream of the galvanized 
line throughout the life of the service line – even if the galvanized line is known to currently not 
be downstream of a lead line. AMWA therefore suggests allowing a water system to use other 
tools such as other related water system records, city codes, and building records to draw a 
reasonable inference about whether a galvanized service line was or was not likely to have been 
connected to a lead line at some point in the past. If this review leads to a conclusion that the 
galvanized line was likely to have been downstream of a lead line at some point in the past, the 
galvanized line should presently be considered lead. Conversely, if the review concludes that the 
galvanized line was unlikely to have been downstream of lead in the past, it should not count as 
lead in the system’s present-day inventory. We will discuss this process further in our comments 
on lead service line inventory and replacement requirements. 
 
AMWA’s revised definition also provides clarity that if a galvanized service line is not otherwise 
considered a lead service line, and is downstream from a lead gooseneck, pigtail, or connector, 
that galvanized line will continue to not be considered a lead service line. 
 
Finally, AMWA also believes that it would be beneficial to have additional information included 
in the preamble so as to better describe the different scenarios that water systems may experience 

7 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
in their own distribution systems. As seen in the table below, under the proposed definition it 
appears there are, at minimum, sixteen different configurations that a service line could have. 
This configuration determines whether the service line is considered lead under the inventory, if 
it may be included in a water system’s sampling pool, and if the line would count towards a 
water system’s replacement goal or three percent mandated replacement rate. AMWA suggests 
EPA include the table below within the preamble. This table will also help with the language 
used to categorize service lines for purposes of an inventory in Section 141.84.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
24-hour notification following a 90th percentile lead action level 
exceedance (Section 141.80(h)(3)) 
 
Summary: 
 
• AMWA recognizes that the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation (WIIN) 
Act of 2016 amended the Safe Drinking Water Act to add a “lead action level 
exceedance” to the list of events after which a water system must give notice to persons 
PUBLIC
PRIVATE
INVENTORY 
STATUS
COMPONENTS NEEDING 
REPLACEMENT
INCLUDED IN TIER 1 
SAMPLING POOL
COUNTS TOWARD 
REPLACEMENT 
GOAL/RATE
L
L
L
B
Y
Y
L
NL
L 
P
Y
Y
L
U
L 
PR
Y
Y
L
G
L 
B
Y
Y
G
L
L 
R
Y
Y
G 
NL
NL
NR
N
N
G
U
L 
DN
N
D
G
G
NL
NR
N
N
U
L
L 
PR
Y
Y
U
NL
L 
DN
N
D
U
U
L 
DN
N
D
U
G
L 
DN
N
D
NL
L
L 
R
Y
Y
NL
NL
NL
NR
N
N
NL
U
L
DN
N
D
NL
G
NL
NR
N
N
L = lead
G = galvanized
U = unknown
NL = nonlead/galvanized
Y = yes
P = public
R = private
B = both sides
NR = no replacement needed
N = no
DN = determination of unknown(s) needed before decision to do replacement
D = depends on status of identified unknowns
PR = determination needed to decide if one or both components need replacing 

8 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
served by the system. In the case of a lead action level exceedance “that has the potential 
to have serious adverse effects on human health as a result of short-term exposure,” the 
Safe Drinking Water Act, as amended by the WIIN Act, requires EPA to issue 
regulations to require a notice to “be distributed as soon as practicable, but not later than 
24 hours, after the public water system learns of the … exceedance.” 
 
• AMWA does not believe that every 90th percentile lead action level exceedance 
necessarily poses serious adverse human health effects as a result of short-term exposure 
but acknowledges EPA’s finding that it would be difficult for the agency to delineate 
between lead action level exceedances that meet this threshold, and those that do not. 
 
• AMWA also believes that EPA should take all steps practicable to avoid mandating 
expedited public notifications about exceedances that may unnecessarily alarm the public 
or undermine their confidence in the quality of their drinking water. 
 
• AMWA is confident that EPA could fulfill the congressional mandate of the WIIN Act 
and appropriately focus expedited exceedance alerts by targeting those alerts to 
households that, based upon information uncovered through a water system’s lead service 
line inventory, are known to receive their water through lead service lines or service lines 
of unknown material. 
 
 
Comments: 
 
Section 141.80(h)(3) of the proposed rule would require any water system that exceeds the lead 
action level at the 90th percentile to “notify the public in accordance with the public notification 
requirements in Subpart Q” of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations. In practice, 
this would require a Tier 1 public notification under the Public Notification Rule for any 90th 
percentile lead action level exceedance, meaning that water systems would have to notify all 
customers within 24 hours of learning of the exceedance. While we agree that the public should 
be promptly notified of water quality conditions that may pose severe and acute human health 
risks, the rule should avoid unnecessarily alarming members of the public (such as those whose 
homes are not served by lead service lines) who are not expected to be significantly impacted by 
an exceedance. AMWA believes this is an achievable objective. 
 
AMWA understands that EPA’s proposal for public notification following a lead action level 
exceedance must abide by the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation (WIIN) Act of 
2016 (P.L. 114-322). That law amended the Safe Drinking Water Act to require a notice to “be 
distributed as soon as practicable, but not later than 24 hours, after the public water system learns 
of the … exceedance,” provided that the exceedance “has the potential to have serious adverse 
effects on human health as a result of short-term exposure.” 
 
No statutory notice distribution timeframe applies in the case of a lead action level exceedance 
that does not have the potential to have serious adverse effects on human health as a result of 

9 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
short-term exposure. In that case, the Safe Drinking Water Act directs EPA to issue a regulation 
to prescribe the “manner, frequency, form, and content” of such notice after taking “into account 
the seriousness of any potential adverse health effects that may be involved” (See SDWA Sec. 
300g-3(c)(2)(A)). 
 
EPA contends in the preamble to the proposed rule (page 61710) that it “cannot define the subset 
of [action level] exceedances that could result in serious adverse health effects due to short-term 
exposure.” As a result, the proposed rule “would require Tier 1, 24 hour notification” through 
methods outlined in the Public Notification Rule anytime a water system exceeds the lead action 
level at the 90th percentile. These methods include notices through broadcast media, posting at 
conspicuous locations throughout the service area, hand delivery to persons served, or other 
methods approved by the state. 
 
While AMWA acknowledges that EPA would face a difficult task in separating those 90th 
percentile action level exceedances that present serious adverse health effects from those that do 
not, requiring a 24-hour notification of all customers following a 90th percentile lead action level 
exceedance goes far beyond the congressional directive and would not be ideal in several 
respects. First, unlike an MCL violation with the potential to carry serious human health effects 
in the short term, all users of the water system would not necessarily be equally vulnerable to 
health effects related to a lead action level exceedance. Instead, sampling results indicating an 
action level exceedance by the water system would have the most relevance to the health of 
customers who are served by lead service lines. It is then reasonable to prioritize this universe of 
customers for the fastest notification following an action level exceedance. 
 
A community-wide 24-hour notification following a 90th percentile action level exceedance, 
utilizing mechanisms such as broadcast media or hand-delivery, would certainly capture all 
households that are served by lead service lines. But in the case of metropolitan water systems 
this broad notification would also capture perhaps tens or hundreds of thousands of households 
without lead service lines that are less likely to experience elevated lead levels regardless of the 
results of the community’s tap sampling. Notifying these customers with an urgent 
communication within 24 hours of obtaining the lead sampling results could lead them to avoid 
their drinking water unnecessarily, or otherwise cause alarm even though their own water quality 
is unlikely to be affected. This would likely undermine the public’s confidence in their drinking 
water and runs counter to the Safe Drinking Water Act’s direction for EPA to “take into account 
the seriousness of any potential adverse health effects that may be involved” when setting the 
form, frequency, and manner of the required notice. 
 
 
AMWA’s recommended alternative approach to customer notification following a lead action 
level exceedance: 
 
AMWA envisions a modified notification approach that maintains compliance with the 
requirements of the Safe Drinking Water Act as amended by P.L. 114-322. In short, AMWA 
recommends that the rule’s requirement to distribute notification to customers within 24 hours of 

10 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
learning of a lead action level exceedance at the 90th percentile be limited to those households 
served by a lead service line (including a galvanized line downstream of a lead service line), or a 
service line of unknown material. 
 
This approach would be made possible by the lead service line inventory that would be required 
under Section 141.84 of the proposed rule. That provision would require water systems to 
“develop and maintain a publicly accessible inventory of lead service lines and service lines of 
unknown materials in its distribution system.” With that inventory in hand, a water system would 
have a readily accessible list of customers to promptly notify in the event of a lead action level 
exceedance. 
 
The proposed rule also includes several other scenarios where a water system would be required 
to deliver a targeted communication specifically to customers served by lead service lines, or 
service lines of unknown material. For example: 
 
• Section 141.85(e) would require water systems to annually “provide notification to all 
customers with a lead service line or a service line of unknown material informing them 
they have a lead service line or a service line of unknown material.” This annual notice 
would have to be delivered to these customers by mail or another method approved by 
the state, indicating that water systems would need to maintain a database of contact 
information for this subset of households. 
 
• Section 141.85(f) would further require that all water systems that exceed the lead trigger 
level of 0.010 mg/L at the 90th percentile “must provide customers that have a lead 
service line information regarding the water system’s goal-based lead service line 
replacement program and opportunities for replacement of the lead service line.” This 
required notice, which would have to be delivered via mail (or another method approved 
by the state) within 30 days of the end of the monitoring period within which the trigger 
level was surpassed reiterates the necessity of water systems to maintain a database of 
contact information for households served by lead service lines. 
 
• Section 141.85(g) would require water systems that fail to meet their annual lead service 
line replacement goals to conduct outreach to the public utilizing at least two methods 
from a prescribed list of options. One such option (found in clause (1)(iii)) is to “send 
certified mail to customers with lead service lines to inform them about the water 
system’s goal-based lead service line replacement program and opportunities for 
replacement of the lead service line.” 
 
Based on these requirements, it is clear that to ensure compliance with the proposed rule water 
systems would need to maintain a database that includes contact information for households with 
lead service lines, or service lines of unknown material. With this database available, a water 
system would have the ability to initiate a targeted notification to these customers within 24 
hours of learning of a lead action level exceedance at the 90th percentile. AMWA therefore 
recommends that EPA give water systems the option of distributing the required notification 

11 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
within 24 hours of learning of a lead action level exceedance to only those households that are 
served by lead service lines, or service lines of unknown material. 
 
Even with the ability to target distribution of this notice to customers most likely to be affected, 
AMWA believes the WIIN Act mandate will impose a substantial burden on water systems. To 
use the example of a water system that learns of its 90th percentile exceedance on a Friday 
afternoon, the system would be in violation if it distributed the required notice to customers the 
following Monday. However, unlike EPA’s proposed notice to residents of individual 
households where tap samples were collected, AMWA recognizes that the WIIN Act does not 
give EPA flexibility to alter the timeline of when a notice following an exceedance must be 
distributed. 
 
However, EPA does have a degree of flexibility on how to interpret the WIIN Act mandate. 
Section 300g-3(c)(2)(C)(i) of the Safe Drinking Water Act, as amended by the WIIN Act, 
provides that the notice about exceedances with the potential to have serious adverse effects on 
human health as a result of short terms exposure must “be distributed as soon as practicable, but 
not later than 24 hours, after the public water systems learns of the … exceedance.” The law 
does not necessarily require that this notice be in the hands of customers within 24 hours. 
Therefore, in the case of a water system that aims to meet its WIIN Act notification obligation by 
issuing a targeted communication to customers served by lead service lines or service lines of 
unknown material, EPA should consider a water system to be in compliance with this 
requirement if it begins the process of distributing the notice to relevant customers within 24 
hours of learning of the exceedance. Steps that may fulfill this requirement could include 
initiating printing of a letter to be mailed to customers, or (in the case of customers for whom the 
water system has electronic contact information) sending them the notice electronically. After 
initiating the process of printing letters for mail distribution, the water system would be expected 
to complete distribution as soon as practicable in order to remain in compliance with the 
statutory deadline. 
 
In this scenario, it is important to remember that the samples themselves would have been 
collected at least several weeks prior to the moment at which the water system learned of its 
action level exceedance at the 90th percentile. After such an amount of time, there would be a 
minimal difference from a public health perspective of whether a customer actually received the 
notice within 24 hours of the water system learning the result, or a few days later. 
 
 
AMWA’s recommendation and compliance with the WIIN Act: 
 
AMWA’s recommendation to target lead action level exceedance notices to customers who are 
served by lead service lines would be consistent with the congressional mandate of the WIIN 
Act. Under Section 300g-3(c)(2)(C) of the Safe Drinking Water Act, as amended by the WIIN 
Act, EPA’s regulations must “specify notification procedures for [each MCL violation or lead 
action level exceedance] that has the potential to have serious adverse effects on human health as 
a result of short-term exposure.” While the proposed rule aims to achieve compliance with this 

12 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
mandate by treating all lead action level exceedances as Tier 1 public notification events that 
“reach all persons served” by the system, the statutory language allows greater flexibility – as 
long as water systems provide distribution to those individuals with the potential to suffer serious 
adverse health effects as a result of short-term exposure “as soon as practicable, but not later than 
24 hours” after learning of the exceedance. 
 
AMWA believes that the portion of a water system’s customer base most likely to be at risk of 
incurring serious adverse health effects as a result of short-term exposure following a lead action 
level exceedance at the 90th percentile are those customers who receive their water through a lead 
service line. Customers who are found (via the water system’s service line inventory) to not be 
served by lead service lines have a much lower potential to experience adverse health effects as a 
result of levels of lead measured in water that spur an action level exceedance. The WIIN Act 
therefore does not require water systems to expedite a notice about an action level exceedance to 
these customers. While AMWA believes that the water system’s entire service population should 
be made aware of a 90th percentile exceedance following the conclusion of the monitoring period 
(or another time period EPA identifies after taking into account the seriousness of any potential 
adverse health effects to the general population), neither statutory nor public health objectives 
necessitate all customers to receive a notice about a 90th percentile lead action level exceedance 
at the same time as customers who do in fact receive their water through a lead service line. 
 
AMWA understands that there may be hesitation on the part of some water systems to divide 
their post-exceedance public notification in this manner, so the final rule should allow the option 
for a water system to distribute its notice to the entire service population, as the rule currently 
proposes. In fact, some water systems may find it preferable to simply utilize broadcast media to 
broadly deliver this notice to the public, and the final rule should not restrict them from doing so. 
But because ensuring compliance with other aspects of the proposed rule will require water 
systems to maintain databases of contact information for households with service lines made of 
lead and/or unknown materials, these databases could also be utilized to begin distribution of a 
required notification within 24 hours of a water system learning of a lead action level 
exceedance. This would quickly and directly get the information to the households where it is 
most needed, without alarming other customers with an expedited notice that may not be 
relevant. 
 
 
 
Find-and-Fix (Section 141.82(j)) 
 
Summary: 
 
• AMWA agrees with the proposed rule’s intent to encourage water systems to identify the 
cause when high levels of lead are detected at an individual tap sampled as part of 
required monitoring activities. 

13 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
• AMWA also agrees with the proposal’s limitation of Find-and-Fix requirements to only 
those samples taken pursuant to the monitoring program under Section 141.86 and not to 
other samples that may be voluntarily collected by water systems through customer-
requested drinking water lead testing programs. 
 
• AMWA objects to EPA’s requirement that all new water quality parameter testing sites 
identified under these provisions be permanently added to a water system’s catalog of 
sites. This is unnecessary and is not a constructive use of limited resources.  
 
• AMWA strongly objects to EPA’s suggestion that adjustments to a water system’s 
corrosion control treatment should be carried out based on a single sample that is above 
the action level. In some cases, an elevated level of lead discovered in an individual 
sample may often relate to lead coatings or other factors that are unique to the specific 
sampling site, and beyond the control of the water system. 
 
• Requiring a water system to make corrosion control changes due to only one or a small 
number of individual samples exceeding the action level could actually expose the public 
to elevated lead levels and corresponding public health risks and provide limited benefits. 
 
• Should EPA proceed with requiring corrosion control adjustments following a single 
sample exceedance, AMWA makes the following suggestions: 
 
o The final rule must include greater clarity about EPA’s vision for adjustments to 
“localized” corrosion control, as neither the rule nor the preamble define this term 
or explain how a water system would implement it. 
 
o AMWA questions whether “six months after the end of the monitoring period in 
which the site exceeded the action level” is enough time for a water system to 
make an informed and scientifically justified decision on changes to corrosion 
control treatment without the possibility of jeopardizing public health. 
 
o EPA should ensure that the proposed rule only requires a water system to make a 
single determination of whether adjustments to corrosion control treatment are 
necessary, following a round of required monitoring activities. EPA should 
further ensure that adequate time and resources are available to study and decide 
upon any adjustment to corrosion control treatment. As currently drafted, the 
proposed rule suggests that a water system would have to make a separate 
determination on potential corrosion control changes for each individual sample 
that detects lead in a home’s water above the action level. 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Comments: 
 
AMWA understands that the “Find-and-Fix” provision in Section 141.82(j) would go beyond the 
Lead and Copper Rule’s current requirements, which direct water systems to notify individual 
customers of the sampling results from their taps within 30 days. The proposed rule, in addition 
to requiring water systems to deliver a notification within 24 hours to individual customers 
whose water was found to have lead exceeding the action level, would also require water systems 
to take steps to identify and rectify underlying issues that may have contributed to elevated lead 
levels measured in an individual customer’s tap, and to determine whether system-wide 
corrosion control changes are necessary. AMWA generally agrees with EPA’s intent to 
encourage water systems to assist in uncovering the cause of elevated lead levels in individual 
homes, but has significant concerns regarding the agency’s proposal for water systems to 
consider changes to their corrosion control based solely on a small number of individual tap 
samples that exceed the action level. 
 
We also note that Section 141.82(j) would only require steps outlined in the Find-and-Fix 
procedure “when a tap sample site exceeds the lead action level under monitoring conducted 
under Section 141.86” (emphasis added). We interpret this to mean that Find-and-Fix 
requirements would not apply to any tap samples voluntarily collected by a water system outside 
of monitoring required under Section 141.86, but urge EPA to confirm this interpretation. If the 
Find-and-Fix process were to apply to all samples collected by a water system – both voluntarily 
and pursuant to monitoring requirements – it would create a strong disincentive for community 
water systems to perform voluntary sampling for customers. In the case of large water systems 
that may voluntarily collect samples from thousands of locations (as opposed to 100 or less 
samples collected pursuant to required monitoring), directing the water system to attempt to 
identify the cause of each and every individual high sampling result encountered would pose a 
tremendous burden, and would likely cause many large water systems to cease offering voluntary 
sampling to customers at all. We therefore encourage EPA to clearly reiterate that the Find-and-
Fix process would only apply to samples conducted pursuant to Section 141.86 monitoring. 
 
While AMWA appreciates EPA’s effort to develop the Find-and-Fix process, we believe 
components of the proposed requirements could lead to redundant analysis and reporting 
exercises. Further, we harbor strong concerns about requiring the consideration of corrosion 
control changes when a water system has not exceeded a 90th percentile threshold. 
 
 
Requirements of the proposed rule: 
 
Section 141.82(j) would require water systems to take a number of steps “when a tap sample site 
exceeds the lead action level under monitoring” conducted pursuant to Section 141.86. These 
steps include: 
 
• Sampling at a new water quality parameter site on the same size water main in the same 
pressure zone and located within one half mile of the original sampling location, within 

15 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
five days of receiving the original sampling results; 
 
• Collecting a follow-up sample at the original sampling location, within 30 days of 
receiving the sampling results; and 
 
• Evaluating the results of monitoring “to determine if either localized or centralized 
adjustment of the optimal corrosion control treatment … is necessary.” If a water system 
determines that changes to corrosion control are necessary, it would have to make this 
recommendation to the state “within six months after the end of the monitoring period in 
which the site[s] exceeded the action level.” 
 
 
Concerns with the proposed rule: 
 
AMWA has several concerns with the proposal. First, as written this complete process appears to 
be required each time that “a [singular] tap sample exceeds the lead action level.” This means 
that water systems would have to make repeated, separate determinations on whether changes to 
corrosion control treatments are necessary. For example, consider a water system that had five 
sites exceed the action level in a given round of testing. Not only would that system have to 
conduct five additional samples at new or nearby water quality parameter sites within five days, 
and at the five original sampling locations within 30 days, but it would also have to make five 
separate determinations of whether adjustments to optimal corrosion control treatments are 
necessary to address each case. Each of these five determinations would have to be submitted to 
the state, and then the water system would have to separately act on any state requirements for 
each. These determinations would come in addition to evaluations of corrosion control treatment 
that the proposed rule would require all community water systems to carry out every three-to-
five years as part of their sanitary surveys. This process would be redundant and could lead to 
conflicting recommendations regarding a community’s corrosion control treatment. 
 
Even more importantly, we do not believe it is appropriate to require a water system to consider 
or implement changes to its systemwide corrosion control treatment when its sampling results do 
not exceed a 90th percentile level -- which possibly indicates a widespread shortcoming in 
corrosion control effectiveness. Although AMWA reiterates its earlier request for additional 
information regarding EPA’s proposal to use a 90th percentile exceedance of the new trigger 
level, rather than the action level, as the point at which a system must study and re-optimize 
corrosion control, the association strongly believes that consideration of corrosion control 
changes at either of these 90th percentile figures is far more appropriate than requiring such 
consideration in response to a Find-and-Fix investigation of a small number of individual tap 
samples that exceed either level. 
 
As proposed, even a single tap sample result that exceeds the action level could prompt a water 
system to consider or implement systemwide corrosion control changes. This could prompt 
adjustments that have unintended consequences elsewhere in the distribution system and expose 
the public to elevated lead levels and corresponding public health issues. Simply put, corrosion 

16 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
control adjustments should only be made in response to data demonstrating that current corrosion 
control is deficient throughout the distribution system, and not in response to a small number of 
samples where other, household-specific factors may have influenced the results. 
 
We question the feasibility of requiring sampling at a “new water quality parameter site that is on 
the same size water main in the same pressure zone and located within a half mile of the location 
with the action level exceedance within 5 days of receiving the sample results.” It will take time 
for a water system to identify such an appropriate testing site, make contact with the property 
owner, and carry out the test. In particular, it may take much more than five days for a property 
owner to respond to a water system’s initial outreach and make their property available for 
testing. The five-day timeframe – from the point of obtaining the initial results to carrying out 
another test at another nearby location – may therefore be unrealistic. 
 
Additionally, the proposal seems to direct a water system to establish a new permanent water 
quality parameter testing site nearby to each sampling site that was found to exceed the action 
level of 0.015mg/L. “Step 1” as explained in paragraph (1) following the discovery of an 
individual sample that exceeds the action level simply states that a water system “shall sample at 
a new water quality parameter site that is on the same size water main in the same pressure zone 
and located within a half mile of” where the high sample was taken (emphasis added). Section 
141.87(g) of the proposed rule later states that this “new” water quality parameter site must be 
permanently added to the system’s catalog of water quality parameter testing sites pursuant to 
Section 141.82(j). This is problematic as water systems could end up with an abundance of new 
permanent water quality parameter testing sites simply because they are near a monitoring 
location where a single sample above 0.015mg/L was collected at some point in the past. Over 
time this would lead to an irrational, unwieldy, and unnecessary number of water quality 
parameter testing sites. AMWA does not believe that this is a practical or beneficial use of a 
water system’s limited resources. 
 
In terms of making decisions about changes to corrosion control treatment, identifying new or 
optimized corrosion control treatment often requires a study involving pipe loops or jar tests that 
can take several months to prepare, carry out, and analyze. We therefore question whether “six 
months after the end of the monitoring period in which the site exceeded the action level” is 
enough time for a water system to make an informed and scientifically justified decision on 
changes to corrosion control treatment.  
 
Finally, AMWA seeks greater clarity on what EPA means when it refers to “localized corrosion 
control treatment.” This term is not defined in the proposed rule or the preamble, yet water 
systems would be directed to explore it as an option in response to individual samples collected 
that test above the action level. While in theory a water system could potentially add small 
chemical feed stations in various locations throughout its distribution system to supplement 
phosphate levels in certain neighborhoods, in practice this would be extremely challenging to 
plan, implement, operate, and maintain. Failure to contain the “localized treatment” to its 
intended zone could result in variable water quality in surrounding areas that destabilizes lead 

17 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
coatings and results in lead releases. AMWA recommends that the proposed rule should focus on 
evaluations of possible system-wide corrosion control adjustments. 
AMWA’s suggested alternative approach: 
 
As an alternative, AMWA recommends that the Find-and-Fix portion of the final rule clearly 
articulate a process that follows these guidelines: 
 
• Each tap sample collected as part of monitoring conducted pursuant to Section 141.86 
that exceeds the lead action level should trigger one-time follow-up testing from the same 
sample site, and at a nearby site in the same water pressure zone. 
 
• For each individual tap sample collected as part of monitoring conducted pursuant to 
Section 141.86 that exceeds the lead action level, the water system should determine 
whether there is a remedy unique to that site, such as an aggressive flushing routine for 
the service line, replacement of premise plumbing or service lines, or flushing nearby 
portions of the distribution system. A water system should not be required to carry out 
any remedy that is beyond its control (such as the replacement of premise plumbing or 
the privately owned portion of a lead service line), the water system’s responsibilities 
under Find-and-Fix should end once any site-specific remedies are identified and shared 
with the property owners. 
 
Again, AMWA reiterates its objection to EPA’s proposal that could lead to adjustments to a 
water system’s corrosion control treatment based on a single sample that is above the action 
level. Instead, we believe that either an exceedance of the 90th percentile trigger level or 90th 
percentile action level should be the point at which a water system must consider adjustments to 
its corrosion control treatment. But if EPA nevertheless proceeds with the proposed requirement 
to consider corrosion control adjustments when the water system has not exceeded one of these 
90th percentile levels, AMWA has the following suggestions to make the requirement as 
workable as possible: 
 
• When a round of monitoring conducted pursuant to Section 141.86 discovers one or more 
individual tap samples that exceed the lead action level for which a remedy unique to the 
site is not identified, a water system should be required to conduct an analysis of the 
sampling results to identify any patterns that could indicate a deficiency in the system’s 
corrosion control treatment. 
 
• This analysis should include data points that reflect voluntary lead sampling conducted 
by the water system, in addition to data collected through required monitoring. 
 
• Based on this analysis, the water system should be given adequate time – at least one year 
after the conclusion of the monitoring period – to make a single determination of whether 
there is a deficiency in the system’s corrosion control treatment that requires adjustment. 
 

18 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
• If a corrosion control adjustment is determined to be necessary, the system shall submit 
the recommendation to the state. If a state approves the water system’s recommendation – 
or specifies an alternative approach – it should be implemented on a timeline mutually 
agreed to by the state and the water system. 
 
AMWA believes the above-stated approach is consistent with the framework of the proposed 
rule, but streamlines the process by having a water system first attempt to identify property-
specific factors that could cause elevated lead levels, before considering adjustments to corrosion 
control treatment. Only if property-specific fixes cannot be identified would a water system have 
to dialogue with the state about potential broader corrosion control changes. Just as importantly, 
AMWA’s suggestion eliminates the uncertainty in the current proposal that could force water 
systems to repeatedly consider an overlapping series of changes to corrosion control practices for 
each sampling site found to have an elevated lead level, but recognizes that all proposed 
corrosion control adjustments should be carefully studied, vetted, and communicated to 
customers prior to implementation.  
 
 
 
Lead service line inventory and replacement requirements (Section 
141.84) 
 
Summary: 
 
• Lead Service Line Inventories: 
 
o AMWA supports EPA’s goal for lead service line inventories and appreciates the 
flexibility the agency has included by allowing for a wide variety of informational 
resources to create the inventories. 
 
o AMWA urges EPA to recognize that some water systems are very likely to have 
no lead service lines in their distribution networks, even if they have a number of 
lines of unknown composition. The rule should attempt to reduce burdens for 
these systems where possible. 
 
o AMWA supports EPA’s alternative for including specific addresses with lead 
service lines rather than location identifiers and supports the requirement for 
water systems serving greater than 100,000 persons to make their inventories 
available online. 
 
• Lead Service Line Replacement: 
 
o AMWA supports EPA’s objectives for full lead service line replacement (not 
partial) and agree that the end goal should be for the entire lead service line to be 

19 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
removed. We also appreciate EPA’s understanding that partial lead service line 
replacements will, at times, be necessary when doing emergency repairs, routine 
maintenance, and capital improvement projects if the customer is unable or 
unwilling to replace their portion of the service line. 
 
o AMWA is supportive of water systems developing lead service line replacement 
plans. 
 
o AMWA has concerns that the provisions within the proposed rule regarding lead 
service line replacement are not realistic and fail to recognize the significant 
limitations created by the most common scenario of a shared ownership of the 
service lines. 
 
o AMWA appreciates and supports EPA’s decision that water systems will not be 
expected to cover the costs of replacing the customer’s portion of a lead service 
line. 
 
o EPA should consider using a “rolling average” over multiple years to determine a 
water system’s compliance with the mandated three percent target or replacement 
goal, rather than determining compliance on an annual basis. 
 
• Customer-initiated lead service line replacement: 
 
o AMWA supports empowering homeowners to initiate full lead service line 
replacements. 
 
o The proposed 45-day timeline for a water system to replace the public portion of a 
lead service line following a customer’s notification of intent to replace the 
privately owned portion of a lead service line may not be achievable for water 
systems because of factors such as work crew availability, seasonal work 
limitations, and long-term infrastructure planning. 
 
o The final rule should promote a collaborative process through which customers 
and water systems can work together to replace lead service lines on a mutually 
agreeable schedule that is unencumbered by artificial deadlines. 
 
 
Lead service line inventories 
 
AMWA supports EPA’s goal for lead service line inventories and agree that this is a crucial step 
for informing the public as to the extent and scope of the lead service lines within their 
community. Information on lead service lines is also important to water systems in order to target 
those areas for potential lead service line removal.   
 

20 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
AMWA applauds the flexibility EPA has included within this proposal regarding inventories. 
AMWA agrees with the agency’s understanding that many systems do not have complete records 
and would struggle to quickly obtain this data. With this in mind, the proposed rule would 
provide water systems with three years, after the final rule date, to complete these inventories, 
and would allow water systems to initially meet this requirement by completing a records search.  
 
Within this section of the rule, EPA requires water systems to review sources of information 
including:  
 
• Plumbing codes, permits, and records in the files of the building department(s) which 
indicate the service line materials used to connect water system- and customer-owned 
structures to the distribution system; 
• Water system records, including distribution system maps and drawings, historical 
records on each service connection, meter installation records, historical capital 
improvement or master plans, and standard operating procedures;  
• Inspections and records of the distribution system that indicate the material composition 
of the service connections that connect a structure to the distribution system; and  
• Any resource required by the State to assess service line materials for structures built 
prior to 1989.  
AMWA supports and appreciates EPA’s allowance of the above examples of records for 
determining the identity of the material used for service lines. This is especially important for 
lines listed as “unknown” as it allows water systems to reasonably infer the material of a given 
service line based on reliable data about similar homes and/or structures built around the same 
time. In particular, we applaud the proposed rule’s flexibility in allowing states to identify (in the 
case of structures built prior to 1989) additional resources that water systems may draw upon to 
identify the composition of service lines. Some water systems, for example, have reported 
success in identifying service line materials through water quality tests conducted at particular 
properties. While such methods may not be practical in every situation, we appreciate that the 
proposed rule would give states the ability to allow them when appropriate. 
 
AMWA understands EPA's decision to classify unknown service lines as lead until determined to 
be otherwise so that a water system may have a “complete” inventory even if it lacks sufficient 
records for every service line within its distribution system. AMWA appreciates that EPA is not 
proposing to require water systems to identify service lines outside of their normal operations 
and agrees with EPA’s assessment in the preamble that “excavating test pits can be expensive 
and may disturb lines, resulting in lead release” (page 61696). AMWA supports water systems 
that take the initiative to go beyond these parameters in order to more quickly identify the 
unknown lines within their distribution system but is appreciative of EPA’s understanding that 
this will not be feasible for every water system.  
 
 
 
 

21 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Consideration of systems unlikely to have lead service lines: 
 
We believe the rule should go further to recognize that some systems very likely do not have any 
lead service lines in their distribution networks, even if their inventory includes a number of lines 
of unknown composition. For example, one AMWA member in North Carolina has never found 
a lead service line in its distribution system and has no evidence to indicate that lead service lines 
were ever present in the past. However, under the proposal, if the system’s inventory was not 
able to positively identify the composition of every individual line, those remaining unknown 
lines would all be classified as lead, and would be the basis of calculations to develop this 
system’s replacement rate. Using these unknown lines to calculate a lead service line 
replacement rate, in the absence of any present or historical evidence suggesting lead in the 
system, is illogical. 
 
In such limited circumstances, AMWA believes the rule should allow water systems to certify to 
the state that they do not currently have, and are never believed to have had, lead service lines 
anywhere in the distribution system. Upon approval by the state, these water systems should be 
allowed to draw a reasonable conclusion that lead is not currently present among their service 
lines of unknown composition, and the system’s replacement rate should be calculated as if there 
is no lead currently present. However, if subsequent evidence demonstrates the presence of lead 
currently or in the past, all of the water system's unknown service lines should be treated as lead 
for the purposes of calculating the system’s replacement rate. 
 
 
Identification of privately owned service lines: 
 
AMWA believes that the final rule must also recognize that water systems will be significantly 
limited in their ability to identify the composition of privately owned portions of service lines. In 
some cases, the water system will be completely dependent upon individual property owners’ 
willingness to cooperate with requests to inspect the line or otherwise document what it is made 
of. Should any individual property owner not agree to this review, the water system would have 
to classify the privately owned portion of the line as an “unknown” material and include it within 
the system’s lead service line inventory and replacement calculations. This would subsequently 
trigger additional reporting requirements for water systems under other sections of the rule. 
 
AMWA agrees that a privately owned portion of a service line whose composition is unable to 
be determined due to lack of cooperation or response by the property owner, should be 
considered “unknown” in the water system’s inventory. However, AMWA believes this line 
should be excluded from calculations used to develop system’s lead service line replacement 
goals. This scenario recognizes that, if the lack of property owner cooperation is the only 
impediment to identifying the composition of the line, no reasonable assumption can be made 
about what the line is made of, and so including the line in the system’s replacement calculations 
could artificially inflate the system’s required three percent replacement rate, in the event of an 
action level exceedance.  
 

22 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
AMWA appreciates and agrees with EPA’s decision to allow a service line of unknown material 
to be removed from the number of lead service lines required to be replaced each year should the 
water system exceed the action level, if the service line is determined or reasonably inferred to 
be non-lead.  
 
 
Treatment of galvanized lines: 
 
As stated in our discussion of the proposed definition of a “lead service line,” AMWA has 
concerns with EPA’s inclusion of galvanized lines that ever were downstream of a lead service 
line. This would seemingly mandate that water systems without records dating back to the 
original installation of a galvanized line would be required to treat the line as lead and include 
the service line within the water system’s replacement schedule and goals. AMWA requests that 
EPA allow water systems to utilize data such as building records and plumbing permits 
pertaining to the neighborhood surrounding the line in question to draw a reasonable conclusion 
about the history of a given service line upstream of a galvanized line. For example, if a 
neighborhood was constructed at a date after a community or water system is known to have 
ceased installation of lead service lines, but the water system does not have specific records 
detailing the material that was upstream of galvanized lines in the neighborhood at the time of 
installation, the water system should be allowed to draw a reasonable conclusion that those 
upstream lines are not likely to be lead. In cases where a water system makes such a good faith 
determination, AMWA suggests allowing the water system to remove this galvanized line from 
its lead service line inventory. If the water system subsequently obtains new information 
indicating that the galvanized line had in fact previously been downstream of a lead service line, 
then the line shall be restored to the system's lead service line inventory. 
 
 
Public identification of homes with lead service lines: 
 
EPA’s proposal seeks comment on whether publicly accessible lead service line inventories 
pertaining to customer-owned portions should include only a “location identifier” such as a street 
or intersection, as opposed to an exact street address. In most cases, AMWA supports including 
exact street addresses for customer-owned portions of lead service lines within publicly 
accessible inventories. It is important to consider that the rule proposes to include both the public 
and privately owned side of a lead service line within the definition of the term, and individuals 
will incur the same health effects whether lead that enters their drinking water does so via the 
public or privately owned portion of the service line connecting their home to the water main. A 
primary purpose of the publicly available inventory is to inform both current and potential 
homeowners and tenants about the risks associated with having a lead service line, and omitting 
specific addresses from this dataset would leave potential homeowners and tenants unable to 
make fully informed decisions about whether to reside in that property. Conversely, including 
the specific address data in the publicly available information would encourage homeowners and 
landlords to take action to address their privately owned lead service line, particularly before 

23 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
putting their home up for rent or sale. Over time, this will prod progress toward the larger 
objective of replacing lead service lines nationwide. 
 
When considering the publication of individual addresses within lead service line inventories, it 
is important to note that a service line of unknown material will be classified as “unknown” in 
the inventory, even though the water system would be required to count that unknown line as 
lead for the purposes of calculating its service line replacement rate. So, there is little risk that a 
property served by a service line of unknown material – which in reality is not lead – would be 
publicly misidentified in the inventory as being served by lead. 
 
AMWA understands that including this information about privately owned portions of lead 
service lines in the publicly available inventory may raise privacy concerns. However, public 
real estate databases presently include a wealth of information about the characteristics of private 
homes, such as the square footage, number of bedrooms and bathrooms, whether a basement is 
finished, and roofing and siding materials. Moreover, federal law requires home sellers to 
disclose the known presence of lead paint in the home prior to the sale. If a water system has 
information about the presence of lead in the privately owned portion of a property’s service line, 
making it available alongside information about the materials on the publicly owned side of the 
service line is consistent with this other publicly available information. 
 
AMWA does recognize that a public disclosure of a lead service line may make it more difficult 
to sell or rent certain properties. But we do not believe that the sale or rental of a home – 
particularly to a new owner or tenant who may have small children – should be facilitated 
through the suppression of information that could affect the health of the new owner or tenant. 
Other sections of the proposed rule provide new mechanisms to enable individual homeowners 
to work with water systems to replace lead service lines, so AMWA would encourage 
homeowners concerned about the public disclosure of their lead service line to pursue this 
replacement opportunity. AMWA also supports EPA’s requirement for water systems serving 
greater than 100,000 persons making their inventories available online. Making this information 
easily accessible helps educate the public and increase transparency. 
 
We are aware that some states have laws that may prohibit water systems and other 
governmental entities from publicly disclosing the addresses of their customers. For example, a 
water system in Colorado that publishes an inventory that allows individuals to look up customer 
addresses could potentially be in violation of the Colorado Open Records Act. In situations 
where the disclosure of specific street addresses could violate similar state or local laws, the rule 
should give the state agency the option to waive the street address publication requirement and 
allow water systems to use location identifiers as an alternative. 
 
 
Lead service line replacement 
 
AMWA supports EPA’s objectives for full lead service line replacement (not partial) and agree 
that the end goal should be for the entire lead service line to be removed. AMWA appreciates 

24 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
EPA’s acknowledgement of situations where a partial lead service line replacement would be 
unavoidable. In general, AMWA supports avoiding partial replacements and agrees with the 
Science Advisory Board’s assertation that partial replacements “have not been shown to reliably 
reduce drinking water lead levels and may even increase lead exposure in the short-term” (page 
61697). However, emergency repairs, routine maintenance, and normal capital improvement 
work should not be impeded due to customers being unwilling or unable to replace their portions 
of the service line.   
 
 
Replacement plan guidelines: 
 
AMWA is supportive of water systems developing lead service line replacement plans.  
However, AMWA is concerned that the proposal could allow states to impose a goal 
replacement rate in the event of a trigger level exceedance that is greater than the three percent 
annual replacement rate that would apply in the event of an action level exceedance. Some 
individual water systems may wish to develop lead service line replacement plans that set targets 
above the three percent threshold, but the final rule should specify that a state may not require a 
replacement plan to include a goal replacement rate that exceeds the three percent target of the 
action level replacement rate. 
 
 
Paying for private lead service line replacement: 
 
AMWA supports the component of the proposed rule specifying that water systems will not be 
expected to cover the costs of replacing the customer’s portion of a lead service line. As 
previously discussed, many water systems are prohibited by state law or local ordinance from 
using ratepayer dollars to carry out an infrastructure project that benefits a particular private 
party, so these systems would be unable to comply with a federal mandate requiring them to fund 
the replacement of privately owned portions of lead service lines. However, water systems 
generally may offer to arrange for the replacement of privately owned lead service lines, as long 
as the customer ultimately covers the cost. In these cases, the water system may offer customers 
extended repayment plans or other financing aids to reduce the customer’s burden. Additionally, 
through Section 2105 of the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation (WIIN) Act of 
2016 (P.L. 114-322) Congress authorized grant funding that may be used by water systems for 
“providing assistance to low-income homeowners to replace lead service lines.” Through fiscal 
year 2020 Congress has appropriated nearly $45 million for these grants, so AMWA hopes that 
EPA will soon begin seeking applications for these funds so communities can begin to offer this 
important assistance to their low-income ratepayers. 
 
 
Inability to achieve replacement rate or goals: 
 
AMWA has concerns with water systems being able to meet both the replacement goals for 
passing the trigger level and the three percent mandated by triggering the action level. AMWA 

25 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
requests that EPA include language stating that there may be scenarios in which a water system 
may not be able to meet the goal or mandated replacement level for reasons completely beyond 
the system’s control. For example, because the entire – public and private – lead service line 
must be replaced to count toward the replacement mandate following an action level exceedance, 
in some circumstances a water system would be completely reliant on a customer to act to 
replace their private side in order for the replacement to count. In particular, customers who may 
be unable to afford replacing their portion of the service line or who may choose to not have their 
side replaced regardless of cost would prevent water systems from achieving their replacement 
goals or mandates. AMWA would also like to highlight that even water systems which may be 
able to cover the cost of replacement may still struggle getting buy-in from all customers as some 
will still choose to forgo replacement.  
 
 
Use of rolling average when determining replacement compliance: 
 
AMWA recommends that EPA consider using a “rolling average” for determining a water 
system’s compliance with the mandated three percent target or replacement goal. It is likely that 
a water system will have more success finding customers who will agree to pay for the 
replacement of their portion of the service line during the water system’s initial outreach efforts. 
As the water system’s replacement program continues, the pool of willing customers will likely 
diminish as the water system goes through subsequent rounds of outreach to customers who have 
previously chosen to forgo replacement. A scenario which may occur could see a water system 
replacing five percent of their lines the first few years followed by a significant drop to one or 
two percent in its final years as the system struggles to find participants.  
 
Allowing for a rolling average will ensure that water systems are given credit for their previous 
accomplishments and are provided flexibility for the difficulties which may arise through no 
fault of the system. Allowing for this flexibility could lead to the replacement of lead service 
lines at a faster rate, because a water system would know that any additional lines beyond three 
percent replaced in one year would still count toward its replacement mandate in future years 
(when various circumstances could cause a system to fall short of the three percent target). In 
other words, if a rolling average were not taken into account, a water system would have no 
incentive, from a regulatory compliance standpoint, to keep replacing lines in a single year after 
reaching the three percent figure. The rolling average would allow the system to focus on 
removing the greatest number of lines feasible, regardless of how many lead service lines have 
already been replaced in a given year. 
 
AMWA also suggests that EPA include criteria for determining when a water system has made a 
good faith effort to replace the required percentage of lead service lines but was unable to do so 
due to factors outside of the water system’s control. In these circumstances, water systems 
should not be considered to have violated their replacement mandate, particularly if the mandate 
would have been achieved had each customer who declined to replace a private lead service line 
actually done so. As part of this provision, EPA should define what type of outreach to a 

26 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
customer is sufficient to demonstrate that the water system made a good faith effort to encourage 
replacement of the private lead service line.  
 
As an example to highlight the complexities of these mandates, one AMWA member reports that 
it no longer has any lead service lines on the public side and therefore is entirely dependent on 
customers agreeing to pay for and schedule the replacement of their portion of the service line. 
This could make achieving a three percent replacement rate, or similar replacement goal, each 
year increasingly difficult as a water system’s replacement program progresses. Because the 
water system would be limited to working with a shrinking pool of customers – many of whom 
that have declined earlier offers to coordinate the replacement of their lead service line – it will 
become progressively challenging for a water system to convince enough of these remaining 
customers to agree to private side replacement in a given year. Allowing for flexibility, a rolling 
average, and a well-defined threshold for when a water system has made a good faith effort will 
ensure that water systems are not considered out of compliance for circumstances beyond their 
control.   
 
 
Customer-initiated lead service line replacement 
 
AMWA applauds provisions in the proposed rule that would allow individual homeowners to 
request a water system to replace the publicly owned portion of a lead service line connecting to 
their property following, or in conjunction with, the customer-initiated replacement of the private 
portion of that same service line. This process will empower individual customers to compel 
replacement of the entire service line serving their home – provided they are willing to finance 
the cost of replacing the privately owned portion of the line (though in some circumstances the 
water system may be able to assist with covering this cost as well). 
 
 
Notification of a customer’s intent to replace private lead service line: 
 
AMWA has serious reservations about the proposal’s stated process for steps that a water system 
must follow when notified of a customer’s intent to replace his or her portion of a lead service 
line. According to Section 141.84(d)(3) of the proposal (emphasis added): 
 
When a water system is notified by the customer that he or she intends to replace the 
customer portion of the lead service line the water system has 45 days from the day of 
their notification to conduct the replacement of the system-owned portion. 
 
AMWA believes it is misguided to set a timetable for replacement of a publicly owned portion of 
a lead service line based upon the date that a customer notifies the water system of his or her 
plans to replace their privately owned portion. A customer’s mere statement of intent has no 
bearing upon the date on which the privately owned portion of the service line might actually be 
replaced, and does not necessarily indicate that such work may be imminent or ever carried out. 
Conceivably, a customer could notify a water system of a vague intent to replace the private 

27 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
portion of the service line at an undetermined date in the future. Or a customer could submit this 
notification to the water system and subsequently not follow through with the private-side 
replacement. In either case, the clock for the public-side replacement would begin ticking on the 
day that the customer provided the initial notification, thus requiring the water system to 
complete replacement of the public-side portion within 45 days. This could lead to situations 
where a water system is required to carry out a partial lead service line replacement, either 
because the customer did not follow through with the private-side replacement, or failed to 
schedule it within the inflexible 45 day window offered to the water system. Such an outcome 
would clearly run counter to the intent of the rule. 
 
Should any deadline for public-side lead service line replacement be included in the final rule, at 
minimum it should specify that the window within which the public line must be replaced shall 
not begin until the customer demonstrates to the water system that he or she has obtained a 
plumbing permit to allow replacement of the private side of the lead service line to proceed. 
 
But even with such a requirement, forcing the public-side replacement to be completed on an 
arbitrary timeline would not be ideal for a number of reasons. AMWA does agree, as is proposed 
in the rule, that water systems should make a good faith effort to coordinate simultaneous 
replacement of both the public and privately owned portions of a service line following a 
notification of intent by the customer. AMWA therefore recommends that the final rule promote 
a collaborative process for customer-initiated service line replacements that is based upon this 
concept. We suggest the following: 
 
1. When a customer notifies a water system of his or her intent to replace the privately 
owned portion of a lead service line, the water system should offer to arrange 
replacement of both the public and privately owned portions of the lead service line 
(though the customer may be required to pay for costs associated with the private-side 
replacement). If the customer agrees to coordinated replacement arranged by the water 
system, the water system shall work with the customer to identify a mutually agreeable 
work date that is as early as practicable based upon factors such as seasonal 
considerations, work crew availability, and long-term infrastructure planning. 
 
2. When a customer notifies a water system of his or her intent to replace the privately 
owned portion of a lead service line, but rejects the water system’s offer to coordinate 
work to replace both the public and privately owned portions of the lead service line, the 
water system shall attempt to ascertain the date on which the customer plans to replace 
the privately owned portion. 
 
a. If the customer fails or refuses to provide such date, the customer shall not be 
considered to have provided a valid notification that triggers action by the water 
system under the rule. No further action should be required by the water system. 
 
b. If the customer does provide an estimated private-side replacement date that is in 
the future, the water system shall subsequently contact the customer on or about 

28 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
that date to verify that the planned private-side replacement has in fact occurred. 
 
i. If the customer fails or refuses, in response to this query from the water 
system, to confirm replacement of the private-side line, then the customer 
shall not be considered to have provided a valid notification that triggers 
action by the water system under the rule. No further action should be 
required by the water system. 
 
ii. If the customer confirms replacement of the private-side line to the water 
system, then the water system should proceed to plan replacement of the 
publicly owned portion of the service line as if the customer had notified 
the water system of his or her replacement of the private-side line on the 
date of such replacement. 
 
The final rule should require a water system to maintain records that log its interactions with 
customers related to the coordinated replacement of lead service lines, and these records should 
be made available upon request to the state. Water systems should not be required to separately 
report on each interaction with a customer to the state. 
 
 
Notification that a customer has already replaced the private lead service line: 
 
AMWA has similar concerns about language in the proposed rule governing the process a water 
system would follow when notified by a customer that he or she had previously (within the past 
three months) replaced the privately owned portion of their lead service line. Section 
141.84(d)(4) of the proposed rule states: 
 
When a water system is notified by the customer that he or she has replaced the 
customer-owned portion and that replacement has occurred within the previous three 
months, the water system must replace its portion within 45 days of the date of their 
notification. 
 
AMWA recommends replacing the proposed rule’s 45-day deadline for public-side replacement 
by the water system with a more flexible timeline that recognizes the many variables that could 
come into play to affect the feasibility of replacement projects. For example, consider a customer 
that independently replaces the private-side portion of his or her lead service line on October 1. 
The customer could then notify the water system of this replacement on December 31 – just 
within the three-month window that triggers mandatory public-side replacement under the 
proposed rule. Then, under the proposed rule, the water system would be required to complete 
the public-side replacement of that lead service line within 45 days of receiving that notification, 
which would put the deadline in mid-February. This would cause the disturbance of lead within 
the public side of the service line four-and-a-half months after the customer originally replaced 
his or her portion of the service line, and would require the water system to carry out the 
replacement in the middle of winter when such work may not be feasible in some climates. 

29 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Rhode Island’s Providence Water, for example, is under a city mandated moratorium on routine 
service line work between December and March each winter due to the lack of availability of 
paving materials during these months. The hard timelines in the proposed rule fail to account for 
these practical considerations. 
 
AMWA suggests a simpler and more workable alternative. If a customer notifies a water system 
that he or she replaced the privately owned portion of a lead service line within the previous 
three months, then the water system shall determine whether, based upon factors such as 
seasonal considerations, work crew availability, and long-term infrastructure planning, it would 
be feasible to replace the publicly owned portion of that lead service line within three months of 
the date on which the customer replaced their privately owned side (This three-month timeframe 
is based upon the reasoning explained on page 61698 of the preamble to the proposed rule, 
which suggests that public-side service line replacements that occur more than three months after 
a private-side replacement should not be prioritized “because the elevated lead levels associated 
with partial LSLR would be expected to have subdued”). 
 
1. If the water system determines that replacement of the publicly owned portion within 
three months of such date is feasible, then the replacement shall be carried out as early as 
practicable. 
 
2. If the water system determines that replacement of the publicly owned portion within 
three months of such date is not feasible, then the water system shall still replace the 
publicly owned portion if requested to do so by the customer. But the water system may 
assign this replacement a lower priority than other replacement projects that have been or 
may be scheduled to occur: 
 
a. In conjunction with a customer’s notification of intent to replace his or her 
privately owned lead service line, or 
 
b. Within three months following a customer’s independent replacement of a 
privately owned lead service line. 
 
AMWA proposes to assign a lower priority to these replacement projects because it is preferable 
for customers and water systems to work together to replace entire service lines concurrently, or 
at minimum replace the public side within three months of replacement of the private side so as 
not to re-disturb lead in the line. Projects that cannot be completed within this three-month 
timeframe should not take precedence over other replacement projects on which the water 
system may be coordinating other customers elsewhere in the community. 
 
As was recommended above, AMWA believes that the final rule should require a water system 
to maintain records that log its interactions with customers who have reported that they have 
replaced their privately owned portion of their lead service line, and these records should be 
made available upon request to the state. 
 

30 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
In summary, AMWA believes it is important for customers and water systems to work 
cooperatively to replace lead service lines, and customers should have the ability to initiate the 
complete replacement of lead service lines supplying water to their homes – provided they are 
willing to cover any necessary costs associated with the private-side replacement. Our 
recommendations are intended to build on the framework in EPA’s proposed rule to ensure a 
system of customer-initiated replacements is workable for all parties involved. 
 
 
 
Filter requirements (Sections 141.84 and 141.86) 
 
Summary: 
 
• AMWA has significant concerns with EPA’s proposed mandates for water systems to 
provide pitcher filters and three months’ worth of filter cartridges to customers whenever 
work is carried out on the public or private portion of a lead service line. 
 
• The proposed rule’s definition of “pitcher filter” in Section 141.2 explains that a 
qualifying filter must be “certified to remove lead in accordance with applicable 
standards established by the American National Standards Institute [ANSI].” However, 
ANSI itself does not “establish” standards, so this could lead to confusion about which 
filters do in fact comply with the definition. 
 
• AMWA has concerns about the availability of sufficient supplies of certified filters to 
meet EPA’s many mandates within the proposed rule.  
 
• AMWA asks that EPA grant state agencies the ability to allow water systems to offer 
customers other options, in addition to pitcher filters, to address lead issues in the near 
term. Because of the limited supply and limited capacity of pitcher filters, they may not 
be the best option for some households, and some water systems may therefore wish to 
provide customers with other alternatives. 
 
• AMWA requests that EPA expand on the agency’s reasoning for requiring water systems 
to provide pitcher filters and cartridges when “disturbing” lead service lines through 
normal maintenance and operational activities such as meter replacement and requests 
that the agency provide data showing the cause for concern for lead exposure via these 
activities and why an aggressive flushing regime is insufficient to address these concerns. 
 
• AMWA asks EPA to clearly articulate what it envisions as an acceptable “pitcher filter 
tracking and maintenance system.” 
 
 
 

31 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Comments: 
 
AMWA understands and is appreciative of the public health protection goals that EPA is 
attempting to achieve through providing pitcher filters to customers in conjunction with lead 
service line replacement work or disturbances. However, we have significant concerns about the 
efficacy of mandates for water systems to provide these filters under other varying 
circumstances. When considering these scenarios, EPA should be cognizant of the fact that it is 
extremely challenging for a water system to persuade customers to use pitcher filters correctly, 
even when provided with the appropriate instructions and resources. In many cases, it may be 
preferable for water systems to direct customers to carry out an aggressive flushing regime, both 
because those directions may be easier for many customers to follow, and because flushing could 
achieve similar results to filter usage. 
 
 
Uncertainty about the definition of “pitcher filter”: 
 
Secondly, we believe the proposed rule’s Section 141.2 definition of “pitcher filter” is unclear, 
specifically in reference to which filters are properly “certified” to remove lead from drinking 
water. The proposed rule’s definition of “pitcher filter” is as follows: 
 
Pitcher filter means the filtration insert for water pitchers that removes lead in drinking 
water, and that is certified to remove lead in accordance with applicable standards 
established by the American National Standards Institute. 
 
We question the meaning of the proposed definition’s reference to applicable standards 
“established” by ANSI. According to its website, ANSI “facilitates the development of American 
National Standards (ANS) by accrediting the procedures of standards developing 
organizations.”2 In turn, those accredited organizations (such as NSF International and the Water 
Quality Association) “work cooperatively to develop voluntary national consensus standards.”  
 
Another section of ANSI’s website states plainly that the organization “itself does not develop 
standards.”3 The proposed rule’s reference to “applicable standards established by” ANSI is 
therefore unclear at best and inaccurate at worst, and invites questions about the universe of 
filters that are covered by the definition. AMWA recommends that the definition be amended to 
read as follows: 
 
Pitcher filter means the filtration insert for water pitchers that removes lead in drinking 
water, and that is certified to remove lead in accordance with applicable standards 
established by an organization accredited for that purpose by the American National 
Standards Institute or any other accrediting body deemed appropriate by the 
Administrator. 
 
 
2 https://www.ansi.org/standards_activities/domestic_programs/overview?menuid=3 
3 https://www.ansi.org/about_ansi/faqs/faqs 

32 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
AMWA’s proposed definition would make clear that a qualifying pitcher filter could be certified 
to any relevant standard established by a standard-setting body accredited by ANSI, rather than 
ANSI itself, thus eliminating a potential source of confusion. Moreover, AMWA’s definition 
would give EPA the authority to recognize lead removal standards developed by a body whose 
accreditation comes from an appropriate organization other than ANSI. This would instill 
flexibility within the definition, should ANSI ever be renamed or cease to exist, and is consistent 
with the administrative requirements of the National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act 
of 1995, as discussed in Section VIII(J) of the preamble (page 61740). Here, EPA notes that the 
agency’s “approved monitoring and sampling protocols generally include voluntary consensus 
standards developed by agencies such as [ANSI] and other such bodies wherever EPA deems 
these methodologies appropriate for compliance monitoring” (emphasis added). 
 
 
Availability of sufficient quantities of filters: 
 
Even under a “pitcher filter” definition that clarifies the scope of organizations that may certify 
drinking water filters appropriate for the removal of lead, AMWA has serious questions about 
whether water systems will be able to procure sufficient quantities of certified filters when 
necessary – particularly on short notice. For example, in April of 2016 an AMWA member in 
Kentucky determined that approximately 500 lead-removing pitcher filters were needed based on 
the number of water main projects that were planned and which could be anticipated to 
potentially involve the replacement of a lead service line. The water system ordered the pitchers 
along with two replacement cartridges for each, but could only find one supplier able to meet this 
volume. Ultimately, it took two months for the water system to receive the order. 
 
EPA should provide flexibility within the rule to account for these possible difficulties in 
obtaining sufficient quantities of certified filters and refrain from declaring water systems out of 
compliance for factors outside of their control. One way to do this would be to grant state 
agencies the authority to allow water systems to make alternative arrangements if ample 
quantities of such certified pitcher filters are not readily available when needed. Alternative 
arrangements could include providing customers with other types of filters that are certified to be 
effective at removing lead from drinking water or instructing customers to complete an 
aggressive flushing regime when undertaking activities other than lead service line replacement. 
In seeking an alternative arrangement, a water system could be required to demonstrate to the 
state agency that it is unable to procure the number of certified filters that are needed, and to 
suggest an alternative approach. 
 
AMWA has further concerns with the capacity of pitcher filters to meet the drinking water needs 
of a customer’s household. Currently, the largest pitcher filter certified by NSF International is 
11-cups. EPA should allow for variations in acceptable alternatives that would mitigate lead 
issues, such as large “blue bottle” dispensers or other bottled water, for homes that have needs 
beyond what is capable using a pitcher filter. AMWA suggests that EPA allow state agencies to 
determine these acceptable alternatives.   
 

33 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Provision of filters following the disturbance of lead service lines: 
 
AMWA has significant concerns with the subsection (e)(5)(ii) of Section 141.85, which would 
require water systems to provide pitcher filters and three months of replacement cartridges to 
customers served by a lead service line following “the replacement of the water meter or 
gooseneck, pigtail, or connector.” As stated above, there are already concerns with availability of 
sufficient inventories of certified filters. Expanding the mandates for water systems to provide 
filters for these normal operational and maintenance activities would exacerbate this issue 
further. Water meter replacement, for example, typically consists only of shutting off water for a 
short time and replacing the meter without any cutting of the pipe itself. That same AMWA 
member in Kentucky referenced above changes approximately 10,000 meters, around 12 percent 
of the total number of meters in its system, every year. A requirement to provide pitcher filters 
and three months of replacement cartridges after every meter replacement would amount to a 
significant cost burden on this water system even if it were able to procure a sufficient number of 
filters and cartridges. 
 
AMWA requests that EPA provide data on the exposure of dissolved or particulate lead when 
“disturbing” lead service lines through these normal operational and maintenance activities and 
further expand on the agency’s reasoning for requiring water systems to provide pitcher filters to 
their customers under these circumstances. As these activities do not involve any cutting of the 
pipe, AMWA is not aware of a cause for concern for a significant increase in lead exposure that 
could not be alleviated by providing homeowners with clear instructions to properly execute the 
flushing of their pipes. If water systems are required to provide filters under these circumstances 
it would significantly increase their resource needs. 
 
Finally, AMWA believes that EPA must define a “pitcher filter tracking and maintenance 
system” under the proposed rule. Each lead service line replacement plan completed pursuant to 
Section 141.84(b) of the proposed rule would have to include such a system, but neither the 
proposed rule nor the preamble offers any insight as to what precisely constitutes an acceptable 
system. AMWA therefore requests that EPA provide guidance which clearly states what the 
agency envisions to be a proper pitcher filter tracking and maintenance system, and articulate a 
system that is minimally burdensome on water systems. 
 
 
 
Public education and supplemental monitoring requirements (Section 
141.85) 
 
Summary: 
 
• AMWA agrees that individual household tap sample results that exceed the lead action 
level should be shared with the home’s occupants in an expedited manner but believes 

34 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
that 24 hours after learning of the results is unnecessarily restrictive. Two business days 
is more workable for several reasons. 
 
• When an individual home’s tap sampling results do not exceed the lead action level, we 
agree with EPA that an urgent delivery of the results is not necessary. The proposed 
requirement to notify the customer within 30 days of receiving results that do not indicate 
an exceedance – consistent with the timeframe required in the current rule – is 
appropriate.   
 
 
Comments: 
 
AMWA appreciates that the proposed rule makes great strides in ensuring timely public 
notification of testing results that indicate elevated levels of lead in the system, but we would 
like to share our feedback and recommendations on several aspects of the proposal.  
 
 
Section 141.85(d)(2)(ii): 24-hour notification of an individual household when a sample 
collected from the household exceeds the action level: 
 
AMWA agrees that water systems should notify the occupants of a household whose tap sample 
results exceed the lead action level of 0.015 mg/L in an expedited manner. Furthermore, it is 
appropriate for subsection (d)(4)(ii) to require this targeted notice be delivered to an individual 
household by phone, electronic means, or another method approved by the state. Because the 
water system will have had to coordinate with the occupants of that household to arrange for the 
tap monitoring to take place, it should not pose a challenge for a water system to obtain 
electronic or phone contact information for that household to use in the event that the building’s 
sample results exceed the action level. 
 
However, the proposed mandate for this notice to be delivered within 24 hours of when a water 
system learns of the tap monitoring results leaves unreasonably little flexibility for the varying 
circumstances that a water system might face. For example, if a water system learned of a 
home’s tap monitoring results on a Friday afternoon, but did not notify that home’s residents 
until the following Monday morning, that system would be in violation of the rule. Especially 
considering that individual tap samples would have been collected at least several weeks prior to 
when a water system learned of the results, an inflexible 24-hour notification deadline is not 
necessary.  
 
AMWA recommends that the final rule direct water systems to notify the residents of individual 
households whose sample exceeded the action level as soon as practicable, but not later than two 
business days, after the system learns of the individual household results. This will still deliver 
the notice to households in an expedited manner but avoid an unreasonably strict timeframe on 
the notice’s distribution. 
 

35 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Section 141.85(d)(2)(i): 30-day notification of an individual household when a sample collected 
from the household does not exceed the action level: 
 
We also agree with EPA’s stance that a less urgent notification timeline is appropriate when an 
individual home’s tap sample results do not exceed the action level. We believe that notification 
of these results within 30 days, by mail or another method approved by the state, as proposed in 
the rule, is appropriate. We further anticipate that a homeowner would be told to expect a notice 
from the water system within 24 hours (or two business days, as we recommend) of the system 
receiving the results should they indicate a level of lead above the action level. Therefore, a 
homeowner who does not hear from the water system within a few days of the expected results 
should be able to infer that their home’s water tested below the action level – well ahead of the 
30-day notification deadline that applies in that circumstance. 
 
 
 
Monitoring for lead in schools and licensed child care facilities (Section 
141.92) 
 
Summary: 
 
• AMWA believes that school and licensed child care facility administrators should pursue 
the testing of drinking water within their facilities. Local water systems should be willing 
to assist in carrying out this testing when requested. 
 
• The Safe Drinking Water Act provides EPA with no authority to broadly regulate the 
water testing practices of schools or licensed child care facilities, and local water systems 
have no ability to demand access to such facilities for the purpose of carrying out water 
quality testing. The proposal therefore errs in attempting to hold water systems 
responsible for achieving school and child care facility testing targets. 
 
• AMWA supports the proposed rule’s alternative option of requiring water systems to aid 
the testing of the water in local school and licensed child care facilities upon request, and 
we oppose the proposed requirement for water systems to meet a target of testing 20 
percent of schools and 20 percent of licensed child care facilities in the service area each 
year. 
 
• School and licensed child care center testing procedures should match EPA’s 
recommended testing procedures in its 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water in 
Schools and Child Care Facilities manual, and must recognize that any testing carried out 
by water systems in school or child care facilities will be the result of a collaborative 
process. 
 

36 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
• Should EPA proceed with requiring water systems to meet a 20 percent target for testing 
schools and licensed child care facilities each year, we recommend clarifying how water 
systems may achieve compliance with this target, describing what actions are required 
when schools do not respond to outreach about testing, giving water systems the option to 
utilize local educational departments to serve as liaisons between water systems and 
individual school facilities, and ensuring that testing is a fully collaborative effort 
between water systems and facility officials. If a school or child care center already 
operates its own water testing program that is at least as stringent as the proposed rule, a 
water system should not be required to pursue duplicative testing. 
 
 
Comments: 
 
AMWA recognizes that the presence of lead in the drinking water of schools and licensed child 
care facilities is an issue of concern to the public. While virtually all lead that is present in the 
drinking water of these facilities comes from premise plumbing, we understand that school 
officials and parents may look to their local water systems for guidance in identifying the scope 
of lead contamination in the water of a given school or licensed child care facility building. 
AMWA believes that water systems should be willing to help school officials carry out desired 
water quality testing, upon request. 
 
However, the proposed rule makes the mistake of designating water systems as the appropriate 
entity to attempt to compel schools and licensed child care facilities to carry out testing to detect 
lead in the water of their buildings. In attempting to encourage schools and child care facilities to 
test their water for lead, the proposal charges water systems with the task, while also holding 
water systems accountable for a school or child care facility’s compliance. In reality, because the 
Safe Drinking Water Act includes no authority for EPA to require schools and child care 
facilities to test their water for lead - unless that school or child care facility is itself a non-
transient non-community water system - it is patently unfair for the proposed rule to create a 
school and child care facility testing regime that is only enforceable against community water 
systems. 
 
AMWA therefore believes that the final rule should eliminate all annual school and child care 
facility testing benchmarks, and only require water systems to assist in the testing of a school or 
child care facility’s water when requested to do so by that facility. Those who wish for EPA to 
go further in requiring water quality testing in schools and child care facilities should encourage 
Congress to give the agency that authority directly. 
 
 
Previous efforts to promote school testing: 
 
In 2019 AMWA was a signatory along with EPA and other federal agencies and water sector 
stakeholders to a memorandum of understanding on “Reducing Lead Levels in Drinking Water 
in Schools and Child Care Facilities.” As part of this MOU, AMWA and EPA agreed “to 

37 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
facilitate actions that reduce children’s exposure to lead from drinking water at schools and child 
care facilities.” Agreed-upon actioned included “encourag[ing] schools and child care facilities 
to” test their drinking water for lead, and “encourag[ing] the drinking water community to assist 
schools and child care facilities in their efforts to understand and reduce lead exposure from 
drinking water.”  
 
Additionally, in 2018 EPA published a revised manual entitled 3Ts for Reducing Lead in 
Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities: A Training, Testing, and Taking Action 
Approach. According to EPA, this 3Ts manual “is intended to serve as a resource to help schools 
and child care facilities implement a voluntary program for reducing lead in drinking water.” The 
manual recommends that schools and child care facilities follow a prescribed “2-step sampling 
procedure” when testing individual outlets. 
 
Both the MOU and 3Ts manual recognize that local school officials are primarily responsible for 
testing the quality of their buildings’ drinking water, but AMWA appreciates that public drinking 
water systems are in a unique position within their communities to provide guidance and 
facilitate effective testing. However, while local water systems should be available to help 
individual schools and licensed child care centers carry out water testing and understand the 
results, AMWA has concerns that the proposed rule promotes unrealistic expectations and goes 
too far in transferring the responsibility for school testing onto individual water systems. 
 
 
Details of the proposed rule: 
 
Section 141.92 of the proposed rule directs each water system to: 
 
1. “[C]ompile a list of schools or licensed child care facilities served by the system”; 
 
2. Contact such schools or licensed child care facilities; and 
 
3. Deliver “notification that the water system will be conducting sampling for lead at the 
facility” (emphasis added). 
 
The process as described is challenging for several reasons. Especially in the case of large 
metropolitan water systems, a comprehensive and accurate list of all schools and licensed child 
care facilities in the system’s service area will number in the thousands. For example, Greater 
Cincinnati Water Works, a water system serving more than 240,000 residential and commercial 
accounts, provides water to roughly 400 schools and an estimated 4,000 licensed child care 
centers. While that system currently carries out a program to assist these facilities with lead 
testing, it reports that identifying licensed child care facilities in particular for testing is a 
significant challenge, in part because the precise number of such facilities is always in flux as 
new licensed child care centers open within the city, and others close. Similarly, most water 
systems would have no existing inventory of such schools and facilities, so it would be a 
tremendous exercise to initially develop such a list. Under the proposed rule, this exercise would 

38 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
have to be repeated every five years as water systems would be required to “submit a revised 
list” of school and licensed child care facilities to the state. 
 
We are also concerned that the proposed rule includes an unnecessarily adversarial requirement 
that water systems “notify” a public school or licensed child care facility that the water system 
“will be conducting sampling for lead at the facility.” A water system has no legal basis upon 
which to demand entrance to a school or licensed child care facility, including for the purpose of 
conducting testing pursuant to the Lead and Copper Rule. Any water system that conducts 
testing of school or licensed child care facility water as proposed by the rule would have to do so 
with the cooperation of the facility’s ownership or management, so a water system’s initial 
communication with the facility about the opportunity for testing should not come in the form of 
a notice that the testing “will” take place. 
 
 
AMWA’s suggested alternative approach: 
 
AMWA proposes another approach to identifying and interacting with schools and licensed child 
care facilities that should be more comfortable for all parties involved, and more in line with the 
school-led testing process highlighted in the MOU and the 3Ts manual. Primarily, AWMA 
believes that rather than requiring water systems to attempt to conduct testing in 20 percent of 
schools and 20 percent of licensed child care facilities in the system’s service area each year, the 
final rule should adopt EPA’s proposed alternative of requiring water systems to conduct 
outreach to local schools and licensed child care facilities to make them aware of the water 
system’s availability to carry out water testing in a school or licensed child care facility upon 
request. 
 
This approach is justified based on EPA’s own data. In the preamble to the proposed rule (page 
61732), EPA states that the amount of testing conducted under the “upon request” option “is 
highly dependent on the percentage of facilities that request to participate in the sampling 
program.” EPA goes on to estimate that only five percent of schools and licensed child care 
facilities would volunteer for a sampling program offered by a community water system. 
However, the mandatory 20 percent testing program would be equally dependent on schools 
positively responding to outreach from the water system, and there is no reason to think that the 
response rate under one scenario would dramatically differ from the other. In each case, the 
water system would have to alert schools and licensed child care facilities to the opportunity for 
testing, and school or facility administrators would have to agree to allow the testing to occur. 
 
It is therefore unclear how the agency expects that water systems would achieve a mandate to 
conduct testing at 20 percent of schools and 20 percent of licensed child care facilities in a given 
year. A higher level of participation on the part of schools and licensed child care facilities 
cannot be expected simply because of a target imposed upon water systems, so following EPA’s 
own assumptions even if a water system was required to attempt to test 20 percent of schools in a 
year, only a small subset of those schools will agree to the testing. 
 

39 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
An “upon request” school and licensed child care facility testing program should be consistent 
with the MOU and the 3Ts manual, while also establishing a recurring pattern of communication 
between local school and water system officials. Under this system, water systems should be 
required to periodically conduct outreach to schools and licensed child care facilities, 
encouraging them to take advantage of the option to have water system officials test their 
facility’s water for lead. With time, schools and licensed child care facilities will come to know 
that they have an opportunity for their local water system to assist with the testing of their water, 
while water systems will be relieved from (as the rule currently proposes) spending significant 
resources attempting to attain participation from 20 percent of schools and 20 percent of licensed 
child care centers on an annual basis. AMWA strongly believes that this is the most practicable 
and beneficial approach and encourages EPA to incorporate the “upon request” school testing 
structure into the final rule. 
 
Additionally, AMWA appreciates that the school and licensed child care facility testing 
procedures outlined in subsection (b) of Section 141.92 reflect those recommended in the 3Ts 
manual, in so far as requiring a 250 ml first-draw sample following a stagnation period of 
between 8 and 18 hours. It is less clear why the proposed rule would require samples to be 
collected from five different locations in schools and two different locations in licensed child 
care facilities, as the 3Ts manual does not recommend that schools conduct any particular 
number of samples in a building. Furthermore, the 3Ts manual recommends that a school collect 
a subsequent 250 ml “30-second flush sample” if the initial test results indicate elevated levels of 
lead. This second test is recommended “to determine if the lead contamination results are from 
the fixture or from interior plumbing components,” but this step is absent from the testing 
requirements of the proposed rule. To help ensure that schools nationwide are receiving 
consistent testing advice and assistance from EPA and their local water systems, AMWA 
suggests amending the school testing procedures in the proposed to conform with the 
recommendations in the 3Ts manual. 
 
In sum, the “upon request” option should ensure that school and licensed child care center 
administrators are made aware of opportunities to receive assistance with water testing consistent 
with EPA’s 3Ts manual. It will relieve water systems of attempting to meet an arbitrary target of 
completing tests in 20 percent of such facilities each year when the actual participation rate 
among these facilities is projected to be much lower. However, the final rule should also specify 
that if more schools and licensed child care centers request testing assistance in a given year than 
a water system can accommodate, the system should prioritize carrying out tests in elementary 
schools and licensed child care centers that serve young children. This prioritization would be 
appropriate because younger children would be most at risk of experiencing negative health 
effects as a result of exposure to lead in drinking water.  
 
 
AMWA’s second alternative: 
 
While we believe that the above recommendations are preferable, AMWA has additional 
suggestions should EPA proceed with its proposed framework of requiring water systems to 

40 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
pursue testing in 20 percent of schools, and 20 percent of licensed child care facilities, in the 
service area each year. While we oppose this option, AMWA has a number of suggestions to 
make it as workable as possible. 
 
Rather than requiring every water system to identify and individually contact 20 percent of all 
schools and 20 percent of all licensed child care facilities within its service area each year, 
AMWA recommends that the rule should allow water systems the option to instead communicate 
with the local educational or regulatory agencies charged with operation or oversight of the 
community’s schools and licensed child care facilities. Even if the final rule does not include the 
requirement to test a certain percentage of facilities each year, AMWA believes that outreach to 
schools and licensed child care facilities about opportunities for testing could be more successful 
– particularly in metropolitan communities that may host hundreds of different schools – if 
coordinated through local educational or regulatory oversight agencies. 
 
Under AMWA’s alternative approach, a water system would have the option to provide the 
appropriate regulatory agencies with a notice about the opportunity to have individual school and 
licensed child care facilities tested for lead in drinking water by the water system. A water 
system utilizing this option should further request the agency to share this information with each 
school or licensed child care facility, or compile a representative list of such facilities that should 
be tested in a given year (making up at least 20 percent of such facilities in the water system’s 
service area). 
 
There are several benefits to this approach. First, local educational or regulatory agencies would 
be expected to have up-to-date lists of schools and licensed child care facilities that fall under 
their oversight readily available – or at least more easily available than a water system could 
produce through its own research. AMWA expects that these regulatory agencies will have open 
and ongoing lines of communication with individual school facilities, so a notice or directive 
about water quality testing may be more well received from the school or licensed child care 
facility’s oversight agency, as opposed to if it was received in the form of a “cold call” from the 
water system. The local educational agency would essentially act as a liaison between the water 
system and individual facilities, likely doing more to increase participation by facilities than the 
water system could achieve alone. 
 
Additionally, as is suggested above, if a water system chooses to contact individual schools and 
licensed child care facilities directly, the rule should require notification that the facility has an 
opportunity to have its drinking water voluntarily tested by the water system, not that the water 
system “will be conducting sampling” at the facility. This approach respects the right of the 
facility to decline participation, but lays the groundwork for a collaborative testing effort. 
 
Aside from the mechanics of how schools and licensed child care facilities are identified and 
contacted, AMWA believes a rule that requires water systems to test in at least 20 percent of 
such facilities must be clear about how achievement of that standard will be calculated. The 
proposed rule is lacking in several respects. Subsection (c)(1) states that each year a water 
system will be required to annually collect samples until 20 percent of such facilities “have been 

41 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
sampled or have declined to participate.” AMWA understands this to mean that a water system 
has met its school testing obligation in a given year once the sum of the number of schools tested 
by the water system, and the number of schools declining testing, reaches 20 percent of the 
number of schools in the service area. However, we urge EPA to make this explicitly clear to 
give water systems full confidence that they do not need to pursue additional “replacement” 
schools to test in a given year following a decline from a school that was originally invited to 
receive testing. 
 
Also concerning is the lack of recognition in the proposed rule of circumstances where a school 
or licensed child care facility offers no response to a water system’s outreach about the 
opportunity for lead testing. Given the thousands of individual schools and licensed child care 
facilities that water systems may have to contact to achieve compliance with the rule, it is 
reasonable to expect that a substantial number of these will not respond to a communication from 
the water system. However, a nonresponse is not the same as an explicit decline, which is 
addressed in the proposed rule and which AMWA believes would count toward the water 
system’s 20 percent target. If a water system does not receive a response from a facility to its 
initial communication and a follow-up within a reasonable amount of time, AMWA believes the 
rule should specify that this nonresponse should be treated as a decline, and also count toward 
the water system’s 20 percent target in a given year. The rule should direct a water system to 
document when it has not received a response to outreach to particular identified facilities, and to 
make such records available to state regulators when requested to do so.  
 
If testing at a particular school or licensed child care facility demonstrates a low or nondetectable 
level of lead during one round of testing, the final rule should include a mechanism for that 
facility to either:  
 
• Receive a lower priority for testing in subsequent rounds, compared with facilities that 
demonstrate higher levels of lead in their initial testing; or 
• Be removed from future testing rounds, if that facility has removed all lead bearing 
plumbing components from the premises.  
 
In other words, after the first five-year cycle of testing of all school and licensed child care 
facilities is completed, later cycles should prioritize testing in schools and licensed child care 
facilities that were previously found to have elevated lead, before additional rounds of testing are 
carried out in schools that were found to not have elevated lead levels initially. Similarly, schools 
that are found to have very low or no detectable levels of lead in their initial tests, and which 
have removed all lead bearing plumbing components from their building, should be removed 
from the pool of locations for future rounds of water system testing. Just as the proposal 
recognizes that non-transient non-community water systems may wish to achieve compliance 
with the rule by removing all of their lead bearing plumbing components, it is reasonable to 
conclude that an individual school that has taken this action does not require assistance from a 
community water system to conduct future screenings for lead in its water supply. 
 

42 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Finally, the rule should better address procedures to follow when a state or community already 
has in place an equivalent law or regulation that requires testing of water in schools and licensed 
child care facilities. Subsection (d) addresses “Alternative School Sampling Programs” this way 
(emphasis added): 
 
If a Local or State law or regulations require schools and licensed child care facilities to 
be tested, by either the school or the water system, in a way that is at least as stringent [as 
the proposed rule], the water system may execute that program to comply with the 
requirements of this section. 
 
In this construct, the proposed rule suggests that a water system should take over execution of an 
already existing school and licensed child care center testing regime that is currently carried out 
by school or facility officials, in order for the water system to maintain compliance with the rule. 
But if state or local regulations require a school to conduct its own testing, these regulations 
would not be superseded by the proposed rule. Regardless of whether a water system stepped in 
to “execute” the testing program, state or local regulations may still require school officials to 
directly carry out tests as well. This scenario would lead to duplicative water testing conducted 
by both the school and by the water system. 
 
To avoid these complications, we agree with the proposed rule’s specification that compliance 
with the rule may be achieved through an existing water-system-administered testing regime in 
schools and licensed child care centers that it is at least as stringent as the rule. However, if a 
qualifying school or licensed child care center testing regime is already required to be carried out 
by schools or local educational agencies, the rule should give the local water system the option to 
certify this fact to the state agency. 
 
Again, AMWA appreciates that the proposed rule strives to promote water testing at schools and 
licensed child care facilities, and we maintain our support for the MOU and 3Ts manual outlining 
how to best accomplish this goal. We further believe that water systems can and should actively 
engage with local schools, licensed child care facilities, and the local regulatory agencies that 
oversee them to make certain that the owners and administrators of these facilities are informed 
of opportunities for assistance in screening their water for lead. 
 
But we also must recognize the limits of the Lead and Copper Rule, particularly that both EPA 
and local drinking water systems lack the authority to compel any school or licensed child care 
facility to submit to testing of the water on their property. The rule must therefore encourage a 
collaborative approach between water systems, individual facilities, and educational agencies, 
and AMWA believes this can best be accomplished through water system testing in schools and 
licensed child care facilities that occurs “upon request” by a facility administrator, following 
outreach from the water system. However, we believe that our above suggestions would make 
the rule as workable as possible should EPA choose to proceed with its proposed requirement 
that water systems attempt to meet a minimum testing threshold each year. 
 
 

43 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
Economic Analysis 
 
AMWA has comments on two of EPA’s assumptions and conclusions within the “Economic 
Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions” included in the docket: the 
estimated average number of schools and child care facilities served by each community water 
system, and the frequency of corrosion control changes made as a result of the Find-and-Fix 
policy. 
 
Estimated number of school and child care facilities: 
 
AMWA believes that EPA’s estimated average number of K-8 (public and private), secondary 
schools (public and private), and child care facilities per water system may be too low to 
accurately capture the true cost of implementing the proposal’s school and child care facility 
testing requirements. We have already expressed concerns about the efficacy of mandating water 
systems to meet prescribed school and child care center testing targets, but our concerns are 
exacerbated because the economic analysis appears to offer little help in identifying precisely 
what it would cost for a water system to meet such a mandate. To better illustrate this problem, 
AMWA has developed the following table which includes both the estimated numbers provided 
by EPA within the economic analysis and multiple examples provided by AMWA’s 
membership.  
 
Table 1. Comparison of EPA’s estimated average number of schools K-8 (public and private), 
secondary schools (public and private), and child care facilities per water system and actual 
estimated figures from five AMWA members. EPA data was collected from exhibits 5-53, 5-
54, and 5-55 from section 5.3.1.5.2 of EPA’s Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Revisions – Number of Schools and Child Cares. For the purposes of 
comparison, EPA’s numbers for K-8 and secondary schools (both public and private) were 
combined in order to better align with the figures given by AMWA’s members.  
 
Water System 
Population Served 
Estimated Number 
of K-12 Public and 
Private Schools 
Estimated 
Number of Child 
Cares Facilities 
EPA Estimate 
100,000 – 1 million 
100.6 
610 
EPA Estimate 
1 million + 
831.8 
5,044.5 
AMWA Member A 
255,750 
104 
121 
AMWA Member B 
324,238 
62 
Unknown 
AMWA Member C 
975,400 
400 
4,000 
AMWA Member D 
~ 1 million 
300-400* 
800-900 
AMWA Member E 
~ 8.3 million 
1,866 
2,227 
* Private schools not included in this figure. 
 
Table 1 demonstrates that these values have a large amount of variation, making it difficult to 
make an informed generalization about a typical number of schools and child care facilities in a 
community of a given size. However, AMWA believes these figures show that EPA’s 

44 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
methodology for determining the cost of implementing this requirement of the proposed Lead 
and Copper Rule is consistently lower than figures provided by AMWA members. In particular, 
the estimates of the number of schools for a population served of 100,000 – 1 million appears to 
be problematic.  
 
With EPA’s use of ranges, it can be inferred that if a water system’s service population falls 
within the middle of that range, say 550,000, it would be expected to serve approximately 100 
schools. AMWA Member A’s population served falls far below the middle of this range at 
255,750 but is still above EPA’s derived number at 104 schools. Similarly, although AMWA 
Member C is at the top of the 100,000 – 1 million range, a total number of schools which is four 
times greater than EPA’s estimate seems far out of range for this analysis to be accurate and 
useful in determining the costs of implementing testing in schools.  
 
Although EPA’s estimate for water systems serving 1 million or more would be expected to be 
skewed due to the large variation in population served above this level, at 8.3 million served 
AMWA Member E’s number of 1,866 schools is more than double EPA’s estimate and 
therefore, again, raises questions about the reliability of EPA’s figures. Given our other concerns 
about holding water systems responsible testing water quality in schools and child care facilities, 
our lack of confidence in the data purported to demonstrate the cost of such a mandate 
strengthens our belief that any school and child care testing program should only be carried out 
at the request of individual facilities. 
 
Another factor to consider is the enormous variation within the numbers of child care facilities 
between systems, regardless of size. AMWA Member E’s service population of 8.3 million 
would appear to be on the higher end of water system size but their estimated number of child 
care facilities at 2,227 is far below EPA’s estimate of 5,044. AMWA believes this showcases not 
only the difficulty water systems might have in developing inventories of licensed child care 
facilities within their communities, but also the difficulty in EPA’s ability to determine the true 
cost of implementing this provision.  
 
 
Corrosion control changes resulting from Find-and-Fix: 
 
We also have questions about another portion of EPA’s economic analysis. In section 5.3.2.3 
Find-and-Fix (page 5-139), EPA appears to assume that water systems will adjust the pH levels, 
at one or more entry points, in response to a single sample result that falls above the action level. 
EPA has previously indicated that it viewed corrosion control treatment adjustments based on 
Find-and-Fix to be a rare occurrence, but this section of the economic analysis suggests 
otherwise. As has been previously stated, EPA’s suggestion that adjustments to a water system’s 
corrosion control treatment should be carried out based on a single sample that is above the 
action level risks disrupting water quality, destabilizing lead coatings, and threatening public 
health as a result of lead releases. Any adjustments to corrosion control should be carefully 
vetted in order to avoid unintended consequences.  
 

45 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 
 
 
 
As we previously recommended, AMWA urges EPA to remove this requirement from the Find-
and-Fix language to avoid these consequences. If EPA maintains this requirement within the 
rule, AMWA reiterates our previous suggestion that water systems should first attempt to 
identify property-specific factors that could be the cause of a single action level exceedance 
before considering adjustments to corrosion control treatment. Only if a property-specific fix 
cannot be found should a water system have to dialogue with the state agency about potential 
broader corrosion control changes.  
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
AMWA thanks EPA for the opportunity to provide input on these critical and long-awaited 
revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule. AMWA’s members are public health leaders in their 
communities and the protection of their customers is their highest priority. We reiterate our 
support for lead service line inventories and the ability of individual customers to compel a water 
system to replace a publicly owned lead service line connected to their property. We also express 
our appreciation that the proposal avoids setting unattainable mandates such as a deadline for the 
replacement of all lead service lines nationwide, a total ban on partial lead service line 
replacements, and a requirement for water systems to cover the cost of replacement for the 
private side of the service line. 
 
While AMWA supports many of the ambitious and vital requirements under this proposal, the 
concerns outlined in these comments highlight the multitude of complications which could 
hinder the implementation of this rule. EPA must work to resolve the components of this rule 
that have placed unrealistic expectations on water systems, particularly those which hold water 
systems accountable for achieving benchmarks which may be outside of their control. Requiring 
water systems to meet standards that rely significantly on the cooperation of schools, licensed 
child care centers, and homeowners may set up water systems to fail through no fault of their 
own, and despite making their best effort to comply. 
 
The association believes that our comments will help the agency ensure the final rule is 
achievable, practical, and enforceable. AMWA is appreciative of all the work EPA has done to 
bring this proposal to fruition and looks forward to working with EPA to best protect the health 
of the millions of people that depend on their local water systems for safe and reliable drinking 
water. 
 

 
 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Appendix B  
 
 
 
 
AMWA Comments Lead and Copper Rule: Virtual Engagements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESIDENT 
Angela Licata 
New York City Department of 
Environmental Protection 
 
Mike Armstrong 
WaterOne 
 
 
Richard Harasick 
Los Angeles Department of 
Water and Power 
 
Sue McCormick 
Great Lakes Water Authority 
 
VICE PRESIDENT 
John Entsminger 
Las Vegas Valley Water 
District 
 
Tad Bohannon 
Central Arkansas Water 
 
 
Robert Hunter 
Municipal Water District of 
Orange County 
 
John P. Sullivan, Jr. 
Boston Water and Sewer 
Commission 
 
 
 
TREASURER 
Yvonne Forrest 
Houston Water 
 
 
Shane Chapman 
Metropolitan Water District of 
Southern California 
 
Ghassan Korban 
Sewerage and Water Board of 
New Orleans 
 
Timothy Thomure 
Tucson Water 
 
SECRETARY 
Jeffrey Szabo 
Suffolk County Water Authority 
 
 
Scott Dewhirst 
Tacoma Water  
 
 
Carrie Lewis 
Portland Water District 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Steve Edgemon 
Fairfax Water 
 
 
James S. Lochhead 
Denver Water  
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER 
Diane VanDe Hei 
 
 
David Gadis 
DC Water 
 
 
Ron Lovan 
Northern Kentucky Water 
District 
 
 
 
 
July 30, 2021  
 
The Honorable Radhika Fox 
Assistant Administrator 
Office of Water  
U. S. Environmental Protection Agency 
 
Via regulations.gov  
 
Re: Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0255, Lead and Copper Rule: Virtual Engagements 
 
Dear Assistant Administrator Fox, 
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) is an organization representing the 
largest publicly owned drinking water utilities in the United States. AMWA appreciates the 
opportunity to comment on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) continued work to 
address the public health risks of lead in drinking water. The association has been involved with the 
Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) since its inception and values all the work that EPA has done to 
decrease the risk posed by lead and copper to public health. All along, we have sought a rule that is 
achievable, practical, and enforceable. AMWA was generally supportive of the revised LCR that 
was finalized in January, but we agree that it is imperative to ensure that any federal regulations 
consider affordability and equity, and provide specific consideration for at-risk communities. 
 
We recognize that the Biden administration’s American Jobs Plan has proposed spending $45 
billion in federal dollars to “replace 100% of the nation’s lead pipes and service lines,”i and we 
appreciate efforts to direct additional federal resources toward this worthy goal. However, any 
further revisions to the LCR must only be made in the context of current statutory and spending 
realities – where EPA has only relatively modest resources to direct toward offsetting the cost of 
lead service line (LSL) replacement. 
 
Since EPA has made the determination to reconsider aspects of the revised LCR promulgated on 
January 15, 2021, AMWA has a number of suggestions for how this rule could be improved upon, 
as well as thoughts on the components the association believes should be retained.  
 
During recent public discussions about the LCR, much attention has been paid to the fact that the 
rule would not mandate the replacement of every public and privately-owned LSL nationwide. 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 2 
 
 
EPA’s June 16, 2021 final rule that delayed the effective date of the revised LCR until December 
noted that the rule “fails to require … public water systems to replace all of their lead service lines.” 
However, we continue to believe that any further revisions to the rule must take into account the 
practical challenges faced by water systems seeking to replace all publicly and privately-owned 
LSLs. Aside from the considerable cost factors and accompanying implications for water 
affordability for low-income ratepayers, a binding mandate on water systems to replace “all” public 
and privately-owned LSLs would encounter the obstacle of individual homeowners who may refuse 
to allow access to their property to replace their privately-owned LSL. If even a single homeowner 
among thousands does not consent to the replacement of their LSL, then the utility would not have 
abided by a mandate for full LSL replacement. And the experience of AMWA members is that a 
significant portion of customers typically decline the chance to have their privately-owned LSL 
replaced, even when the cost is partially or fully subsidized.  
 
Local water systems and their communities also face differing circumstances and competing 
priorities. If EPA were to require water systems to replace all LSLs by a defined deadline, the 
agency would effectively be deciding, for each and every water system in the nation, that the 
removal of lead lines is the most important water infrastructure investment above all others to 
protect public health in a community. But water systems and communities must actually balance a 
variety of competing priorities such as addressing per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), the 
need to strengthen infrastructure to withstand the effects of climate change and extreme weather, 
cybersecurity risks, and the development of new drinking water sources in the face of long-term 
drought. As these communities often have limited resources, a revised LCR with an inflexible LSL 
removal mandate would require water systems to put these competing priorities aside – even if they 
pose the most pressing threats to public health and utility sustainability.  
 
In addition, equity concerns would arise if EPA were to require water systems to cover the cost of 
replacing the private, customer-owned portion of every LSL, possibly including not only residential 
homes but also schools, daycares and businesses where children might be present. This would cause 
a disproportionate impact on low-income communities because the rate-paying base would be 
funding the replacement of all the LSLs and local water systems would have to broadly increase 
water rates to compensate this need. Although the increase in water bills would be equal across 
ratepayers within the community, it would not be equitable as low-income households would be 
paying a larger portion of their income to fund replacements across the water system’s entire service 
area, which will include higher income households that are impacted less by the subsequent increase 
in water bills.  
 
With these considerations in mind, AMWA has multiple suggestions for any LSL replacement 
program that EPA may put into place via additional revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule: 
 
1. As EPA and public water systems work together to lower exposures to lead in drinking 
water, we must keep other public health considerations in mind. For example, a common 
corrosion control method for lead is to add orthophosphate to a system’s drinking water. 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 3 
 
 
Adding additional orthophosphate can have unintentional consequences such as increased 
disinfection byproducts and environmental impacts from increased phosphorus loads.  
 
 
2. AMWA strongly supports individual utility efforts to remove their LSLs as quickly as 
possible and agrees that the complete removal of LSLs is a worthy goal. However, as 
outlined above, AMWA would harbor deep reservations about any proposal that would 
require public water systems to eliminate all LSLs by a firm deadline. Any federal 
replacement mandate must reflect the reality that a community’s LSLs are often jointly 
owned by the water system and thousands of individual homeowners. Convincing all 
customers to agree to replace their LSLs can be a significant challenge. Without this 
customer consent, full replacement of LSLs is impossible.  
 
We understand that some stakeholders have pointed to communities like Newark, New 
Jersey and Madison, Wisconsin, as examples of cities that have made great progress toward 
the near-total replacement of LSLs. AMWA also applauds the efforts of these communities 
and their residents, but we must be clear about what has enabled their success: local city 
ordinances that require individual homeowners to replace, or allow replacement of, their 
privately-owned LSLs or else face fines or even jail time. 
 
For example, Chapter 16:23 of Newark’s city code required private property owners to 
either replace their private LSL at their own expense within 90 days of passage of the 
ordinance, or sign up for the city’s LSL replacement program. Individual property owners 
were also required to allow the city to access their property to carry out a LSL replacement, 
and homeowners who are in violation could be fined up to $1,000 or sentenced to jail time 
or community service of up to 90 days.ii  
 
Similarly, Chapter 13.18 of Madison’s code of ordinances required city homeowners to 
immediately replace all previously known “lead customer-side water service lines,” and to 
replace any newly-discovered such lines within one year. City residents who fail to comply 
with this mandate face fines of up to $1,000 per day.iii  
 
The fact that two of the communities that have had the most success in fully replacing LSLs 
have only done so by compelling residents to cooperate with this effort under threat of fine 
or imprisonment is telling. It not only shows that full LSL replacement cannot be achieved 
by local water systems alone, but also demonstrates that any full LSL replacement mandate 
included in a revised LCR would be likely to fail unless each city and town nationwide 
implemented a similar ordinance to enforce compliance on the part of homeowners. And 
given evidence presented by stakeholders that LSLs are primarily concentrated in minority 
and low-income communities, the widespread implementation of penalty-based LSL 
replacement ordinances could carry national implications for equity and social justice. The 
goal of 100% LSL replacement must be considered in the context of these factors, so 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 4 
 
 
AMWA urges EPA to thoughtfully consider the ramifications of a revised LCR that 
prioritizes full replacement above all else. 
 
 
3. While many water systems across the country can and do offer incentives to encourage 
homeowners to cooperate on LSL replacement projects, water systems themselves are 
extremely limited in their ability to force a homeowner to consent to the replacement of a 
privately-owned LSL. Any revised rule therefore should not hold water systems responsible 
for falling short of prescribed replacement targets due to lack of customer cooperation on 
private-side replacement. EPA must understand that LSL replacement is a community-wide 
effort that will require cooperation and buy-in from community groups and the citizens 
themselves.  
 
 
4. In this same vein, EPA should use this additional time for public input to survey the 
willingness of homeowners to replace the privately owned portions of the service lines. 
Many water systems report that the homeowner resistance they experience is typically 
related to a homeowner’s reluctance to pay for the private-side replacement, and we have 
demonstrated that the most successful local LSL replacement initiatives were backed by city 
ordinances requiring individual customers to comply. However, the motivations of 
customers who decline to replace or allow replacement of LSLs often go beyond just 
concerns about cost to also include reasons such as the customer not seeing the need to 
replace the line. This may be because the customer has no children, or the customer’s 
reluctance to have their gardens torn up. EPA should therefore use this opportunity to 
quantify the scope of this problem of reticent homeowners. 
 
The agency should look to engage both homeowner associations and individuals directly and 
utilize public polling to obtain a clear picture of how willing typical homeowners are to 
spend thousands of dollars on replacing their portion of a LSL, absent a binding mandate to 
do so.  
 
 
5. After further consideration of the revised LCR, AMWA members voiced concerns regarding 
how the LCR would impact renters. The occupants of rented homes generally lack the 
authority to initiate or approve private-side LSL replacement work, and therefore could 
continue to be served by a LSL if the landlord is unresponsive to water system outreach on 
this topic. This highlights another equity issue that must be addressed as Black and Hispanic 
Americans account for a lower percentage of homeowners compared to non-Hispanic White 
Americansiv. AMWA applauds EPA’s work under the revised LCR to address this by 
expanding notifications to occupants, rather than just homeowners. The association 
recommends that EPA consider renters in any new revisions and look to providing 
additional guidance to help with targeted outreach to landlords, public officials, and 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 5 
 
 
community groups in neighborhoods with high proportions of rental housing served by 
LSLs.  
 
 
6. AMWA continues to support the requirement for water systems to develop LSL replacement 
plans. Assuming any final LCR would maintain the requirement to replace LSLs once a 
water system has exceeded the action level or trigger level, it is good practice to have a plan 
already in place to allow for expediency when launching the program after the requirement 
is triggered.  
 
  
7. AMWA continues to agree that EPA should discourage partial LSL replacements as such 
replacements carry few public health benefits and allow lead pipes to remain in the ground. 
However, AMWA urges EPA to maintain a water system’s ability to conduct partial 
replacements in specific circumstances such as an emergency water main replacement or a 
planned water main replacement project which results in a new alignment or spacing of the 
main, necessitating replacement of at least part of a LSL.  
 
Ideally, the privately-owned portion of the lead line would be replaced at the same time, but 
as noted above, a water system’s ability to do so is often contingent upon that customer’s 
willingness to allow work on their property (and, in many cases, for the customer to pay the 
costs associated with replacing the privately-owned portion). The final LCR revisions 
recognized that there will be situations where customer consent cannot be quickly obtained, 
and in those limited cases permits a water system to at least remove the publicly owned 
portion of a LSL when emergency main repair projects or other scheduled infrastructure 
work has provided an opportunity to do so. 
 
  
8. AMWA urges EPA to maintain the final rule’s decision to not require water systems to 
cover costs associated with the replacement of privately-owned service lines, but still retain 
the option to do so. As mentioned above, while some water systems are able to subsidize 
private-side replacement, the use of ratepayer funds and/or capital funds for private 
replacements may be legally questionable or banned outright by state and/or local law. 
 
  
9. AMWA implores EPA to consider using a “cumulative average” to determine a water 
system’s compliance with a mandated percentage target or replacement goal, rather than 
determining compliance on an annual basis. While the final rule attempted to incorporate 
this suggestion by moving to a two-year rolling average, this does not fully relieve the issue 
at hand.  
 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 6 
 
 
Allowing for a cumulative average will ensure that water systems are given credit for their 
previous accomplishments and are provided flexibility for the difficulties which may arise 
through no fault of the system. It is likely that a water system will have more success finding 
customers who will agree to pay for the replacement of their portion of the service line 
during the water system’s initial outreach efforts. As the water system’s replacement 
program continues, the pool of willing customers will likely diminish as the water system 
goes through subsequent rounds of outreach to customers who have previously chosen to 
forgo replacement.  
 
An example of how this cumulative average might be implemented with a 3% mandated 
replacement target is shown in the table below. Note that the ten-year timeframe chosen for 
this example is arbitrary and not meant to suggest a preferred timeline in which LSLs should 
be replaced but is only meant to help visualize the concept of a cumulative average total 
throughout the life of the LSL replacement program. 
 
Year 
Percentage of LSLs 
Replaced 
Cumulative Average 
Percentage of LSLR 
Two-Year Rolling 
Average 
2025 
5% 
5% 
5% 
2026 
6% 
5.5% 
5.5% 
2027 
4% 
5% 
5% 
2028 
3% 
4.5% 
3.5% 
2029 
2% 
4% 
2.5% 
2030 
1% 
3.5% 
1.5% 
2031 
7% 
4% 
4% 
2032 
2% 
3.75% 
4.5% 
2033 
6% 
4% 
4% 
2034 
1% 
3.7% 
3.5% 
 
This hypothetical scenario would have the water system out of compliance with a mandated 
3% yearly mandate, as well as a two-year rolling average. However, after ten years, this 
system would have replaced 45% of their LSLs versus 30% under the 3% yearly mandate.  
 
As seen above, allowing for flexibility could lead to the replacement of LSLs at a faster rate, 
because a water system would know that any additional lines beyond the mandated 
percentage replaced in one year would still count toward its replacement mandate in future 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 7 
 
 
years (when various circumstances could cause a system to fall short of the three percent 
target). In other words, if a cumulative average were not taken into account, a water system 
would have no incentive, from a regulatory compliance standpoint, to keep replacing lines in 
a single year after reaching the three percent figure. The cumulative average would allow the 
system to focus on removing the greatest number of lines feasible, regardless of how many 
LSLs have already been replaced in a given year. 
 
 
10. AMWA requests that any LSL replacement mandate recognize the unique situation posed by 
long-term vacant housing. Some cities are home to tens of thousands of vacant housing 
units, some of which may be connected to the water main through LSLs even though the 
water has been shut off for many years. For example, there are approximately 103,000 
vacant housing properties in Detroitv, and 16,000 in Baltimorevi. A broad LSL replacement 
mandate that does not take vacant housing into account could require these communities to 
spend millions of dollars on LSL replacement work on properties that are unlikely to be 
occupied in the foreseeable future, and which therefore pose no risk of human exposure to 
lead in drinking water. AMWA recommends that abandoned housing units be included in a 
water system’s LSL inventory, but that they be left out of replacement calculations and work 
efforts until the point at which water service is restored to any such property. 
 
 
11. AMWA continues to support the components of the final LCR revisions that empower 
individual members of the public to direct their community water system to work with them 
on a timely replacement of the public and privately-owned portions of a LSL serving their 
property. This way, any individual homeowner could ensure that their water system work 
with them to fully remove their home’s LSL, regardless of any replacement schedule or plan 
otherwise being followed by the utility. 
 
 
Beyond LSL replacement, AMWA has numerous suggestions for how the agency may improve 
upon the rule as was finalized on January 15, 2021.  
 
1. Lead Service Line Definition and Inventories: 
 
AMWA continues to believe that one of the strengths of the revised LCR was the new 
requirement for water systems to complete an inventory that specifies the composition, if 
known, of public and privately-owned service lines connected to the distribution system. 
While many water systems will face challenges in accurately determining the makeup of 
some service lines – particularly those on private property – AMWA agrees that is important 
and worthwhile for water systems to document the composition of the service lines that 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 8 
 
 
deliver water to their customers. Once an inventory is completed, we also continue to agree 
that all water systems serving more than 100,000 people should make their inventories 
available to the public online. However, it is not practical for utilities to visually confirm the 
composition of potentially hundreds of thousands of individual service lines in the near 
term, so it is appropriate for initial inventories to rely on utility records and other similar 
sources. AMWA agrees that after this initial records search utilities should generally work to 
improve upon these inventories in order to positively identify service lines of unknown 
composition.   
 
AMWA encourages EPA to retain water systems’ ability to use tools such as water system 
records, city codes, and building records to draw a reasonable conclusion about whether a 
service line is likely to be lead. However, EPA should more clearly define what will be 
considered a good faith effort on the part of the water system to determine that a service line 
is lead or non-lead. AMWA feels this concern is most prevalent when discussing EPA’s 
direction to consider whether a galvanized pipe “ever was” downstream of a LSL or a pipe 
of unknown material.  
 
AMWA continues to believe this “ever was” standard is problematic as water systems may 
not have specific, uninterrupted records for service lines that date back to the initial 
installation. The water system may therefore be unable to definitively prove or disprove 
what material may have been upstream of the galvanized line throughout the life of the 
service line.  
 
If a water system uses the tools mentioned above and concludes that the galvanized line was 
likely to have been downstream of a lead line at some point in the past, the galvanized line 
should presently be considered lead. Conversely, if the review concludes that the galvanized 
line was unlikely to have been downstream of lead in the past, it should not count as lead in 
the system’s present-day inventory. 
 
In cases where a water system makes such a good faith determination, AMWA suggests 
allowing the water system to remove this galvanized line from its LSL inventory. If the 
water system subsequently obtains new information indicating that the galvanized line had 
in fact previously been downstream of a LSL, then the line should be restored to the system's 
LSL inventory. 
 
AMWA would also like to highlight an additional example that the association believes has 
not been addressed in the previous LCRs. AMWA members have reported that, while their 
water system has never encountered a LSL within their service area, they do not have 
definitive records dating back to the installation of their lines to prove that there are no LSLs 
at all. As stated above, water systems have tight budgets and must use their resources in 
ways that best benefit their communities. EPA should better explain how far a utility should 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 9 
 
 
have to go to determine whether a line is lead. Under the current rule, a utility that lacks 
records suggesting the presence of a lead line, and which have never encountered a lead line 
in their maintenance or capital construction work, is unable to definitively “prove a 
negative” that they have no LSLs.  
 
This may be even more apparent after water systems have consolidated, such as by a larger 
system incorporating a smaller one into its service area. If those smaller systems do not have 
detailed records in place, it now falls onto the larger water system to correct this issue, 
particularly in regards to LSLs. In instances where property records are incomplete, to 
definitively prove that a given pipe is not lead, water systems could be forced to expend 
large amounts of resources attempting to identify service line materials using disruptive and 
labor-intensive methods such as potholing, digging test pits, or otherwise inspecting 
individual homes. Funds expended on these exercises could be better used to replace LSLs 
that are already known to exist or other necessary public health projects. EPA must weigh 
the costs and the benefits of each action towards the overall public health of the community.  
 
AMWA believes there should be flexibility in such situations and a standard at which a 
water system can reliably say a service line is or is not lead without necessarily requiring 
water system staff to set eyes on the line. In these circumstances, where LSLs are not 
documented or discovered in a water system, additional physical exploration for LSLs 
should not be required.   
 
 
2. Testing in schools and child care facilities  
 
AMWA appreciates that the rule finalized by EPA recognized that water systems may only 
conduct testing in schools and child care centers after consent has been obtained from 
facility administrators. We believe that any revised rule should continue to avoid penalties 
for water systems that make good faith efforts to offer testing to schools and child care 
centers, but do not receive sufficient positive responses. However, AMWA still has concerns 
regarding EPA’s requirement to test all schools and child care centers within five years of 
the rule’s compliance date.  
 
AMWA appreciates EPA’s recognition that water systems will likely not get responses from 
all facilities and that this should not be counted against the system’s goals under any final 
rule. AMWA members have reported immense difficulties in obtaining sufficient 
engagement from schools and child care centers. Having flexibility in this area will ensure 
utilities are not held responsible for things outside of their control.  
 
Additionally, multiple AMWA members have voiced concerns over the ability to collect 
samples after a sufficient stagnation period, as it can be difficult to time when schools have 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 10 
 
 
before and after-hours activities. For example, a water system may have to carry out the 
testing in a school early on a Monday morning before classes begin – a schedule that may 
not be accommodating for staff of either the water system or the school. EPA should include 
workable best practices for obtaining these samples as part of any guidance documents 
created to help water systems implement this provision.   
 
3. Find-and-fix 
 
AMWA continues to agree with the agency’s intent to encourage water systems to identify 
the cause when high levels of lead are detected at an individual tap sampled as part of 
required monitoring activities. If implemented appropriately, this requirement can help 
prevent continued exposures from identified materials such as LSLs and interior plumbing 
or fixtures. However, any rule should make it clear that water systems are not responsible 
for any premise plumbing or fixtures located inside the home as this is outside of a water 
system’s control.   
 
AMWA encourages EPA to retain the rule’s provision which limits Find-and-Fix 
requirements to only those samples taken pursuant to the monitoring program under Section 
141.86 and not to other samples that may be voluntarily collected by water systems through 
customer-requested drinking water lead testing programs. Large water systems may 
voluntarily collect samples from thousands of locations (as opposed to 100 or less samples 
collected pursuant to required monitoring), and any provision that would direct water 
systems to attempt to identify the cause of each and every individual high sampling result 
encountered would pose a tremendous burden and could possibly cause many large water 
systems to cease offering voluntary sampling to customers at all. 
 
We appreciate EPA’s acknowledgement that the LCR revisions’ requirement for adding 
water quality parameter (WQP) sites for every find-and-fix follow-up was excessive and 
instead laid out a maximum number of WQP sites for systems so to prevent a never-ending 
growing list. AMWA believes WQP sites should only be added when the water quality at 
that location is significantly different from that found throughout the rest of the system. The 
association encourages EPA to maintain a provision limiting the amount of WQP sites that 
can be added, as well as consider clarifying situations in which it would be appropriate to 
add an additional site.  
 
AMWA continues to strongly object to EPA’s suggestion that water systems should 
consider adjustments to their corrosion control treatment based on a single sample that is 
above the action level. In some cases, an elevated level of lead discovered in an individual 
sample may often relate to lead coatings or other factors that are unique to the specific 

 
Assistant Administrator Fox 
 
July 30, 2021 
Page 11 
 
 
sampling site, and beyond the control of the water system. Requiring a water system to make 
corrosion control changes due to only one or a small number of individual samples 
exceeding the action level could provide limited benefits and actually expose the public to 
other public health risks such as elevated disinfection byproducts and microbial issues due to 
disruption of the pipe biofilms. 
 
Finally, AMWA implores the agency to focus resources on developing guidance documents in a 
timely manner as the implementation of this rule will be a large undertaking. EPA should work with 
stakeholders, such as public drinking water systems, to help inform the development of these 
documents. The agency has highlighted in previous discussions with AMWA that guidance for LSL 
inventories will be one of the first documents that EPA will work to develop. The association 
supports this prioritization, and AMWA would again like to emphasize our members’ hopes to help 
inform this critical guidance. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to expand upon the comments we provided last year after EPA 
formally proposed revisions to the LCR. We continue to believe each of these comments and 
suggestions should be addressed in the interest of ensuring a revised rule remains achievable, 
practical, and enforceable, and equitable. If you have any questions about these comments, please 
contact Stephanie Hayes Schlea, AMWA’s Director of Regulatory and Scientific Affairs, at 
schlea@amwa.net. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Diane VanDe Hei 
Chief Executive Officer 
 
cc: Jennifer McLain, Director, Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
 
 
i https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/.  
ii City of Newark, NJ, Title XVI Health, Sanitation, and Air Pollution, Chapter 16:23 Mandatory Replacement of Lead 
Service Line, https://ecode360.com/36709585. 
iii Madison, Wisconsin Code of Ordinances, Chapter 13.18 Lead Water Service Line Replacement, 
https://library.municode.com/wi/madison/codes/code_of_ordinances?nodeId=COORMAWIVOIICH11--
19_CH13PUWASUSY_13.18LEWASELIRE. 
iv U.S. Department of Commerce. (April 27, 2021). Quarterly Residential Vacancies and Homeownership, First Quarter 
2021. https://www.census.gov/housing/hvs/files/currenthvspress.pdf  
v Blanco, E. C. (2020, September 1). As Michigan Makes Progress on Vacant Homes, Detroit’s Vacancies Have 
Skyrocketed. Next City. https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/michigan-makes-progress-on-vacant-homes-detroits-vacancies-
have-skyrocketed 
vi Scott, A. (2020, July 8). Why can’t Baltimore solve its vacant housing problem? Marketplace. 
https://www.marketplace.org/2020/07/08/why-cant-baltimore-solve-vacant-housing-problem/ 

 
 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Appendix C 
 
 
 
 
 
AMWA Comments on Environmental Justice Considerations for the 
Development of the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESIDENT 
John Entsminger 
Las Vegas Valley Water Dist. 
 
Mike Armstrong 
WaterOne 
 
Calvin Farr 
Prince William County 
Service Authority 
 
Joe Mantua 
Beaufort Jasper Water & 
Sewer Authority 
 
Paul Vojtek 
Erie Water Works 
VICE PRESIDENT 
Yvonne Forrest 
Houston Water 
 
Tad Bohannon 
Central Arkansas Water 
 
Randy E. Hayman 
Philadelphia Water Department 
 
 
Lindsey Rechtin 
Northern Kentucky Water 
District 
 
 
TREASURER 
Jeffrey Szabo 
Suffolk County Water Authority 
 
Edward Campbell 
Portland Water Bureau 
 
Robert Hunter 
Municipal Water District of 
Orange County 
 
Holly Rosenthal 
Phoenix Water Services 
Department 
SECRETARY 
James S. Lochhead 
Denver Water  
 
Shane Chapman 
Metropolitan Water District of 
Southern California 
 
Ghassan Korban 
Sewerage and Water Board of 
New Orleans 
 
John P. Sullivan, Jr. 
Boston Water and Sewer 
Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andrea Cheng 
Chicago Department of Water 
Management 
 
Yann Le Gouellec 
Newport News Waterworks 
 
Todd Swingle 
Toho Water 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER 
Tom Dobbins 
 
Scott Dewhirst 
Tacoma Water  
 
Angela Licata 
New York City Department of 
Environmental Protection 
 
Timothy Thomure 
Tucson Water 
 
 
 
 
November 15, 2022  
 
Dr. Jennifer L. McLain  
Director, Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Ave NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
 
Re: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 Environmental Justice Considerations for the Development of the 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI)  
 
Dear Dr. McLain,  
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) welcomes the opportunity to provide 
feedback on environmental justice considerations related to the development of EPA’s 
anticipated Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). AMWA is an organization 
representing the largest publicly owned drinking water utilities in the United States, and 
collectively its membership serves more than 160 million people. Our members represent diverse 
metropolitan areas and have long been working to identify and replace lead service lines in their 
service areas. The association has been involved with the Lead and Copper Rule since its 
inception and offered substantive comments during development of the Lead and Copper Rule 
Revisions (LCRR) that were published on January 15, 2021.1 We value the work that EPA has 
done to decrease the risk of lead and copper to public health while prioritizing environmental 
justice.  
 
Approximately 10 million publicly and privately owned lead pipes and service lines presently 
deliver drinking water to American households. Last year, the Biden Administration announced 
its intention to “use every tool at its disposal to eliminate all lead service lines” in the next 10 
years, including by “encouraging full lead service line replacement and strongly discouraging 
 
1 Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies. National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions. February 12, 2020. 
https://www.amwa.net/testimonycomments/comments-regarding-epas-proposed-lead-and-copper-rule-revisions-epa-
hq-ow-2017 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
November 15, 2022 
Page 2 of 6 
partial replacement.”2 EPA subsequently concluded an ongoing review of the LCRR and 
announced its intention to “immediately begin development” of further revisions that would be 
known as the LCRI. Among the revisions that EPA intends to propose as part of the LCRI are 
requirements that “would result in the replacement of all LSLs as quickly as is feasible.”3 
 
In light of these objectives, AMWA reiterates its support for advancing public health and 
environmental justice. Additionally, AMWA asks the EPA to recognize, consider, and address 
the potential hurdles associated with full lead service line replacements should they be mandated 
as part of a proposed LCRI rule, and to provide support for community water systems to address 
these challenges. We summarize these potential complications below. 
 
Service line ownership 
 
To understand the difficulties associated with full lead service line replacement, it is important to 
understand the ownership of service lines that connect water mains with the premise plumbing in 
each home served by a water system. Typically, service lines are partially owned by a 
community water system and partially owned by the customer. The water utility usually owns 
the portion of the service line from the water main to the curb stop or meter, and the private 
property owner usually owns the portion of the service line from the property line to the building 
inlet. The water system is generally unable to access the customer-owned portion of the service 
line without the customer’s permission, nor is the utility under any obligation to replace, or pay 
for replacement of, the customer portion of a service line that fails. 
 
This does not mean that community water systems are wholly unable to aid in the replacement of 
privately owned lead service lines. Many utilities often offer to replace the customer-owned 
portion of a service line at cost to the customer, in conjunction with the water system’s 
replacement of the publicly owned portion. Additionally, some utilities and localities have 
developed plans to fully replace lead service lines without charging customers individually. 
Some opportunities and challenges of these approaches will be discussed further in this letter. 
 
Impacts on drinking water affordability 
 
EPA estimates that full lead service line replacement has an average cost of $4,700, ranging from 
$1,200 to $12,300 per line replaced.4 Using EPA’s estimate of an average replacement cost per 
 
2 FACT SHEET: The Biden-⁠Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan, December 16, 2021. 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-lead-pipe-
and-paint-action-plan/ 
3 Environmental Protection Agency. Review of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR). 86 FR 71574. December 17, 2021. 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/12/17/2021-27457/review-of-the-national-primary-drinking-water-
regulation-lead-and-copper-rule-revisions-lcrr 
4 Chapter 5: Economic Analysis. Lead and Copper Rule Revisions. Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-210-0300. 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-0001  

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
November 15, 2022 
Page 3 of 6 
line of $4,700 and an assumption of 10 million lead service lines in the United States, fully 
replacing all lead service lines in the country could cost roughly $47 billion. This $47 billion 
sum far exceeds the $15 billion worth of lead service line replacement funds included in the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) of 2021, thus requiring community water systems to turn to 
other sources of funding to cover the costs of full lead service line replacement.  
 
Therefore, AMWA is concerned that an EPA requirement for water systems to carry out full lead 
service line replacements would represent a massive unfunded mandate for communities that do 
not receive BIL funding. These communities would likely have to turn to increased customer 
water rates to cover these replacement costs, which could be expected to disproportionately 
impact low-income customers. Water utilities are limited to grants, loans, and user rates to cover 
the costs of providing drinking water service, and federal funds to date alone will not cover the 
full costs. 
 
Since utilities must cover the costs of a litany of other challenges, including aging infrastructure, 
changing state and federal regulations, climate change, and supply chain disruptions, they must 
turn to a limited pool of federal grants and loans and increased customer rates to fund major 
infrastructure projects. Utility customer rate setting authority ranges significantly by locality and 
states, but when necessary to increase rates, many utilities must increase customer rates for all 
customers. Increased customer rates disproportionately impact low-income customers, who must 
spend a larger portion of their income on their water bill than higher income customers.  
 
Community water systems face additional challenges in their authority to increase rates and in 
their ability to assist low-income customers most affected by increased rates. AMWA represents 
publicly owned drinking water utilities, which are often governed by boards or other elected 
officials that may restrict the degree to which utilities can increase rates or whether they may 
establish lower rates for low-income customers. In other cases, publicly owned utilities may 
require voter permission to authorize funding for major infrastructure projects. The LCRI must 
recognize the unique challenges faced by water utilities in acquiring and distributing funds to 
replace lead service lines and recognize potential increased water rates as an intended 
consequence of funding lead service line replacement.   
 
Legal constraints on authority to replace lead service lines 
 
Further considerations regarding the LCRI are the legal and logistical complications of replacing 
lead service lines held by property-owners. As described above, the task of fully replacing lead 
service lines is often complicated because ownership of each household’s service line is split 
between the community water system (which generally owns the portion from the water main to 
the property line) and the private homeowner (who typically owns the portion from the property 
line to the building inlet). Community water systems are generally unable to access or replace a 
privately owned lead service line without the permission of the property owner.  
 
The challenge of obtaining property owner permission to fully replace a lead service line should 
not be downplayed, and EPA’s announcement to pursue the LCRI acknowledged that 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
November 15, 2022 
Page 4 of 6 
communities like Newark, New Jersey “have shown that full LSLR can be equitably achieved 
when there is both a regulatory requirement and a commitment to prioritize funding” (emphasis 
added).5 
 
It is worth exploring Newark’s regulatory requirement in more detail. In 2019, the city’s code 
was amended to require private property owners to either replace their privately owned lead 
service lines at their own expense within 90 days of passage of the ordinance, or sign up for the 
city’s lead service line replacement program. Individual property owners were also required to 
allow the city to access their property to carry out a lead service line replacement. A property 
owner who violated this ordinance could be fined up to $1,000 or sentenced to jail time or 
community service of up to 90 days.6 
 
The fact that Newark could only achieve so much success in fully replacing lead service lines by 
compelling residents to cooperate with this effort under threat of fine or imprisonment is telling. 
It not only shows that full lead service line replacement cannot be achieved by local water 
systems alone, but also demonstrates that any full lead service line replacement mandate 
included in the LCRI would be likely to fail unless each city and town nationwide implemented 
and enforced a similar ordinance to compel the cooperation of property owners. Given 
stakeholder comments cited by EPA that “low-income people and communities of color are 
disproportionately served by” lead service lines, the widespread implementation of penalty-based 
lead service line replacement ordinances could similarly disproportionately threaten these 
communities with fines or jail time. The goal of fully replacing all lead service lines nationwide 
must be considered in the context of these factors, so AMWA urges EPA to thoughtfully 
consider the ramifications of an LCRI that prioritizes full replacement above all else. 
 
Other legal obstacles at the state and federal level can further complicate full lead service line 
replacement efforts. For example, as of 2017 the laws of three states expressly prohibited water 
systems from using ratepayer funds on initiatives that benefit specific customers, and laws in at 
least 19 others made the practice highly questionable.7 This would pose significant challenges to 
any federal mandate that would require community water systems to fully replace, and pay for 
the replacement of, the publicly and privately owned portions of lead service lines. 
 
Other obstacles to full lead service line replacement can be found in the federal tax code. If a 
water system attempts to finance the replacement of both the public and private portions of a lead 
service line with tax-exempt bonds, which are a common and cost-effective infrastructure 
financing mechanism, it must first navigate the IRS’ “private business use test” to certify that a 
 
5 Environmental Protection Agency, December 17, 2021. 
6 City of Newark, NJ, Title XVI Health, Sanitation, and Air Pollution, Chapter 16:23 Mandatory Replacement of 
Lead Service Line, https://ecode360.com/36709585 
7 University of North Carolina Environmental Finance Center. Navigating Legal Pathways to Rate-Funded 
Customer Assistance Programs: A Guide for Water and Wastewater Utilities. 
https://www.amwa.net/publication/navigating-legal-pathways-rate-funded-customer-assistance-programs-2017 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
November 15, 2022 
Page 5 of 6 
disproportionate portion of the bond issuance would not benefit a private, home-based business.8 
This process adds months of work and expense to the process, as utilities must document 
whether there is a home-based business at each property with a private lead service line to be 
replaced. Any draft LCRI rule must be created with the knowledge that the US tax code currently 
imposes difficulties on utilities using tax-exempt bonds to pay for private-side lead service line 
replacement. 
 
The LCRI must further consider the difficulty community water systems may face in acquiring 
permission to replace lead service lines on rental properties, where some of a utility’s most 
vulnerable customers may live. In nearly all cases, water utilities require the permission of the 
property owner to conduct a lead service line replacement on the customer property side. 
Without adequate support to connect with landlords, which can range from individuals managing 
a few properties to large organizations with multiple, multi-unit properties, many utilities may 
not be able fully replace lead service lines where rental residents would benefit. 
 
Community distrust in tap water 
 
Finally, AMWA asks that the forthcoming LCRI recognize the racial disparities in trust in tap 
water utilities and consider how that may inform the support needed for water utilities to replace 
lead service lines in private homes. A recent Value of Water Campaign poll, for example, found 
that respondents of color (i.e., people of all races and ethnicities other than non-Hispanic Whites) 
were less likely to say their pipes were safe (69%) compared to white respondents (87%).9 These 
statistics bring to light the fact that already existing community concerns about water 
infrastructure safety may hinder water utilities’ ability to access and replace service lines on 
private property. It is possible that communities with lower trust in their water infrastructure may 
also not fully trust a utility’s ability to properly replace a lead service line and in turn opt out of 
the replacement; therefore, it is important that the EPA consider and prepare for these potential 
concerns.  
 
An additional complicating factor of lead service line replacement is that residents may refuse a 
utility access to replace a service line for several reasons, including home water disruption, 
concerns about costs, or loss of landscaping. Alternatively, utilities may have to juggle how to 
cover costs of disruptions to properties caused by replacement, introducing the possibility that 
only homeowners who can afford to make aesthetic improvements after service line replacement 
agree to replacement. Regardless of homeowner decisions, to ensure order and community trust, 
utilities will have to invest administrative time and effort to oversee respecting private 
homeowners’ decisions, further driving costs of lead service line replacement.  
 
 
 
8 Kildee Introduces Bill to Help Communities Replace Lead Pipes. March 8, 2022. 
https://dankildee.house.gov/media/press-releases/kildee-introduces-bill-help-communities-replace-lead-pipes 
9 Value of Water Campaign. American Support for Investments in Water Infrastructure. 
http://thevalueofwater.org/sites/default/files/Value%20of%20Water%20Poll%202022%E2%80%94Key%20Poll%2
0Findings.pdf 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
November 15, 2022 
Page 6 of 6 
Conclusion 
 
AMWA supports the EPA in its mission to advance environmental justice and public health. We 
similarly support individual utility efforts to remove their lead service lines as quickly as 
possible, and agree that the complete removal of lead service lines is a worthy goal. However, 
achieving this critical milestone will be a complex process. The agency must recognize the 
various affordability, legal, and community trust challenges as it considers environmental justice 
in the development of the LCRI. We appreciate the opportunity to comment and ask that the 
agency fully consider and address the challenges associated with lead service line replacement. If 
you have any questions about this letter, please contact Brian Redder, AMWA’s Manager of 
Regulatory and Scientific Affairs at redder@amwa.net or Jessica Evans, AMWA’s Government 
Affairs Associate at evans@amwa.net.   
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Thomas Dobbins  
Chief Executive Officer  
 
cc: Radhika Fox, Assistant Administrator, EPA Office of Water 
Eric Burneson, EPA Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 

 
 
Comments on behalf of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Appendix D 
 
 
 
 
 
AMWA Comments on the Federalism Consultation for Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements 
 
  

 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESIDENT 
John Entsminger 
Las Vegas Valley Water Dist. 
 
Mike Armstrong 
WaterOne 
 
Calvin Farr 
Prince William County Service 
Authority 
 
Joe Mantua 
Beaufort Jasper Water & 
Sewer Authority 
 
Paul Vojtek 
Erie Water Works 
VICE PRESIDENT 
Yvonne Forrest 
Houston Water 
 
Tad Bohannon 
Central Arkansas Water 
 
Randy E. Hayman 
Philadelphia Water Department 
 
 
Lindsey Rechtin 
Northern Kentucky Water 
District 
 
 
TREASURER 
Jeffrey Szabo 
Suffolk County Water Authority 
 
Edward Campbell 
Portland Water Bureau 
 
Robert Hunter 
Municipal Water District of 
Orange County 
 
Holly Rosenthal 
Phoenix Water Services 
Department 
SECRETARY 
James S. Lochhead 
Denver Water  
 
Shane Chapman 
Metropolitan Water District of 
Southern California 
 
Ghassan Korban 
Sewerage and Water Board of 
New Orleans 
 
John P. Sullivan, Jr. 
Boston Water and Sewer 
Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andrea Cheng 
Chicago Department of Water 
Management 
 
Yann Le Gouellec 
Newport News Waterworks 
 
Todd Swingle 
Toho Water 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER 
Tom Dobbins 
 
Scott Dewhirst 
Tacoma Water  
 
Angela Licata 
New York City Department of 
Environmental Protection 
 
Timothy Thomure 
Tucson Water 
 
 
 
December 13, 2022 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
Director, Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
 
Re: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0813, Federalism Consultation on Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements  
 
Dear Dr. McLain, 
 
The Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) welcomes the opportunity to provide 
input on EPA’s forthcoming proposed rulemaking, the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
(LCRI). AMWA is an organization representing the largest publicly owned drinking water 
utilities in the US, and collectively its membership serves more than 160 million people. AMWA 
was generally supportive of the LCR Revisions (LCRR) but continues to urge EPA to consider 
the challenges associated with identifying and replacing lead service lines in future regulation.  
 
Last year, the Biden Administration announced its intention to “use every tool at its disposal to 
eliminate all lead service lines” in the next 10 years, including by “encouraging full lead service 
line (LSL) replacement and strongly discouraging partial replacement.”1 EPA subsequently 
concluded an ongoing review of the LCRR and announced its intention to “immediately begin 
development” of further revisions that would be known as the LCRI. Among the revisions that 
EPA intends to propose as part of the LCRI are requirements that “would result in the 
replacement of all LSLs as quickly as is feasible.”2 
 
AMWA reiterates its full support for advancing public health by reducing public exposure to 
lead. Additionally, AMWA asks the EPA to recognize, consider, and address the potential 
 
1 FACT SHEET: The Biden-⁠Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan, December 16, 2021. 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-lead-pipe- 
and-paint-action-plan/ 
2 Environmental Protection Agency. Review of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR). 86 FR 71574. December 17, 2021. 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/12/17/2021-27457/review-of-the-national-primary-drinking-water- 
regulation-lead-and-copper-rule-revisions-lcrr 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
December 13, 2022 
Page  2 
hurdles associated with full LSL replacements should they be mandated as part of a proposed 
LCRI rule, and to provide support for community water systems (CWS) to address these 
challenges. We summarize these potential complications in our comments below, split into 
sections matching EPA’s Federalism Consultation meeting slides.  
 
Identifying and Replacing Lead Service Lines 
 
AMWA continues to believe that any further revisions to the rule must consider the realities on 
the ground, namely, the practical challenges faced by water systems seeking to replace all 
publicly and privately-owned LSLs. These challenges are detailed in the attached comments 
previously submitted by AMWA on July 30, 2022 on the Lead and Copper Rule virtual 
engagements. Aside from the considerable cost factors and accompanying implications for water 
affordability for low-income ratepayers, a binding mandate on water systems to replace “all” 
public and privately-owned LSLs would meet the obstacle of individual homeowners who may 
refuse access to their property to replace their privately-owned LSL. The experience of AMWA 
members is that a significant portion of customers typically decline the chance to have their 
privately-owned LSL replaced, even when the cost is partially or fully subsidized, often due to 
distrust or apprehension in government. 
 
CWS and their communities also face differing circumstances and competing priorities. If EPA 
were to require water systems to replace all LSLs by a defined deadline, the agency would 
effectively be deciding, for each water system in the nation, that the removal of lead lines is the 
most important water infrastructure investment above all others to protect public health in a 
community. Realistically, water systems and communities must balance a variety of competing 
priorities such as addressing PFAS, the need to strengthen infrastructure to withstand the effects 
of climate change and extreme weather, cybersecurity risks, and the development of new 
drinking water sources in the face of long-term drought. As these communities often have 
limited resources, a revised LCR with an inflexible LSL removal mandate would require water 
systems to put these competing priorities aside – even if they pose the most pressing threats to 
public health and utility and community sustainability.  
 
AMWA also asks EPA to consider the following situation related to galvanized [pipe] requiring 
replacement service lines (GRRSL). Currently, GRRSL are defined as “a galvanized service line 
is or was at any time downstream of a lead service line or is currently downstream of a ‘Lead 
Status Unknown’ service line [emphasis added].”3 For utilities that identified LSLs many years 
ago and removed them, they will have to treat customer-side galvanized lines formerly connected 
to LSLs as though they are lead. EPA should consider, using the most up-to-date science, that 
these GRRSL are no longer a source of lead after a period of time as supported by the data.  
 
AMWA also urges EPA to consider the state of the workforce currently in the country. Many 
AMWA members struggle to find and secure individuals trained and capable of completing LSL 
 
3 40 CFR Part 141 Subpart I; https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-40/chapter-I/subchapter-D/part-141/subpart-I 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
December 13, 2022 
Page  3 
replacement and related work. Some states require specific qualifications, like being a licensed 
plumber, for those replacing LSL. This severely limits the ability of CWS to be proactive in 
quickly replacing LSLs. EPA should prioritize increased opportunities for training and workforce 
development to address this important issue. 
 
In addition, there are equity and environmental justice concerns associated with full LSL 
replacement that AMWA previously detailed in November 15, 2022 comments to EPA on 
environmental justice considerations in development of LCRI, also attached to this letter. Any 
increase in water rates due to LSL replacement would have a disproportionate impact on low-
income communities. Although the increase in water bills would be equal across ratepayers 
within the community, it would not be equitable as low-income households would be paying a 
larger portion of their income to fund replacements across the water system’s entire service area, 
which will include higher income households that are impacted less by the subsequent increase 
in water bills. EPA cannot expect that funds already appropriated will be enough to complete the 
entirety of LSL replacement, meaning the remainder of those costs will fall to the public.  
 
AMWA is also concerned that the varying definitions of disadvantaged communities in states 
and across the federal government will exclude larger utilities, with service areas including 
pockets of these communities, from being eligible for certain LSL replacement funds. AMWA 
urges EPA to maximize the opportunities for states and municipalities to use funds in a way that 
delivers the most benefit to low-income households and communities. Additionally, EPA should 
consider difficulties with communicating to customers who previously have replaced their own 
LSLs, at great cost to themselves, that others will now have access to full replacement costs.  
 
Tap Sampling and Compliance 
 
It’s critical that any revisions to the LCR do so with the mindset of minimizing burdens on CWS 
and their customers. Many CWS already struggle to get customers to participate in tap water 
sampling, some even offering incentives and discounts on water bills to conduct sampling. 
Increasing the amount of work associated with sampling will only deter more individuals from 
participating.  
 
EPA claims the first liter of water sampled from a tap represents issues from premise plumbing. 
While there are instances this may not be the case, any proposed rule should make it clear that 
water systems are not responsible for any premise plumbing or fixtures located inside the home, 
as this is outside of a water system’s control. By testing both these samples, it will only increase 
the number samples reaching the action/trigger levels, prompting public notifications that 
typically cause panic and worry among residents and cost CWS significant resources.  
 
Reducing Rule Complexity 
 
AMWA suggests EPA not take large actions in this rulemaking, and instead use the data 
acquired from LCRR implementation to make an informed decision during the next Six-Year 

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
December 13, 2022 
Page  4 
Review. Many CWS are still preparing for elements of the LCRR, like the LSL inventory, and 
the notion of major changes happening right as the compliance date nears has led to much 
confusion over what needs to be done now and in the future. The LCR is not the only major 
rulemaking EPA is currently undergoing, and CWS must weigh changes associated with LCRI, 
PFAS regulation, and MDBP revisions, all coming together around the same time.  
 
AMWA strongly suggests EPA keep the action level at 15 ppb. Lowering the action level, in 
addition to potentially including both 1st and 5th liter draws for sampling, will only increase the 
number of samples that require action, including public notification which will be a substantial 
burden on states. Increasing the number of samples that require action will divert resources away 
from other issues that may have larger public health consequences. Instead of lowering the action 
levels, AMWA urges EPA to develop and promote guidance documents that help CWS and the 
public understand the importance of lead testing, how to properly conduct lead testing at home, 
and resources available to reduce lead exposure. 
 
Having two similar parameters, like the action and trigger levels, seems to have created some 
confusion as to how they differ and what is specifically required of each of them. If a sample 
exceeds both levels, triggering both actions, the costs and time associated would be substantial. 
Additionally, the action level requires replacement of the LSL, so CWS should not have to 
evaluate their corrosion control technique (CCT) if the source of lead was removed.  
 
The association continues to oppose actions that require changing a system’s CCT based on a 
single sample that is above the action level. In some cases, an elevated level of lead discovered 
in an individual sample may often relate to lead coatings or other factors that are unique to the 
specific sampling site, and beyond the control of the water system. Requiring a water system to 
make corrosion control changes due to only one or a small number of individual samples 
exceeding the action level could provide limited benefits and expose the public to other public 
health risks such as elevated disinfection byproducts and microbial issues due to disruption of the 
pipe biofilms. 
 
Conclusion 
AMWA strongly supports individual utility efforts to remove their LSLs as quickly as possible 
and agrees that the complete removal of LSLs should be the ultimate goal. However, as outlined 
above, AMWA harbors deep reservations about any proposal that would require public water 
systems to eliminate all LSLs by a firm deadline for the reasons detailed in this letter. Any 
federal replacement mandate must reflect the reality that a community’s LSLs are often jointly 
owned by the water system and thousands of individual homeowners. Convincing all customers 
to agree to replace their LSLs can be a significant challenge for reasons ranging from disinterest 
to disillusionment and distrust of government. Without this customer consent, or a change in 
local laws, full replacement of LSLs is impossible.  

 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
December 13, 2022 
Page  5 
Overall, the LCRI should make minimal changes to the current rule. EPA should collect data 
over the next few years to do a comprehensive assessment during the next Six-Year Review to 
identify areas that will be most effective in reducing lead exposure to the public. AMWA 
appreciates the opportunity to comment and asks that the agency fully consider and address the 
challenges associated with LSL replacement. If you have any questions about this letter, please 
contact Brian Redder, AMWA’s Manager of Regulatory and Scientific Affairs at 
redder@amwa.net.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Thomas Dobbins 
Chief Executive Officer 
 
Attachments 
 
cc:  
Radhika Fox, OW 
 
Eric Burneson, OGWDW 
 
Anne Lausier, OGWDW 
 
Michael Goldberg, OGWDW 
Hannah Holsinger, OGWDW 
Andrew Hanson, OCIR

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0837 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
STATE OF WASHINGTON 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
PO Box 47890 Olympia, Washington 98504-7890 
Tel: 360-236-4030  711 Washington Relay 
 
 
February 5, 2024  
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (Docket  
ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801)  
 
The Washington State Department of Health (DOH) offers the following comments in response to the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed rulemaking for the above-mentioned Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI), published on December 6, 2023 (Federal Register Vol. 88, No. 233).  
 
Overall, DOH supports EPA’s efforts with the proposal to address potential disproportionate impacts of 
lead in drinking water in communities, including through proposed lead service line replacement and 
public education. DOH recognizes the transition to and implementation of the LCRI will likely require 
significant additional state resources.  
 
Regarding the need for additional resources 
 
EPA upgrades to the federal Safe Drinking Water Information System or its modernization will ensure 
DOH can effectively implement the various components of the rule. Training, education, review, tracking 
of the lead service line inventory and replacement plan, and changes in the monitoring and reporting 
requirements specified in the LCRI will likely require an increase in resources to effectively implement. 
DOH recognizes that changes in the LCRI will help to ensure the public is better informed about the 
status of their water systems. But the public education and public notification requirements will likely 
require increased tracking due to the multiple public notification requirements. Simplifying public 
education and public notification requirements by streamlining the timelines within the rule may lessen 
the impact on staffing resources and public water systems.  
 
Similarly, changes in monitoring and reporting requirements may increase staff time to review and 
approve monitoring plans and ensure systems are sampling at correct locations and correctly calculating 
and reporting their 90th percentiles. When these changes are coupled with the lower action level, DOH 
anticipates additional resources will need to be dedicated to the Lead and Copper Program.  
 
 

EPA 
February 5, 2024 
Page  2 
 
 
Regarding proposed changes associated with lead service line inventory (LSLI) validation 
(141.84(b)) 
 
DOH does not agree with the need for a validation process for inventories that identify non-lead service 
lines based on records, construction date, or pipe size. DOH supports the state's ability to determine if 
inventories based on records should be subject to further validation.  
 
If EPA keeps the validation process, DOH recommends EPA only require a validation process on non-
lead service lines installed prior to the lead ban date. Systems have already used the statistical approach 
for the initial LSLI or have all non-lead based on construction date should not be required to further 
validate their LSLI.    
 
Regarding proposed changes associated with system size definitions (141.2) 
 
DOH appreciates that EPA is proposing to correct an error from LCRR to define small water systems as 
those serving 10,000 persons or fewer. However, the use of similar terms with different definitions may 
create some confusion and increases the likelihood of error. DOH recommends using consistent 
definitions of water system size within the SDWA. Examples that could cause confusion, include:  
• 
There is a definition of small water systems (serving 10,000 persons or fewer) that only applies to 
Subpart I; and 
• 
The Small Water System Compliance Flexibility is identified for small community water systems 
serving 3,300 or fewer. 
If there are going to be different size ranges, those categories should have different names to avoid 
confusing the regulated community. DOH recommends defining a very small water system as serving 
3,300 or fewer so that the definition of small water system and small water systems compliance flexibility 
are not confused. 
 
Regarding proposed changes associated with adding connectors to the LSLI (141.2; 141.84; 141.85; 
141.86; 141.90) 
 
DOH is concerned with the addition of a new required connector category for water systems that have 
already begun or completed record review activities to develop their LSLIs. This new category will 
require another records review to determine this information.   
 
Regarding proposed changes associated with the requirement to provide notification of all lead and 
copper tap results within three calendar days (141.85(d)) 
 
DOH supports EPA’s efforts to ensure customers receive both lead and copper test results. However, 
DOH is concerned with the proposed requirement that water systems deliver tap sample results within 
three calendar days of learning of the results. DOH recommends that water systems have 30 days to 
provide customers with the results of their lead and copper test samples. 30 days is consistent with Tier 2 
notification for contaminants that are not acute. This will allow water systems to mail out test results to 
customers and ensure thorough and accurate information is provided.   
 
Keeping three calendar days in the proposal could also create challenges for states. Requiring three days 
for results that are not over the action level could set up a situation in which a state would need to 
prioritize spending resources to assist water systems with this requirement over more broadly impactful 
issues related to Tier 2 notices. Additionally, this may add challenges in our efforts to ensure that water 
systems use their limited resources on efforts that are critical to addressing higher public health risks. 
 

EPA 
February 5, 2024 
Page  3 
 
 
If EPA keeps three calendar days, DOH suggests the rule specify three business days.  Three calendar 
days could create a challenge when a water system receives results on a Friday before a holiday weekend. 
The system will require staff to work additional hours to meet the three calendar days and may not be able 
to deliver the results in time, subsequently falling out of compliance. 
 
Regarding proposed changes associated with lead in schools (141.90(i); 141.92) 
 
DOH supports community water systems working with schools, early learning, and childcare centers to 
reduce a child’s overall exposure to lead in the environment. All outlets that can be used for drinking and 
cooking should be routinely sampled and those outlets that exceed the action level should be taken out of 
service and remediated. 
   
DOH is concerned the proposed LCRI is not the appropriate platform for mitigating exposure in schools 
and childcare facilities.  
 
DOH supports allowing states to issue waivers to community water systems from the requirement for lead 
sampling in schools, early learning, and childcare facilities. DOH requests if the state requires sampling at 
all outlets available for drinking and cooking and requires outlet above the action level be taken out of 
service immediate, states should then be able to issue waivers to community water systems, even if the 
sampling frequency in the LCRI is not met.  
 
Regarding the requirement for large system with lead service lines or galvanized requiring 
replacement to complete a pipe loop study (141.82) 
 
DOH disagrees that all large systems would need to complete a harvested pipe loop study to identify 
optimal corrosion control treatment. Pipe loop studies are difficult, time consuming, and costly. It could 
ultimately delay installation of corrosion control treatment and increase costs to reduce the lead at 
customers taps. Coupon tests and other analysis can identify optimal corrosion control without these 
costly studies. States should have the flexibility to identify when additional studies are needed based on 
information provided by the water system on coupon studies, partial system-tests and other analyses 
based on analogous systems. 
 
Additionally, harvesting lead or galvanized service lines from the system disrupts scale and increases 
exposure risk similarly to when systems conduct partial service line replacement or do other work that 
causes lead releases. 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide comments regarding the LCRI.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Lauren Jenks 
Assistant Secretary, Environmental Public Health 
Washington State Department of Health

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0946 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1096 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
OHIO CONFERENCE NAACP 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Serving Ohioans Since 1930 
PO Box 29014, Columbus, Ohio 43229 
 
February 5, 2024   
  
Michael S. Regan, Administrator    
US Environmental Protection Agency    
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW   
Washington, DC 20460   
   
Dear Administrator Regan,   
   
The NAACP State Conference of Ohio submits the following comments regarding  
the US Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary  
Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”).  
The Ohio NAACP State conference provides leadership for local branches, youth 
councils, and college chapters for environmental and climate justice needs in Ohio. 
The NAACP and its Center for Environmental and Climate Justice have a long- 
standing interest in ensuring that issues of community engagement and environ- 
mental justice center Black communities and frontline communities most impacted, 
including communities in Ohio.    
   
Ohio applauds EPA for proposing stronger regulations to protect communities from  
lead in drinking water. 
   
The Lead and Cooper rule, as it stands now, is wholly inadequate.  According to an 
article published by International Journal of Environmental Research and Public  
Health, found on the National Library of Medicine National Center for Bio- 
technology Information, researchers Deniz Yeter, Ellen Banks and Michael Aschner, 
concluded that there is a “significant nationwide racial disparity in blood Pb that has 
been documented among predominantly African-American Black children since while 
ethnic disparity for Hispanic children is no longer seen at the national level compared  
to White children since the 1990s.” Though I am aware that Hispanic children 
experience heightened blood lead levels when the neighborhood conditions and  
exposure levels are the same as Black communities.       
 
From my perusal of the articles and studies available, there seem to be an agreement  
that industrial waste and products and the lack of federal enforcement of prohibitions  
of lead product and paint use as the primary cause of lead exposure and poisoning, 
especially among Black children. In fact, Ohio is ranked second in the number of lead 
pipes.  With the available science, technology and resources in the US, a course 
correction is possible.  The modification of the lead and cooper rule is critically  
needed for this to happen.    
 
Tom Roberts 
President 
Dr. Derrick L. Foward 
1
st Vice President 
Andre Washington 
2
nd Vice President 
Annette McCoy 
3
rd Vice President 
Dr. Dora Bronston 
Secretary 
Oliver Warren 
Asst. Secretary 
Willie Perryman 
Treasurer 
Williann Moore 
Asst. Treasurer 
 
 
Ophelia Averitt 
President’s Advisor 
 
Sybil Edwards McNabb 
President Emeritus 
 
   
Email: 
statesenatortomroberts
@yahoo.com 
Website: 
www.naacp-ohio.net 

For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong elements of the 
proposed LCRI such as the requirement for the removal of all lead service lines in ten years, the 
requirements for water systems to sample both the first and fifth liter of water passing through lead 
pipes and a lower action level; but also ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes which 
undermine their goals and ensure that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened.   
Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule does not leave 
black communities in Ohio behind:   
 
 
Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it is a fundamental 
injustice that the communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed 40 or more years to 
fix this issue.   
 
Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines: Removal can 
cost thousands of dollars, and putting the financial burden on impacted communities will result in 
mostly wealthy and white neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced. Removal and replacement 
do not make up major proportions of utility budgets, and utilities should be expected to maximize the 
use of available federal water infrastructure funds and other non-ratepayer sources of funds to 
prioritize solving this crisis.   
 
 
Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who spend many hours there 
daily are not at risk of exposure: Black children face an increased risk of lead exposure when 
compared with white children. The proposal’s suggested testing program does not differ from past 
ineffective programs, and EPA should move towards incentivizing the installation of filters and 
protecting children.   
   
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components would allow for 
environmental injustice to persist. Black communities and frontline communities have long suffered 
from disinvestment and lack of resources. Past NAACP analysis has demonstrated that race, ethnicity, 
or language spoken had the strongest relationship to slow and inadequate enforcement of the SDWA 
of any sociodemographic characteristic analyzed. The final LCRI is a rare opportunity to make 
significant changes in the lives of millions of people in Ohio, and to provide a measure of 
environmental justice which these families are owed, and we encourage this administration to build on 
the progress made in the proposed rule by strengthening the final rule further.   
   
Sincerely,   
 
Tom Roberts 
 
 
Tom Roberts, President  
Ohio State Conference of NAACP Branches  
Former State Senator Tom Roberts  
  
Cc: Dr. Will Pinn, Environmental and Climate Justice, Chair   
Ohio Conference of NAACP Branches NAACP

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0939 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1019 Congress, 15th Floor, Houston, TX 77002-1700 | 713-274-5258 |  
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
Via Federal eRulemaking Portal: regulations.gov 
Michael S. Regan  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: Harris County Attorney’s Office Comment on the Lead and Copper Rule Improvement 
Rulemaking; Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Dear Administrator Regan,  
 
The Harris County Attorney’s Office (HCA) appreciates the opportunity to submit comment on 
the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulation for lead and copper in the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) under 
the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA). EPA published the proposed rule in the 
Federal Register on December 6, 2023, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801.  
 
The proposed LCRI would revise the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) which was 
promulgated on January 15, 2021. After President Biden issued Executive Order 13990 
(“Executive Order on Protecting Public Health and the Environment and Restoring Science to 
Tackle the Climate Crisis”) which directed the heads of all Federal agencies to immediately review 
regulations that may be inconsistent with, or present obstacles to, the policy it establishes, EPA 
conducted a review of the LCRR and concluded there were significant opportunities to improve 
the rule. HCA acknowledges and commends EPA for considering shortcomings in the LCRR 
through significant revisions proposed in the LCRI.  
  
Texas has among the highest proportion of lead service lines in the country, with EPA estimating 
that more than 647,000 water lines in Texas are made of lead which accounts for approximately 
7% of the State’s water lines.1 Harris County is the largest county in Texas and the third largest in 
the country. There are approximately 1,200 public drinking water systems in Harris County, 
ranging from the City of Houston’s, which is the largest in Texas, to many that are among the 
state’s smallest. HCA writes in general support of the proposed LCRI. Particularly, HCA supports 
EPA’s goal of completely removing LSLs, the removal of the lead trigger level, and reduction of 
the lead action level. However, HCA raises several questions and concerns regarding the feasibility 
 
1 Erin Douglas, Texas has the fifth-highest percentage of water pipes made of lead, TEX. TRIB., (Apr. 4, 2023, 3:00 
PM), https://www.texastribune.org/2023/04/04/texas-lead-water-lines-epa/; 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs 
Survey 
and 
Assessment, 
EPA, 
(Apr. 
2023), 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-
04/Final_DWINSA%20Public%20Factsheet%204.4.23.pdf. 

 2 
 
 
 
of compliance, disparate impacts on environmental justice communities, and the sufficiency of 
protections in schools and childcare facilities. 
 
HCA requests EPA to reconsider available exemptions to the 10-year LSLR deadline and 
provide guidance to states in determining feasibility of a system to conduct LSLR at a faster rate 
than required by the proposed LCRI.  
 
The current LCRR, requires water systems to replace LSLs and Galvanized Requiring 
Replacement (GRR) service lines only after exceeding the lead action or trigger level. HCA 
supports the proposed LCRI mandating full replacement of LSLs and GRR service lines 
independent from tap sampling and monitoring requirements. The LCRI implements a 10-year 
compliance deadline with a minimum average annual replacement rate of 10 percent calculated 
across a rolling three-year period. EPA proposes to retain the LCRR provision that requires states 
to set a faster replacement rate where feasible for a system. HCA requests EPA provide guidance 
and clarify what factors a state should consider when determining whether it is feasible for a system 
to conduct LSLR at a faster rate and in establishing an adjusted rate.   
 
In contrast to the more stringent replacement rate imposed on systems that can feasibly replace 
LSLs at a faster rate, the LCRI proposes to allow “deferred service line replacement” deadlines for 
eligible water systems. EPA proposes to extend a deferred service line replacement deadline to 
eligible systems to which the 10-year deadline is infeasible, which includes systems that would 
have to replace more than ten thousand service lines per year. HCA asks EPA to reconsider an 
exemption potentially extending the compliance deadline for decades to systems serving 
communities with among the highest proportions of LSLs. Rather, HCA requests EPA consider 
structuring LSLR deadlines in a way which prioritizes most at risk communities and systems with 
the highest proportions of LSLs.  
 
HCA is concerned with the challenges small and rural systems will endure under the 10-year 
deadline for LSLR proposed under the LCRI considering the extensive resources that will be 
required to comply with the annual replacement rate coupled with increased costs and demand for 
labor and materials. With the exception of those systems eligible for deferred service line 
replacement, under the proposed LCRI all community water systems and non-transient non-
community water systems across the nation will be replacing LSLs within the same time frame. It 
is critical that EPA not underestimate the resource implications of the 10-year deadline, 
particularly for older, smaller, and economically disadvantaged communities.  
 
HCA suggests considering flexibility in LSLR deadlines for small systems that can demonstrate a 
low risk for lead exposure or that have already replaced a certain amount of service lines in its 
system. Because the LCRI proposes to reduce the threshold for a “small system” from those 
serving 10,000 or fewer persons to those serving 3,300 persons or fewer, flexibility would be 
limited to those systems which are significantly smaller and most likely to incur these types of 
challenges.  
 

3 
 
 
 
HCA is concerned EJ communities will not have equitable access to LSLR and be 
disproportionally affected by lead exposure. HCA requests EPA provide robust guidelines and 
minimum criteria regarding LSLR plans, including for prioritization and funding strategies.  
 
Under the LCRI, EPA proposes to remove any statement addressing how a water system should 
or should not cover the cost of replacing service lines under the control of the system and any 
statement on whether a system is or is not responsible for the cost of full-service line replacements. 
Rather, EPA strongly encourages customer-side service line replacement to be offered at no direct 
cost to the customer wherever possible. HCA is concerned that without a more explicit directive 
regarding the allocation of costs for customer-side replacements, low-income and minority 
communities will not have equitable access to LSLR and be at risk for increased lead exposure.  
 
In Harris County, 45% of households are rented with renters expected to represent the majority of 
households in the next twenty years.2  The majority of Harris County renters consist of minorities 
with approximately 36% of black households owning their homes compared to the nearly 70% of 
white households owning their home.3 Requiring customers to pay for the private-portions of 
service lines often leaves low-income homeowners and landlords unable or unwilling to pay for 
LSLR – disproportionately affecting low-income communities and communities of color resulting 
in higher risks of lead exposure from their water.4 Furthermore, many Harris County residents are 
at risk for other exposures to lead. While the exact number of homes that still contain lead-based 
paint is unknown, it is estimated that approximately 55,000 houses in Harris County outside of 
Houston were constructed before the ban on lead-based paint was enacted in 1978.5  
 
Under the LCRI, EPA proposes that a service line replacement plan consist of several elements 
which are aimed to improve the equitable outcomes of replacement, including that systems identify 
a replacement prioritization and funding strategy for conducting full service line replacement. One 
of these elements is that systems create a strategy to achieve full LSLR at rental properties to 
reduce instances in which LSLs are not replaced and create disparities in situations in which 
landlords refuse access.  
 
Considering the large proportion of Harris County residents that reside in rental properties, 
particularly those of color, HCA raises concerns regarding the allocation of costs for customer-
side portion replacements of lead and GRR service lines. EPA proposes systems be required to 
compile a LSLR plan which addresses targeting replacement of lines in environmental justice 
communities and low-income communities; however, HCA requests that EPA provide robust 
guidance on what is to be considered by systems in developing a LSLR plan specifically for those 
communities most at risk of lead exposure and limited access to LSLR. Additionally, HCA asks 
 
2 Stephen Averill Sherman, Ph.D. et al., The 2023 State of Housing in Harris County and Houston, KINDER INST. FOR 
URB. RSCH., RICE UNIV., 5, (Jul. 2023), https://rice.app.box.com/s/kpzz1a5toi4sycxw1e1bpt1xk86fvggq. 
3 Id. at 7. 
4 Getting the Lead Out- Removing Lead Pipes Would Yield Hundreds of Billions of Dollars in Health Benefits, NAT’L 
RES. DEF. COUNS., 9, (Oct. 2023), https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/2023-10/getting-lead-out-health-benefits-
ib.pdf. 
5 Rebekah Ward, Harris County residents are still finding toxic lead paint in homes, 40 years after it was banned, 
HOUST. 
CHRON., 
(Oct. 
5, 
2023, 
6:17 
PM), 
https://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/houston-
texas/environment/article/toxic-lead-exposure-harris-county-remediation-18296184.php. 

 4 
 
 
 
that EPA provide more detailed information and education on opportunities for available funding 
to replace customer-portion service lines and that EPA make this information readily available to 
the public.  
 
HCA requests EPA to provide further guidance regarding a system’s determination of whether 
the customer-owned portion is within the system’s control. 
 
Under the proposed LCRI, systems would only be required to replace all lead and GRR service 
lines and any lead connectors encountered that are “under control” of the water system. EPA 
proposes to treat a service line as under a systems control wherever a system has adequate legal 
and physical access. HCA acknowledges that legal access will vary among state and local laws; 
however, HCA asks EPA to reconsider delineating prerequisites or elements of physical access to 
reduce the occurrence of conflicting interpretations of physical access and potential risks of 
circumventing a system’s obligation to replace service lines.   
 
HCA asks EPA to consider available incentives to increase installation of filters and increased 
testing at tap locations more frequently in schools and childcare facilities.  
 
In 2021, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services identified Texas as one of the states 
with the highest concentration of children with elevated blood lead levels.6 Houston Independent 
School District (HISD) voluntarily partnered with the Texas Commission on Environmental 
Quality (TCEQ) to test for lead in its drinking water during the 2016-2017 school year. HISD has 
approximately 194,607 students, 90% of which were reported as minorities and 59.5% as 
economically disadvantaged.7  
 
 Preliminary testing of HISD water resulted in nearly half of the district’s participating schools 
reporting lead in the water from drinking fountains, classroom faucets, and other outlets throughout 
each campus.8 Particularly concerning was the fact that ten HISD schools reported at least one site 
indicating the presence of 100 ppm of lead in the water. 9 Almost half of the district outlets that 
tested above the LCRR action level of 15 ppm were from drinking fountains.10  
 
EPA has concluded that the levels of lead measured at the tap are variable due to numerous factors 
including the individual site’s plumbing, characteristics of the water, length of time the water is in 
contact with the material, and consumer use patterns. This is particularly important when 
contemplating potential lead exposure in schools and childcare facilities considering that these 
facilities experience periods of time in which water is sparingly used allowing lead in pipes and 
other fixtures to leach into the water.  
 
6 See id. 
7 Houston Independent School District, U.S. NEWS, https://www.usnews.com/education/k12/texas/districts/houston-
isd-104364, (last visited Feb. 5, 2024). 
8 Megan Menchaca & Anastasia Goodwin, Dozens of HISD schools found to have high levels of lead in drinking 
water, TCEQ data shows, HOUST. CHRON., (Oct. 9, 2023), https://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/houston-
texas/education/article/houston-isd-lead-drinking-water-sources-report-18433762.php 
9 See Lead Testing in School and Child Care Program, TCEQ, https://www.txleadtesting.org/public-results (last 
visited Feb. 5, 2024); see also id. 
10 See Menchaca & Goodwin, supra, note 8. 

5 
 
 
 
 
Recognizing variability in sampling, patterns of use, and susceptibility of individuals at risk at 
these facilities, HCA requests EPA to consider more stringent sampling requirements in the LCRI, 
including sampling at more taps within the facility, and more frequent sampling independent of 
sampling upon request. Furthermore, EPA should consider incentivizing schools and childcare 
facilities to engage in the installation of point of use filters to reduce risks of lead exposure.  
 
*** 
 
In conclusion, HCA supports EPA’s proposed revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulation for lead and copper in the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements; however, 
HCA has concerns regarding the feasibility of compliance and practical implications of the 
proposed rule. HCA appreciates the work EPA has done to improve public health protections 
against lead exposure and the opportunity to comment. If you have any questions, please reach out 
to Brennan.Flannery@harriscountytx.gov.  
 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
CHRISTIAN D. MENEFEE 
Harris County Attorney 
JONATHAN G. C. FOMBONNE 
First Assistant County Attorney 
TIFFANY S. BINGHAM 
Managing Counsel, Affirmative Litigation, 
Environmental & Compliance 
SARAH J. UTLEY 
Division Director, Environmental 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   _______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Brennan Flannery 
Assistant County Attorney 
Environmental Division 
State Bar No. 24125772 
1019 Congress, 15th Floor 
Houston, Texas  77002 
Telephone:  713-274-5285 
Facsimile:  (713) 437-4211 
Email: Brennan.Flannery@harriscountytx.gov

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0821 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0945 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1
Andrea Seifert
From:
Stan Van Wagenen <Stanley.VanWagenen@lvvwd.com>
Sent:
Tuesday, January 14, 2020 4:02 PM
To:
Ross Cooper; Andrea Seifert
Cc:
Justin Hanks; Cynthia Williams
Subject:
Rainbow Canyon Lead AL Exceedance and Water Usage
Ross, Andrea: 
We had a look back at usage at the three homes in Rainbow Canyon that exceeded the AL for lead.  Two of three had no 
usage to speak of.  We know that we won’t be able to provide CCT for their premise plumbing without consistent usage, 
let alone no usage.  Would you have a few minutes to discuss this with me sometime tomorrow or Thursday?   
 
Thanks, 
Stan 
 
From: Stephen Anderson <stephen.anderson@lvvwd.com>  
Sent: Thursday, January 9, 2020 12:34 PM 
To: Stan Van Wagenen <Stanley.VanWagenen@lvvwd.com> 
Subject: RE: Scanned image from LABM3 
 
Stan 
 
Use by # for the past several Months 
 
232 Alpine Way – No use in the past 18 Months so no coating of premise plumbing

2
 
 
311 Ski Trail – No use for the past 18 Months 

3
 
369 Moritz Way – use every Month 

4
 
 
-----Original Message----- 
From: Stan Van Wagenen <Stanley.VanWagenen@lvvwd.com>  
Sent: Thursday, January 09, 2020 12:23 PM 
To: Stephen Anderson <stephen.anderson@lvvwd.com> 
Subject: FW: Scanned image from LABM3 
 
Steve: 

5
Attached is the report form for KYLE CANYON's Lead and Copper results.  Samples 9. 10, and 11 are over the 
AL. 
 
Thanks, 
Stan 
 
-----Original Message----- 
From: LABM3@lvvwd.com <LABM3@lvvwd.com>  
Sent: Thursday, January 9, 2020 12:25 PM 
To: Stan Van Wagenen <Stanley.VanWagenen@lvvwd.com> 
Subject: Scanned image from LABM3 
 
Reply to: Stan Van Wagenen <stanley.vanwagenen@lvvwd.com> Device Name: LABM3 Device Model: MX-
3070N 
Location: LABS 1st FLR - South Wing  
 
File Format: PDF (Medium) 
Resolution: 300dpi x 300dpi 
 
Attached file is scanned image in PDF format. 
Use Acrobat(R)Reader(R) or Adobe(R)Reader(R) of Adobe Systems Incorporated to view the document. 
Adobe(R)Reader(R) can be downloaded from the following URL: 
Adobe, the Adobe logo, Acrobat, the Adobe PDF logo, and Reader are registered trademarks or trademarks of 
Adobe Systems Incorporated in the United States and other countries. 
 
            http://www.adobe.com/

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0965 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
Ms. Radhika Fox 
Assistant Administrator Office of Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, D.C.  20460 
 
Re: 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
 
Dear Ms. Fox: 
 
The South Dakota Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources (DANR) appreciates the 
opportunity to provide comments on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. South 
Dakota supports reducing lead exposure from drinking water and increasing public health 
protection; however, the proposed rule creates a significant burden on the state programs 
responsible for implementing the revised rule and public water systems impacted by the 
proposed rule revisions. 
 
Many of South Dakota’s public water systems are defined as Small Water Systems. In general, 
small systems have limited resources. DANR is very concerned that the impacts of the proposed 
rule will be overly burdensome on these systems, resulting in lower compliance rates which will 
undermine consumer confidence. 
 
The proposed rule improvements are numerous and extremely complex. DANR offers the 
following general comments for specific issues important to South Dakota. Additionally, DANR 
request that EPA carefully consider the comments received from the Environmental Council of 
States, the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators, and the American Water Works 
Association, which are more extensive and provide greater technical detail.  
 
Distribution System and Site Assessment (DSSA): 
 
The proposed rule states that within 30 days of receiving sample results, water systems must 
collect and analyze a follow-up sample at any tap sample site that exceeds 0.010 mg/L and 
collect water quality samples at a site located within a half mile radius of that sample site. South 
Dakota is a rural state and many systems would be challenged to find a sampling location within 
a half-mile radius of the original sample location. DANR suggests that the EPA add additional 
language allowing systems to take a sample at the closest site to the original sampling site should 
one not be available within a half-mile radius.  Additionally, DANR is concerned with the lack 
of resources to train operators and regulatory staff on which components of the DSSA a water 
system will be required to complete.  
 

 
 
Filter Distribution: 
 
The proposed rule states that water systems must provide filters to their entire service area after 
the water system has had three or more action level exceedances. DANR is concerned that by 
having to provide filters to an entire service area, rather than solely to those locations with risks 
of lead and copper exceedances, which are locations with: lead or galvanized service lines 
requiring replacement or unknown service lines; customers will develop an unwarranted distrust 
in their water utility. DANR requests EPA allow states the discretion to require filters, where 
appropriate based on sampling results, data, and corrosion control.  
 
Public Notification: 
 
The proposed rule adds lead exceedances to the list of Tier 1violation’s requiring a 24-hour 
public notice. Tier 1 based exceedances have the potential to have serious adverse health effects 
on human health because of short-term exposure. DANR feels that requiring systems to public 
notice lead exceedances within 24 hours will cause implementation issues for states and water 
systems. One of the most significant issues is the current EPA method allows laboratories to hold 
onto samples after being preserved for several months after the sampling occurred. It does not 
make sense to require systems to report the sample results within 24 hours for samples that may 
have been collected many weeks or months earlier. To remedy this inconsistency, DANR 
recommends that the Tier 1 public notice requirement be changed to a Tier II public notice 
requirement. This change will permit states and water systems to properly assess the sample 
validity and allow adequate time to coordinate the appropriate public notice. If EPA is unwilling 
to change the public notice timing, then at a minimum, DANR recommends that EPA update the 
standard method to reduce the time a laboratory must analyze a sample so a water system to 
achieve timely notification of results to its customers. 
 
Required Testing in Schools and Daycares: 
 
Under the proposed rule, community water systems would be required to conduct lead sampling 
at all schools and all licensed daycares within its distribution system, excluding those constructed 
after 2014 or those facilities who have had full plumbing replacement. While we support testing 
of lead in schools and childcare facilities, the water system should not be considered the experts 
when it comes to plumbing and remediation services within the schools and daycares. This 
requirement will place a great burden upon the small water system with limited resources. 
DANR recommends that any required remediation work be the responsibility of the property 
owner and not be a burden of the public water system. Additionally, with different sampling 
requirements at schools and daycares and the continuous state of flux of daycare facilities, 
DANR has great concern regarding how sampling data from schools and daycares will be 
tracked and managed for compliance. EPA must also communicate where funding and resources 
are available to school and daycares and that they convey that information directly to these 
entities, as well as provide all templates for any public education material that is required.  
 
Data Management/Guidance/Training: 
 
Each of the changes outlined within the proposed revisions increase rather than decrease 
implementation challenges. It is imperative that a fully functional data system be in place a 
minimum of six months prior the rule effective date. Without a proper and functional means to 
manage all the data elements of the final rule, states and systems will be unable to implement or 
comply with the rule. EPA does not currently have a data system in place to manage all the data 

 
 
points required to be collected under the proposed rule. DANR requests that EPA makes 
available all database guidance on implementing the rule If a state must design its own, there will 
be substantial cost to an already stretched state budget.   
 
South Dakota is requesting that guidance documents and training be finalized and shared as soon 
as possible.  The effective date of the rule should be at least six months prior to implementation 
to allow adequate time for training. In addition, DANR requests that clarity and continuity be 
brought into the rule revisions for all applicable water systems.   
 
Corrosion Control Studies: 
 
Corrosion control requirements need to be updated to reflect clear definitions about what will be 
required in a study. Guidance and training should be provided to states on how to review 
corrosion control studies and water quality parameter testing.  
 
Funding:  
 
This proposed rule’s complex nature adds significant requirements to systems and states which 
will surpass most small systems ability to comply. This, in effect, shifts even more burden to 
state programs as they will be required to pull along systems struggling to comply. State 
programs are already stretched to the breaking point. With years of flat or rescission-based 
funding, states will be hard pressed to implement these rule revisions unless significant funding 
increases to the Public Water System Supervision grants are authorized and made available to 
states. Without additional grant funding, state programs will be unable to fully implement the 
rule without adversely impacting other core program areas which in turn reduces overall public 
health protection.   
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Mark A. McIntire, P.E. 
Drinking Water Program Administrator 
South Dakota Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources 
 
 
 
cc: Hunter Roberts, Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources 
      Megan Goltz, Policy Advisor, Governor’s Office 
      Ben Grumbles, Executive Director, Environmental Council of States 
      Alan Roberson, P.E., Executive Director, Association of State Drinking Water Administrators

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0734 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0914 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
2375 Cabot Drive 
 
 
 
Lisle, Illinois 60532-3696 USA 
 
 
 
Phone 630-505-0160 
 
 
 
Fax 630-505-963 
https://wqa.org/ 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
Michael Goldberg,  
Standards and Risk Management Division,  
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.  
Washington, DC 20460   
 
 
RE: EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg, 
 
On behalf of the Water Quality Association (WQA), a not-for-profit trade association with more 
than 2,500 member companies representing the residential, commercial, and industrial water 
treatment industry, we are writing to you in support of the proposed Lead & Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI). The proposed rule is pivotal in addressing lead contamination in drinking 
water by strengthening public health protections and WQA commends the Administration for 
taking this important action. To further enhance these efforts, WQA offers its expertise to the 
EPA for developing comprehensive educational resources, guidance on lead contamination, and 
using certified water treatment systems to minimize exposure.  
 
About WQA 
Since its creation in 1974, WQA has worked tirelessly to improve water quality through 
sustainable technologies and services. As a leader in the point-of-use (POU) and point-of-entry 
(POE) drinking water treatment system industry, the association operates an ANSI National 
Accreditation Board (ANAB) accredited testing and certification laboratory that evaluates and 
certifies water treatment systems to nationally accepted voluntary standards for contaminant 
removal, including lead. WQA also offers a variety of technical skills and educational resources, 
many of which can serve as vital tools to the EPA, Utilities, and other organizations looking to 
address drinking water contaminants.  
 
WQA Comments on LCRI  
The proposed LCRI puts the U.S. on the path to dramatically reduce Americans’ exposure to this 
neurotoxin by strengthening key elements to address lead reduction in drinking water. Enabling a 
cohesive approach for water systems to locate lead service lines and improvements to tap 
sampling requirements are crucial first steps in understanding the extent of lead contamination. 
Moreover, lowering the action level to 10 µg/L for lead provides clarity and fixes a gap in the 

 
 
2375 Cabot Drive 
 
 
 
Lisle, Illinois 60532-3696 USA 
 
 
 
Phone 630-505-0160 
 
 
 
Fax 630-505-963 
https://wqa.org/ 
regulation, which may have led to a delayed response in treatment and mitigation efforts. All of 
these actions are central to ensuring that resources are allocated effectively and streamlined to 
communities that are most at risk and least equipped to address lead in their drinking water. 
WQA also applauds EPA’s emphasis on public education materials – a cornerstone to 
empowering stakeholders in understanding the nuances of lead contamination and treatment 
options.  
 
WQA supports the requirement that certified point-of-use water treatment products be made 
available to customers of water systems with multiple lead action level exceedances, so they may 
immediately reduce lead exposure while waiting for lead service lines to be replaced. WQA also 
supports the proposed rule’s flexibility, which allows small systems to continue to use alternative 
compliance mechanisms, such as certified point-of-use products. These devices are proven to be 
effective, affordable, and immediate at reducing lead in water. In some instances, point-of-entry 
filtration devices should be used as well.  
 
The EPA requested comments on several sections of the proposed rule. WQA is willing to 
provide the following insights: 
  
EPA is requesting comment on the ability of the market to correct for potential shortages: 
• The water treatment industry is ready to respond rapidly to any potential shortages 
in the services needed to address lead contamination. WQA and its members are 
already serving as a proven partner by assisting several cities in addressing lead, 
including during service line replacement. With multiple manufacturers producing 
certified water treatment products, municipalities should have a bevy of options to 
purchase large quantities of filters. The industry does not anticipate a shortage in 
supplies or labor and WQA is willing to prepare a list of certified products and 
professionals to help municipalities address lead issues.  
 
• In the years leading up to the enforcement date, the EPA should collaborate with 
WQA to strengthen technical assistance availability through workforce 
development – especially in underserved and rural areas. WQA’s professional 
certification program is prepared to provide the resources needed to educate and 
support the development of an expanded workforce to address water quality 
issues.  
 
EPA is proposing to require water systems with multiple action level exceedances to 
make filters certified to reduce lead and replacement cartridges, along with instructions 
for their use, available to all consumers. 
 

 
 
2375 Cabot Drive 
 
 
 
Lisle, Illinois 60532-3696 USA 
 
 
 
Phone 630-505-0160 
 
 
 
Fax 630-505-963 
https://wqa.org/ 
• Third-party certified POU devices have been used in several cities (e.g., Newark, 
Pittsburgh, Kalamazoo, Benton Harbor, Eglin, and Denver) to address lead 
contamination and are success stories on how POU devices can serve a variety of 
communities immediately. WQA supports the requirement that certified POU 
devices be made available to all consumers of water systems that have multiple 
lead action level exceedances. This will allow the public to significantly mitigate 
lead exposure as an interim while finding and addressing the source of lead 
contamination in drinking water. WQA also supports the proposed rule’s 
flexibility, which allows small systems to continue to use alternative compliance 
mechanisms, such as certified POU devices. These devices have been proven to 
be an effective, affordable, and readily available solution, and water systems, 
including those that serve up to 10,000 people, should not be restricted from 
utilizing this mitigation option. 
 
• To assist with the implementation of POU filter compliance programs, the EPA 
should consider the use of Drinking Water State Revolving Funds (DWSRFs) and 
provide guidance to states.  
 
EPA is proposing to revise the regulatory language regarding filter distribution to clarify 
that water systems are required to provide filters and replacement cartridges to every 
occupancy, rather than residence.  
 
• WQA strongly supports providing certified filters and replacement cartridges to 
every occupant. Oftentimes, renters face unique challenges in accessing and 
implementing water quality measures. Unlike homeowners, they may not have the 
authority to make building infrastructure changes or install permanent fixtures. 
This shift in regulatory language will help clarify and address a historical 
unintended oversight. By emphasizing the provision of filters to every occupant, 
the EPA is taking a more inclusive approach to safeguarding public health, 
ensuring that individuals in various living arrangements benefit from lead 
exposure reduction measures. 
 
EPA proposes to determine that allowing these systems [CWSs serving 3,300 persons or 
fewer] to install point-of-use devices or conduct lead-bearing plumbing replacements is 
consistent with the statutory standard for a treatment technique rule. EPA is requesting 
comment, however, on whether the Agency should maintain the small system flexibility 
for CWSs serving 10,000 persons or fewer (see section IX. of this document).  
 
• Third-party certified POU devices have already been used by water systems and 
have a proven track record in effectively treating lead in drinking water. We 
encourage the EPA to continue to allow flexibility for utilizing this effective and 
affordable technology for all system sizes. As stated previously, water systems 

 
 
2375 Cabot Drive 
 
 
 
Lisle, Illinois 60532-3696 USA 
 
 
 
Phone 630-505-0160 
 
 
 
Fax 630-505-963 
https://wqa.org/ 
including those that serve up to 10,000 people should not be restricted of 
mitigation options and should continue to have the ability to choose a solution 
that fits their unique needs. Although concerns have been expressed by 
stakeholders regarding the continuous maintenance of POU devices, proper 
educational materials on filter use and strategies to distribute replacement 
cartridges for consumers can help address this issue. Furthermore, water filtration 
systems continue to evolve with new design options that can assist with 
implementation on a larger scale. This technology will continue to improve in the 
time between the finalized rule and enforcement date. WQA is also willing to 
work with its members and the EPA to provide “best practices” for 
communication and project management that will result in the successful 
deployment of this technology.  
 
EPA is seeking comment on the minimum requirements for States to provide a waiver 
(e.g., should the waiver be limited to locations where the filter use is required by State or 
local law; should the waiver be limited to locations where State or local law requires 
periodic sampling or testing to ensure proper filter use).  
 
• Filter-first approaches to school and childcare facilities are an effective and 
growing trend across the country. WQA supports a waiver for states that have laws 
that require periodic sampling or testing to ensure proper filter use and can 
subsequently minimize the burden on water systems in ensuring compliance.  
 
EPA is also requesting comment on alternative approaches following multiple lead 
action level exceedances, including requiring water systems to deliver a filter and 
replacement cartridges to every household served by the system.  
• WQA supports EPA’s approach in ensuring that every household and in the case of 
multi-unit residences, each occupant, be provided with third-party certified filters 
and replacement cartridges. To maximize effective program implementation, the 
EPA should consider increasing public awareness campaigns during lead service 
line replacement and disseminating information in a variety of media channels. 
Although stakeholders have highlighted that a portion of the filters distributed may 
go unused, WQA strongly urges the EPA to clarify that utilities and water systems 
should use “opt-out” language when distributing filters instead of requiring the 
end-user to have to “opt-in.” This will ultimately ensure that the public has 
received the necessary support to minimize lead exposure in drinking water.  
EPA is proposing to maintain the requirement that filter replacement cartridges be 
provided for six months [after service line replacement]…EPA is [also] proposing to 
require risk mitigation actions following disturbances resulting from physical action or 
vibration. 

 
 
2375 Cabot Drive 
 
 
 
Lisle, Illinois 60532-3696 USA 
 
 
 
Phone 630-505-0160 
 
 
 
Fax 630-505-963 
https://wqa.org/ 
 
• Sediment from lead service line replacement or other disturbances (including water 
meter replacement, pipe cutting, and mechanical or vacuum excavation during 
service line material investigations) can continue to contaminate the drinking water 
even after project completion. WQA believes that filter replacement cartridges 
should be provided for a minimum of 6 months in alignment with the proposed 
rule. However, studies have shown that contamination can last up to 18 months in 
some circumstances.1 Therefore, water systems should monitor for lead until it's 
confirmed to be below the set AL. Moreover, as a precautionary measure, WQA 
supports requiring risk mitigation actions such as providing filters to the end-user 
when their service lines are made of unknown materials.  
EPA is requesting comment on the ability and practicality of point-of-use devices to 
address multiple contaminants. 
 
• Point-of-use devices have the ability to address multiple contaminants and using 
them to combat lead would likely result in several additional benefits. NSF/ANSI 
53 for example offers up to sixty-five different elective claims including PFAS, 
Cyst, and Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs), in addition to lead. According to 
WQA’s online database of certified water treatment technologies, 81% of POU 
certified to remove lead are also certified to remove other contaminants. Our 
database shows some of these POU products were certified to remove or reduce 
up to 25 contaminants. 
 
EPA is also proposing requiring public education materials to explain that using a filter 
certified by an American National Standards Institute accredited certifier to reduce lead 
is effective in reducing lead levels in drinking water. EPA is proposing this change to 
ensure that consumers are made aware that filters are an effective option for reducing 
lead in drinking water. 
  
• Providing resources and guidance is essential in educating the public on water 
quality issues and solutions. WQA welcomes collaboration with EPA on 
developing easily understandable guidance containing treatment options. 
Moreover, the EPA should have utilities share the EPA’s consumer tool for POU 
filters, which already contains the relevant certification bodies (e.g. WQA, 
IAPMO, NSF, etc.) and associated certification marks. Additionally, the EPA 
should consider including information on where to locate and find products, such 
as WQA’s product certification database and search tool. When navigating the 
complexities of drinking water challenges, it's paramount to recognize and 
 
1 https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.7b01720  

 
 
2375 Cabot Drive 
 
 
 
Lisle, Illinois 60532-3696 USA 
 
 
 
Phone 630-505-0160 
 
 
 
Fax 630-505-963 
https://wqa.org/ 
reference these groups so consumers and government officials can easily find 
certified drinking water solutions. The EPA also should correct the language in the 
final rule and subsequent materials referring to certifiers. The correct reference 
would be “using a water filter certified for reducing lead in drinking water by a 
third-party certifying body accredited by the American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI) National Accreditation Board (ANAB) and follow the manufacturer's 
instructions for use and maintenance.” Both of these comments should be taken 
into consideration when finalizing the EPA’s proposal for a revised Lead 
Informational Statement. 
 
WQA’s mission and vision sit on the pillar of improving awareness and knowledge of water 
quality. Leveraging the expertise of organizations like WQA can significantly contribute to 
public awareness and understanding, ultimately empowering individuals to make informed 
decisions about their water quality. We urge that the EPA consider working with WQA on 
providing resources to the public and are here to support the agency in its efforts to reduce lead 
in drinking water.  
 
Thank you in advance for the consideration of these comments, and we welcome any opportunity 
to meet with you to discuss these recommendations in greater detail.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Jeremy Pollack 
Director of Government Affairs 
Water Quality Association  
jpollack@wqa.org

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0827 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1345 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Rick L. Callender, Esq.
President
Reverend Jethroe Moore II
1st Vice President
Zephanii Smith-Eisenstat
2nd Vice President
Naomi Rainey Pierson
3rd Vice President
LaJuana Bivens
Secretary/State Director
Ida M. Johnson
Assistant Secretary
Olivia Verrett
2nd Assistant Secretary
Carolyn Veal-Hunter
Treasurer
Satia Austin
Area Director - Southeast
Darrell Goode
Area Director - Southwest
Delois Richards
Area Director - Coastal
Dave Smith
Area Director - North
Regina Hatcher-Crawford
Area Director - Central
Freddye Davis
Area Director - West
Alice A. Huffman, Ph.D.
President Emeritus
February 5, 2024
Michael S. Regan, Administrator
US Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
RE: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, National Primary
Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements
Dear Administrator Regan,
The NAACP State Conference of California-Hawaii submits the following comments
regarding the US Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary
Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”). The
California-Hawaii NAACP State Conference provides leadership for local branches,
youth councils, and college chapters for environmental and climate justice needs in
California and Hawaii. The NAACP and its Center for Environmental and Climate
Justice have a longstanding interest in ensuring that issues of community
engagement and environmental justice center Black communities and frontline
communities are most impacted, including communities in California and Hawaii.
California-Hawaii NAACP State Conference applauds EPA for proposing stronger
regulations to protect communities from lead in drinking water. Lead in drinking water
has been a historically prevalent issue in Black communities, posing extreme risks to
the health of young people, mothers, and their families. In California, estimates
suggest that there are as many as 65,000 lead service lines, with Hawaii having 2,800,
threatening families across our state with exposure to a potent and irreversible
neurotoxin which, even at low levels of exposure, is linked to damage to the brain and
nervous system, learning disabilities, shorter stature, impaired hearing, and harm to
blood cells. In California, we would derive $5,557,500,000 in public health cost savings
from full lead service line replacement and $239,400,000 for Hawaii.
A significant portion of California’s drinking water infrastructure, including lead service
lines and components, is outdated and in need of replacement. In 2016, Fresno
residents were concerned about “rusty, discolored water” coming from their pipes.
Nearly 14% of children tested in one Fresno neighborhood had reported high lead
levels, 25% of schools in Fresno reported finding lead coming from their drinking water
fountains, and 40 homes had lead levels above the federal limit. Expanded testing
found an additional 300 homes had lead coming from their faucets, leading to class
action lawsuits. Fresno found that lead was leaching into their water through
corroding and unwrapped galvanized pipes.
For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong
elements of the proposed LCRI, such as the requirement for the removal of all lead
service lines in ten years, the requirements for water systems to sample both the first
and fifth liter of water passing through lead pipes and a lower action level; but also
ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes which undermine their goals and

ensure that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened.
Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule
does not leave black communities in California and Hawaii behind:
●
Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it is a
fundamental injustice that the communities with the most lead service lines
would be allowed 40 or more years to fix this issue.
●
Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines:
Removal can cost thousands of dollars, and putting the financial burden on
impacted communities will result in mostly wealthy neighborhoods having
lead service lines replaced. Removal and replacement do not make up major
proportions of utility budgets, and utilities should be expected to maximize the
use of available federal water infrastructure funds and other non-ratepayer
sources of funds to prioritize solving this crisis.
●
Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who spend many
hours there daily are not at risk of exposure: Black children face an increased
risk of lead exposure when compared with white children. The proposal’s
suggested testing program does not differ from past ineffective programs,
and EPA should move towards incentivizing the installation of filters and
protecting children.
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components
would allow for environmental injustice to persist. Black communities and frontline
communities have long suffered from disinvestment and lack of resources. Past
NAACP analysis has demonstrated that race, ethnicity, or language spoken had the
strongest relationship to slow and inadequate enforcement of the SDWA of any
sociodemographic characteristic analyzed. The final LCRI is a rare opportunity to
make significant changes in the lives of millions of people in California and Hawaii and
to provide a measure of environmental justice that these families are owed. We
encourage this administration to build on the progress made in the proposed rule by
strengthening the final rule further.
Respectfully,
Rick Callender
President
NAACP CA/HI State Conference

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1100 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N. W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
*Comments submitted to the Federal eRulemaking Portal 
RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (Docket 
#: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036) 
Administrator Regan, 
The City of Thornton, Colorado (Thornton) appreciates the opportunity to partner with the EPA 
on continued improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule. As always, Thornton applauds the 
EPA’s efforts to protect public health from the risks of lead. Thornton offers the following 
comments to EPA to ensure that the proposed rule is properly informed and effective. 
1) General:  
Thornton concurs with the comments provided to the EPA by the Colorado Water Utility 
Council (CWUC). While LCRI is certainly an improvement over LCRR, there are still many 
areas that need clarification, correction, and simplification to increase compliance with 
the rule. In particular, the reporting and notification timelines are overly burdensome. 
The EPA should partner with water utilities to ensure that the rules they are 
promulgating are actually feasible to implement. Please strongly consider making the 
recommended changes proposed by CWUC.  
In general, Thornton believes that the promulgation of the LCRI (as well as LCRR) has 
been a fraught, clumsy process. It is completely unreasonable to modify rule 
requirements while utilities are in the process of working towards compliance deadlines. 
The addition of connectors to the Lead Service Line (LSL) inventory came after Thornton 
had already spent over $400,000 inventorying our system. Luckily for Thornton, the 
connector information was noted during the inventory process, but if another utility had 
not obtained that information during their inventory, they would be forced to perform 
another at considerable cost to their residents. With future rulemakings, please ensure 
you give utilities the best possible chance for compliance by looking at potential future 
requirements and reducing overlapping timeframes.  
 
2) Corrosion Control Treatment:  
Thornton has previously submitted comments to EPA against the use of ortho-
phosphate (ortho-P) as part of optimal corrosion control treatments (OCCT). Use of 
ortho-P as part of OCCT has the potential to significantly increase phosphorus loading in 

 
 
watersheds through wastewater discharges and returns from surface and groundwater 
flows from irrigated lawns. Increased phosphorus loading in the watershed will lead to 
increased occurrence of harmful algal blooms (HABs); increased HABs also leads to an 
increase in cyanotoxin occurrence, which are highly toxic compounds that the public can 
be exposed to through recreation in the watershed or through drinking water from 
utilities that are unable to effectively remove those compounds during the treatment 
process. Because of the increased health risks of cyanotoxins, if the EPA requires an 
upstream utility to implement ortho-P OCCT, they are effectively prioritizing the health 
of the upstream community over the health of Thornton’s residents.   
In Colorado, significant improvements in phosphorus loading have been realized 
through the nutrient criteria in CDPHE Regulation 85; the potential use of ortho-P for 
upstream entities’ OCCT could completely undo the progress that has been made to 
date. In addition, Thornton residents are already paying for phosphorus reduction 
through their wastewater rates (through the Metro Water Recovery district). If another 
entity within the Metro Water Recovery district is required to implement ortho-P OCCT, 
Thornton resident’s rates will increase to treat the increased ortho-P loading at Metro 
Water Recovery; Thornton has not violated the LCRI, but our residents will essentially 
and unfairly be forced to subsidize upstream OCCT. Likewise, even if Metro Water 
Recovery can fully remove the additional ortho-P loading, there is still the non-point 
source loading mentioned above that can increase cyanotoxin occurrence in Thornton’s 
drinking water reservoirs, thus necessitating costly capital improvements to Thornton’s 
water treatment plants; this is an additional undue cost burden on Thornton ratepayers 
to accommodate the impacts from upstream ortho-P OCCT.  
For these reasons, Thornton recommends that the EPA take a more holistic and multi-
barriered approach to OCCT than currently put forth in the LCRI as well as provide 
latitude in the OCCT approval process to consider downstream environmental and 
public health. Thornton maintains that when properly monitored, pH and alkalinity 
control is an effective, protective, and recommended treatment technique for reducing 
lead concentrations.  
In addition, Thornton believes that re-optimization of OCCT following an Action Level 
(AL) exceedance is a misappropriation of funds and resources that could be better 
applied elsewhere. Exceedances could be due to disruption of the distribution system 
during lead service line replacements and the number of exceedances would trend 
down as the utility progresses in their replacement project. The utility should be allowed 
to focus on LSL replacement instead of re-optimization. If the re-optimization provision 
is implemented, the EPA must grant state primacy agencies the ability to waive this 
requirement. Thornton also supports the proposed option to delay OCCT/re-
optimization until after the utility has replaced all of its LSLs. 
 

 
 
3) Service Line Replacement: 
Thornton believes that the State should have primacy on issues related to the service 
line replacement. In this section, and throughout other sections, EPA consistently 
suggests shortening timeframes and deadlines; Thornton recommends against these 
shortened timeframes. One reason Thornton recommends against tighter deadlines is 
that we still have not seen a market correction for supplies or labor since the onset of 
the COVID pandemic. Thornton does not feel that a market correction is imminent and 
believes the EPA should err on the side of caution by taking current shortages into 
account. Shortened timeframes and deadlines will strain an already overburdened 
market thus increasing prices and potentially necessitating rate increases to our 
residents. Thornton also disagrees that a maximum replacement threshold of 10,000 is 
appropriate; even 8,000 replacements annually would stretch resources too thin. While 
Thornton has not identified any LSLs or GRRs to date, we have seen supply chain and 
labor shortage issues on other projects that have resulted in increased costs and 
construction timelines not being met; the higher the EPA sets the threshold, the more 
shortages will be seen on the market and likely results in utilities unable to financially or 
timely comply with the rule. Additionally, Thornton has seen increased delays in 
construction projects due to climate change induced extreme weather. In Colorado in 
2023, we saw a late ground thaw and significant spring precipitation/flooding that 
would have reduced the replacement timeframe by a couple of months; a Colorado 
utility on a 10,000 per year replacement threshold would struggle to complete their 
replacements on that kind of reduced schedule. While Thornton agrees that LSLs should 
be replaced as quickly as possible, EPA should err on the smallest possible replacement 
threshold.  
 
4) Lead Action and Trigger Levels: 
Thornton supports the proposed lead AL of 10 ppb and does not support lowering the 
AL to 5 ppb. Thornton also agrees that special study samples, such as samples following 
LSL replacement, should not be considered in the 90th percentile calculation. As stated 
previously, Thornton suggests waiving requirements for OCCT after an AL exceedance so 
that utilities can focus on LSL replacement.  
 
5) Public Education: 
As stated previously, many of the proposed notification timeframes are overly 
burdensome. Requiring customer notification of lead results within 3 days is 
unreasonable, especially if the results are below the AL; Thornton proposes a 7-business 
day timeline for individual tap sampling results and consumer-initiated sampling results. 
The requirement for annual notification of lead connectors is unnecessary and will go on 
for too long considering connectors will only be replaced as needed. The suggestion by 

 
 
EPA to increase frequency of public education materials from annually to twice annually 
is administratively burdensome and likely takes away from the priority of replacing LSLs. 
 
6) Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances: 
It is entirely unreasonable and unnecessary for EPA to require utilities to provide point 
of use filters to all consumers within 60 days of multiple AL exceedances. Thornton 
estimates that providing filters for all of our ~160,000 customers would exceed 
$2,000,000. It is infeasible for Thornton to receive and distribute $2 million of filters 
within 60 days. Utilities should only be required to supply filters to those consumers 
impacted by an exceedance due to LSLs, GRRs, or Unknowns. 
 
7) Reporting and Recordkeeping:  
Thornton suggests that the EPA consider allowing States to use a phased approach for 
reviewing and approving site sampling plans to reduce administrative burden. States 
should start with utilities with the highest 90th percentile results and work down from 
there. 
Thornton would like to thank the EPA for taking these and prior comments into consideration 
during the finalization of the LCRI.  
Sincerely,  
 
Caleb Owen 
Water Quality Administrator 
City of Thornton  
9500 Civic Center Dr 
Thornton, CO 80229 
caleb.owen@thorntonco.gov 
303-255-7772

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0813 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Error! Unknown document property name. 
Comments of the Copper Development Association to: 
 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
Request for Public Comment 
Proposed Revisions to the National Primary Drink Water Regulation (NPDWR) for Lead and Copper 
 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 (December 6, 2023) 
 
Submitted via www.regulations.gov on February 3, 2024 
 
Introduction  
 
The Copper Development Association (CDA) is the North American based not-for-profit association of the global 
copper industry, influencing the use of copper and copper alloys through research, development, and education, 
as well as technical and end-user support. 
 
The copper industry is a major contributor to U.S. economic and national security, with the metal being a key 
component in the cars and trucks (internal combustion and EV’s), water lines, building materials, industrial 
machinery, electronic hardware, consumer products, battery storage and renewable energy sources that 
individuals need to carry out their daily business. Those companies manufacturing copper alloys and related 
products as well as the copper mines, refineries, and other members of the industry are responsible for a $160 
billion economic impact to the United States, supporting nearly 400,000 jobs across the country with $31 billion in 
wages paid. The copper industry also supports local and regional economies through the creation of downstream 
employment opportunities for plumbers, electricians, automotive workers, and electronics manufacturers. 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide these general comments in connection with the Environmental 
Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) request for comments on the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead 
and Copper: Improvements.  Overall, CDA supports the proposal and shares in the goal to eliminate harmful lead 
service lines (LSL) and galvanized requiring replacement (GRR) service lines across the country. 
 
Copper and copper alloy products have been used in water delivery applications for decades, and as such will be 
key – if not critical – construction materials and components in federally funded water infrastructure projects. 
Copper continues to be the preferred, alternate material for domestic water service and distribution for drinking, 
cooking, and sanitary purposes. Major cities have committed to using copper service lines as a safe and long-term 
solution for their communities, for example: Flint, Denver, Chicago, Newark, Fort Worth, Benton Harbor and 
Cleveland. In addition to being 100% recyclable, copper is impermeable, this means it is resilient against chemicals 
that may find it’s way into the ground can continues to protect communities. In addition, copper service lines form 
a protective coating (patina) when in contact with the water passing through it that renders it extremely resistant 
to corrosion. Based on the this, these comments focus primarily on lead and galvanized service line replacement, 
however, please consider CDA as a resource on other parts of the proposal affecting copper. 1   
 
1 For additional information on the historical use of copper in plumbing applications, as well as cost-savings over 
the life-cycle of copper products, please see:   
https://copper.org/applications/plumbing/water_service/city-officials.php 
 
 

 
 
2 
Lead & Galvanized Service Line Replacement Component – Copper Tube 
 
Water service lines, crucial for connecting buildings to the public water supply, are often outdated and made from 
lead, presenting significant health risks. As the federal government invests billions of dollars through the Inflation 
Reduction Act (IRA) and the Infrastructure Investments and Jobs Act (IIJA) toward replacements, copper service 
lines offer a safe, reliable, resilient, and sustainable alternative.  
  
The primary copper-related component in lead and galvanized service line replacement is copper water tube, 
specifically manufactured to the ASTM B88 Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube standard. For 
the majority of the estimated 12 million lead and galvanized service lines in the U.S. that will need replacement, 
this will require ASTM B88 copper tube in the sizes of ¾-inch to 1-1/2-inch, usually specified as Type K (indicating 
wall thickness).  It is worth noting that copper tube produced in North America contains high amounts of recycled 
content, estimated at 50% or higher in recent years.  Continued availability and security of post/pre-consumer 
recycled copper and copper scrap will also be of importance in the U.S. industry’s ability to meet the 
Administration’s goals in replacing lead and galvanized service lines. Members of CDA have been significant capital 
and personnel investments to meet the demand and schedule for total and full lead and galvanized service line 
replacements.  
 
 
Specific CDA Recommendation 1 – The Problem is Large and More Federal Funding is Needed 
 
Based on the EPA’s latest survey, there are approximately 9.2 million lead service lines actively providing water 
throughout the United States with the potential for an equal amount to be replaced.  An additional 2.8 million 
galvanized water pipes also need replacing.  Using some simple assumptions of average service line length would 
require approximately $45B - $56B in funding in 2019 dollars (total installed cost based on EPA’s 2019 estimate 
average of $4,700 per replacement, not just materials) for full replacement of all 12 million (Lead and Galvanized) 
service lines.  The amount needed is almost certainly higher today.  Unfortunately, to date the IIJA only provided 
for a total of $15B, to be allocated over 5 years.  
 
Additional funding is therefore necessary to support full service line replacement in lower income and underserved 
communities. It is also important to note that the $11.7B supplemental Drinking Water State Revolving Fund 
(DWSRF) is NOT guaranteed to service lines and much of it will likely be absorbed by other infrastructure projects, 
leaving a gap in funding for service line replacement. 
 
On January 16th the EPA had a virtual public hearing to comment on LCRI in which the agency shared the 
following: 
1. EPA estimates $2.1-$3.6B a year for replacement (estimate $36B for ten years for all service lines but 
that’s not enough to ensure full-service line replacement and instances where communities need longer 
time due to infrastructure readiness and updates).  
 
https://copper.org/applications/plumbing/water_service/resources/A4117_Service_Line_Right_Choice_Fact_Shee
t.pdf 
 
https://copper.org/applications/plumbing/water_service/resources/A4119_service_line_false-initial-cost-
economy-fact-sheet.pdf 
 

 
 
3 
2. Proposed EPA timing to begin to comply with LCRI is three years after the final rule. There’s also an 
extension of an additional two years if the systems need additional time for necessary capital 
improvement. That is 15 years from now or the final rule so funding will be challenging for communities 
that need it most. 
3. The health and safety impact (“ROI”) the EPA conducted for the US is estimated to be $9B in benefits a 
year to reduce lead exposure by removing lead service lines. If the US were to spend an average of $5B a 
year on LSR and GRR service line replacement the US would still benefit and be well ahead of the impact. 
 
 
Specific CDA Recommendation 2 – Full Replacement is Critical 
 
Full lead and/or galvanized service lines replacement is the best approach for safety and ensuring access to clean 
water within homes and communities long term. EPA’s approach should be in full support of “get the lead out”.  
• 
We are aligned with EPA’s statement that lining or coating technologies do NOT count as replacement and 
should not be a solution to lead exposure from service lines. 
• 
We are also aligned with EPA’s proposal that systems must give customers the chance to participate in full 
replacement (but must be funded by system) as well as provide notification and risk mitigation prior to 
infrastructure work and during emergency repair (if before is not possible). 
• 
We encourage point of use filters or water-pitcher filters only be used as a temporary solution until the 
full LSL, GRR or galvanized premise plumbing system can be replaced. Temporary use should be clearly 
defined by the EPA. Using filters as a long-term solution is not removing the problem of lead service lines. 
• 
We highly recommend that partial replacements should be temporary, and while the use of a dielectric 
fitting to reduce the potential for galvanic corrosion may address the issue short term, however these 
fittings are not suitable for underground use long term. This can result in failure and leaks in the 
connections and reduced efficacy as water deposits form over the relatively small dielectric separation 
created by the fitting. 
 
 
Specific CDA Recommendation 3 – Corrosion Control Treatment 
 
Water quality parameter adjustments are multivariate and should not be made to only consider one material in 
the system (lead) without understanding or investigating the impact of those adjustments on the other materials 
in the system. 
 
 
Further General CDA Comments 
 
• 
We commend and support EPA for including language regarding rental housing (single or multifamily) that 
full-service line replacement is mandatory to avoid owners choosing not to replace. This is a big step to 
protecting the lower income and underserved communities nationwide. 
 
• 
We understand the challenges water services may have meeting the October 2024 deadline to report all 
lead service lines, galvanized requiring replacement, and identifying unknown service material types. 
However, we believe it is the correct first step for an accurate estimate in order to address the issue, and  
to provide safe water to homes and businesses. 
 

 
 
4 
• 
We recommend EPA expands its scope to replace lead and galvanized piping systems in premise plumbing 
that are down stream of lead service lines. 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments. As noted, we are generally supportive of EPA’s 
approach and goals with the proposal and are happy to be a continued resource on the implementation of the 
Lead and Copper Rule.   
 
*****

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1129 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
3640 OLD OXFORD RD  HAMILTON, OHIO 45013-9347 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
Michael S. Regan  
Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
 
RE: 
Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations (NPDWR) for Regulations for Lead and 
Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
Public Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
 
To United States Environmental Protection Agency,  
 
 
Southwest Regional Water District appreciates the opportunity to provide comments to the USEPA 
regarding the proposed drinking water for Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) to the 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) during this comment period of the rulemaking 
process.  Public participation is vital to making the rulemaking process successful.   
 
Southwest Regional Water District (District) is a political subdivision of the state of Ohio organized under 
Chapter 6119 of the Ohio Revised Code. The District serves safe drinking water to approximately 16,000 
customer connections within its service area, which primarily includes western Butler County, Ohio, but 
also includes parts of Hamilton, Preble and Warren Counties and Franklin and Union in Indiana. The 
District's water system includes more than 650 miles of water mains, two water production plants and 
twenty-five water storage facilities all maintained by a staff of less than 40 employees.  
 
The District would like to acknowledge the efforts the EPA has made to address the potential lead 
exposure in drinking water.  There are several positive elements in the proposed rules that the District 
supports, some impacting directly the District and others elements specific to neighboring PWSs, 
including:  
• 
Maintaining the treatment technique regulatory framework for the control of lead and copper in 
drinking water.  
 
• 
Establishing a program for lead service line replacement rather than based on triggered 
requirements.  
 
• 
Recognizing that public water systems (PWSs), specifically community water systems (CWSs), 
continue to face legal constraints outside of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SWDA) that limit our 
access to customer properties.  
 
• 
A goal of simplifying the rule for effective implementation.  
 
Phone: 513-863-0828  Fax: 513-863-5330  E-Mail: swrwd@swwater.org 

 
 
 
 
There are critical revisions to this rule that need to be addressed prior to the final version.  Without 
these modifications the District would be subject to regulations that are not legally sound as they would 
be beyond the scope of the SDWA.   
 
• 
EPA must act to immediately extend the compliance date for the provisions under the LCRR that 
will not be continued in the LCRI.  The District continues to work towards meeting the  
requirements of the LCRR, including service line inventory, tap sample monitoring, etc.  The 
District should not be expending resources on compliance requirements with no guarantee from 
EPA that the LCRI final rule will be published prior to the compliance date of the LCRR. 
 
• 
In the LCR revisions in 2000 the definition of “control” was based ownership.  With the proposed 
change of this definition, the EPA is creating access issues for the District to meet the 
requirements of the LCRI. The definition of what is “under the control” of water systems as 
described in SDWA does not include piping not owned by the water system, even when the 
actual owner uses their “control” to grant “access” to a water system.  
 
• 
The EPA needs to simplify the compliance path for systems with no or few LSLs and/or GRRSLs.  
The District has no known LSLs on the public side, which we have certified to our state agency, 
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (OEPA) and based on predictive modeling, completed to 
comply with the LCRR deadline of October 16th, 2024, a very low probability of LSLs on the 
private side.  The proposed rule does not allow for an alternative method for PWSs, like the 
District, to have a second path to compliance that focuses primarily on (1) having a procedure 
for the rare occurrence of a LSL or GRRSL is discovered and (2) the validation study to assure the 
initial characterization of the system’s inventory is correct. 
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to comment on these proposed rules.  Should the USEPA have 
additional questions, the District is available for discussion.  My contact information is below.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Sarah Affrunti 
Regulatory Compliance & Safety Manager  
Southwest Regional Water District  
affruntis@swwater.org

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0927 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
2915 S. 13th Street | Duncan, OK 73533 
(580)-252-0629 | www.nrwa.org 
 
February 4, 2024 
Michael S. Regan 
Administrator Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N. W. 
Mail Code: 4607M 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE: National Rural Water Association Comments on the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for 
Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) - Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Headquartered in Duncan (Oklahoma), the National Rural Water Association (NRWA) is the non-profit 
association of the federated state rural water associations with a combined membership of over 30,000 
small and rural communities. NRWA is the country's largest water utility association and the largest 
community-based environmental organization. State Rural Water Associations are non-profit 
associations governed by elected board members from the membership. Our member utilities have the 
very important public responsibility of complying with all applicable U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) regulations and for supplying the public with safe drinking water and sanitation every 
second of every day. 
____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Administrator Regan, 
 
The National Rural Water Association (NRWA) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed National Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and 
Copper Improvements (LCRI). NRWA has been providing boots-on-the ground Technical Assistance to 
small rural water systems since 1976.   40% of all technical assistance that is provided by NRWA goes 
directly to disadvantaged communities. 100% of the assistance and training we provide is to 
communities with populations of 10,000 or less. NRWA’s technical experts provide practical, problem-
solving assistance that help small rural communities every day.  
NRWA shares the goal of eliminating harmful contaminants from the public’s drinking water and 
environment.  NRWA commends EPA for continuing to improve this rule to better protect public health 
while reducing complexity and burden to water systems.  The great majority of water systems regulated 
by the EPA under LCRI will be small (under 10,000 in population). Small and rural communities will have 
more difficulty complying with the new rule due to limited economies of scale and lack of technical 
expertise.  The items below reflect concerns the small, rural, and disadvantaged water systems that 
NRWA members have communicated. 
Cost and Affordability 
NRWA understands our infrastructure needs updating and in many cases replacement. Drinking water, 
wastewater and cybersecurity need significant investments. Although the federal government provides 
resources for LSL replacement, this funding is inadequate to meet the needs of our rural systems. 
Coupled with the recently proposed PFAS rule, this regulation will increase costs well beyond the 
available funding.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
The infrastructure law provides $55 billion to support upgrades to the nation’s water infrastructure, 
with projections speculating a cost of $30 billion to replace all lead service lines (LSLs). However, only 
$15 billion of this is dedicated to LSL replacements while the rest is being stretched by multiple demands 
particularly the $11.7 billion of general Drinking Water State Revolving Funds (DWSRF). The DWSRFs 
could support much of the replacement of LSLs, but they are also being utilized to address other 
contaminants like per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in drinking water systems and used for 
congressionally directed spending (earmarks). Additionally, the available funding will impact fewer 
projects due to rising costs, permitting delays, and added expenses from expanded requirements under 
Davis-Bacon and Buy America when suitable components are unavailable domestically. All of this 
threatens to shift much of the cost to communities and ultimately the citizens they serve. 
Additionally, many states have struggled to spend their allocated SRF money. In a study published by 
Duke Nicolas Institute for Environmental Policy Solutions and the Environmental Policy Innovation 
Center, it is stated that “Nationwide there is $9.9 billion in SRF funding that states have not committed 
to projects.” There are many reasons why the SRF funding isn’t being spent that are not the fault of the 
state SRF staff: capacity, staffing, resources, and funding. These challenges will be compounded by the 
influx of new money, further challenging the state staff. If the administration wants to prioritize the 
removal of LSLs, we ask that EPA carefully considers opportunities to provide relief through exemptions, 
and more flexibility in conjunction with adequate funding. 
Please see the following comments in specific response to EPA’s “Request for Comment” Section IX in 
the proposed rule. 
General Matters: 
2. Whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the regulatory approach used to 
address lead in drinking water consistent with the statutory standard for a treatment technique rule in 
section 1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. Specifically, EPA requests comments on ways that the proposed LCRI could 
be simplified and ways that burden, including paperwork burden, could be reduced without affecting the 
ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects. 
Response: Finding a way to streamline the required communications, public notices, public education, 
language required in the Consumer Confidence Reports and consumer notifications would help greatly 
to reduce the burden of the proposed requirements. 
Service Line Replacement: 
2.  Whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent should be more than four times (e.g., 
five, six, or seven times). 
Response: Reasonable effort should not be increased to require a quantity above 4 times.   
4.  The proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement deadlines. EPA is seeking comment on 
whether it is feasible for systems across the nation to complete service line replacement in a shorter 
timeframe than ten years, such as in six, seven, or eight years. EPA is seeking comment on the rate 
construct approach, including how to calculate compliance with a given service line replacement 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
deadline and average annual rate calculated across a rolling three-year period. EPA also seeks comment 
on whether systems should be required to meet a minimum replacement rate in the first three years 
after the compliance date to give States an opportunity to enforce replacement rate progress sooner 
than three years after the compliance date. EPA also seeks comment on the complexity of the rate 
construct. 
Response: The proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement deadlines are too short at 10 
years – especially due to the increased requirements to gain access to the public funding made available 
for LSL replacements.  Planning, permitting and acquisition of parts in many locations will take up to 3 
years to get started.  There should be no minimum replacement requirement in the first 3 years.   
5.  EPA is taking comment on whether States, as a condition of primacy, or EPA when it is directly 
implementing the program, should be required to set initial shortened deadlines by a certain timeframe, 
such as no later than 60 days after the compliance date. 
Response: There should be no shortened deadlines.   
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper criteria: 
1.  Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of the proposed sites should be included in 
Tier 3, if additional sites should be included, or if some should be included in a different, lower priority 
tier, such as Tier 4. Specifically, comment on whether sites served by galvanized service lines or 
containing galvanized premise plumbing that are identified as ever being downstream of an LSL or lead 
connector should be included in the same tier as other sites with a current lead connector (e.g., copper 
service line downstream of a lead connector). 
Response: We do not support adding Tiers or changing Tier 3 sites.  Adding a requirement to use 
premise plumbing material for sampling tiers – adds a high level of complexity and would be difficult to 
achieve from private owners on private property. 
3.  Comment on the applicability of alternate sampling protocols to assess CCT performance, increase 
customer participation, and other relevant factors  
Response: WQP testing is a good indicator of CCT performance and doesn’t rely on complicated in-
house testing.  Testing can be completed at an outside hose bib.  
6.  Comment on whether State authority to specify sampling locations when a system is conducting 
reduced monitoring should apply regardless of the number of taps meeting sample site criteria. 
Response: There is already a requirement for sampling plans.  Requiring states to specify sampling 
locations adds another level of complexity which will only add a further burden on the water systems 
who already struggle to get the proper number of samples each monitoring period.    
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan: 
1. In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a threshold of systems serving greater than 50,000 persons to host the 
inventory and plan online, which is the required threshold under the LCRR. EPA is seeking comment on 
the size threshold at which systems must host their publicly accessible inventory, inventory summary 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
data, replacement summary data, and service line replacement plan online, and whether it should be 
lowered relative to the LCRR requirements. 
Response: 50,000 population is a good threshold to require systems to host the LSLI and plan online.  
Smaller systems are less likely to have the resources to comply with the requirement.  
2. In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of non-lead service 
lines in their inventory that were categorized using methods other than records review or visual 
inspection of at least two points along the line. EPA is requesting comment on the number of validations 
required, the proposed 95 percent confidence level approach used to develop the number of validations 
required, the criteria for which methods used to categorize non-lead service lines should be included in 
the validation pool (including whether non-lead lines categorized based on records should be subject to 
validation), and the seven year timeline for systems on a 10-year replacement deadline to complete the 
validation requirements.  
Response: Non-lead lines categorized based on records review or visual inspection should stand as 
validated. EPA should carefully consider the difficulty and complexity of validation and the burden on 
smaller water systems – especially those that are privately, or community owned  
   
Corrosion Control Treatment: 
2.  Comment on whether it would be more appropriate to require water systems to re-optimize again 
following an action level exceedance regardless of meeting their optimal water quality parameters and 
to provide the State with the authority to waive this requirement. 
Response: Systems with existing CCT should be allowed to adjust (re-optimize) their treatment if they 
have an action level exceedance.  The primacy agencies should have authority and flexibility to assist 
systems to come into compliance. 
4.  The treatment recommendation and CCT study process can take multiple years to complete. For 
systems with existing corrosion control, the system may be able to alter the existing treatment (e.g., 
increase pH and/or orthophosphate dose) without a new CCT study on a much faster timeframe rather 
than waiting for study results that may recommend that same change. EPA is requesting comment on 
whether there are situations and/or conditions where existing treatment modifications may achieve 
similar lead reductions rather than delaying new treatment for two and- a-half years while a study is 
underway. 
Response: Systems with existing CCT should be allowed to alter their existing treatment to gain 
compliance with the rule without having to complete a new CCT study.   
Compliance Alternatives for a Lead Action Level Exceedance for Small Community Water Systems and  
Non- Transient, Non-Community Water Systems: 
1. EPA is proposing that small system flexibilities be limited to CWSs serving 3,300 persons and fewer and 
all NTNCWSs for the remaining compliance alternatives of point-of-use devices and plumbing 
replacement. EPA is seeking comment on whether the Agency should allow systems serving up to 10,000 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
persons (or another threshold) to be eligible to use the small system compliance flexibility provision. EPA 
is also seeking information, data, and analysis on whether point-of-use devices and plumbing 
replacement are as effective as OCCT at systems serving up to 10,000 persons (or another threshold). 
Response: NRWA urges EPA to keep the small system flexibility available to systems serving < 10,000 
people.  If flexibilities are not feasible, larger water systems will naturally not use them, as such there 
doesn’t need to be additional regulations in place to keep it from happening.  As an example, Kentucky 
alone has 131 systems that serve between 3,300 and 10,000 people (29% of the State’s water systems, 
serving over half a million people, or 11% of state’s population). Of these, 114 (87%) serve populations 
with a MHI lower than the state MHI, indicating that these communities will require flexibility, financial 
assistance, and on-site technical assistance from trusted providers. 
 
Public Education 
2. Comment and supporting data on the capacity of water systems to conduct some or all of the required 
public education activities in 30 days, or another period of time that is less than 30 or 60 days, after the 
end of the tap sampling period in which a systemwide lead action level exceedance occurs. 
Response: Requiring Public EducaƟon for a lead acƟon level exceedance aŌer receipt of results in less 
than 30 days will be burdensome to small water systems.   
 
3. Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water systems are capable of 
providing consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three calendar days of obtaining 
those results, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or copper action level, or if a longer time 
frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 calendar days). 
Response: The LCRI proposes an additional copper consumer notification and then a deadline of 3 days 
to get both Lead and  Copper Consumer Notifications to the customers.  It is important to note that the 
process of acquiring samples, delivering them to the lab, and lab processing times to the actual receipt 
of results and the calculated P90 can take as long as 6 months. Therefore, the need to rush a 3 day 
notification doesn’t make a great deal of sense and presents large burden to the small water systems – 
many of which are managed by volunteers.  It is also important to note that in many cases results 
provided by the laboratories contain errors that must be addressed before customer notification. For 
these reasons, NRWA requests this requirement be changed to at least 10 business days when the final 
rule is published.  
Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances: 
6.  Alternative requirements for systems with multiple action level exceedances to provide filters to their 
consumers, such as requiring water systems to provide filters and replacement cartridges to consumers 
served by an LSL, GRR service line, or unknown service line or to all consumers, or to require systems to 
consult with the State upon meeting the criteria for multiple action level exceedances, after which the 
State determines the appropriate action to reduce lead exposure 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Response: NRWA recommends EPA consider requiring filters after multiple Action Level Exceedances for 
sites that exceeded the Action Level, buildings with LSLs or GRRs, and not necessarily the entire 
community. The service line inventory processes, new tiers, additional CCT requirements and 
assessments in the proposed LCRI reduce many risks to consumers related to lead in drinking water, 
making the requirement to provide filters to all consumers unnecessary, burdensome and unaffordable.  
Also, EPA should consider that filters can become harmful if not used and maintained properly. 
Reporting and Recordkeeping 
1. EPA is requesting comments on the expansion of the inventory reporting to include lead connectors 
and non-lead service lines. 
Response: Requiring an expansion of the inventory reporting now will require systems to “re-inventory” 
which is a huge expense.  “Updating the inventories” as systems do work in the water systems, and 
tracking any new components, would be a far more reasonable requirement.   
 
2. EPA has heard concern over the ability of States to review all required site sample plans and provide 
approvals in time for the first tap monitoring period and is requesting comment on whether EPA should 
consider a phased approach or alternate approach to reduce the burden on States following the rule 
compliance date. 
Response: Providing phased due dates would allow States to phase site plan reviews and approvals. 
 
Compliance Dates: 
1. The proposed LCRI includes a three-year implementation period following the publication of the final 
rule until the compliance date to allow States time to obtain primacy and work with systems to prepare 
to comply. It also allows systems time to plan and obtain funding for LSLR as appropriate. EPA is seeking 
comment on all aspects of the proposed LCRI compliance dates and whether it would be practicable for 
water systems to implement any of the proposed LCRI requirements earlier than three years from the 
date of final action on the proposed LCRI.  
Response: EPA should retain a three-year implementation period on all aspects of the rule. 
Thank you for the opportunity to participate and comment. NRWA is very appreciative of the agencies’ 
many public outreach opportunities. We believe our recommendations will result in a better rule once 
finalized. NRWA is ready to work with the EPA to responsibly provide safe, clean, and affordable drinking 
water in a manner that is cost effective and non-burdensome. 
If you have any questions, please contact NRWA’s Senior Executive Policy Director, Charles Stephens 
(charles@nrwa.org).  
Sincerely, 
 
 
Matthew Holmes 
Chief Executive Officer

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0807 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 2, 2024  
  
Submitted via https://www.regulations.gov  
  
Michael S. Regan  
Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
EPA Docket Center  
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket  
Mail Code 28221T  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
  
Re:  
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801  
Comments on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI)  
  
Dear Administrator Regan:   
  
Enclosed please find comments regarding the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
(LCRI) submitted by the Kansas City, Missouri Water Department (KC Water) on behalf of the 
City of Kansas City, Missouri.  Kansas City, Missouri has a population of 512,000 residents, 
over 21% live in economically disadvantaged census tracts, and the city contains over 176,000 
service lines.  The comments provided herein are offered to help reduce the cost to customers 
and administrative burden to the utility without sacrificing public health.  
  
1. Defining When Galvanized Lines become Galvanized Requiring Replacement (GRR)  
  
Reference:    
V. Proposed Revisions to 40 CFR Subpart I, Control of Lead and Copper  
  B.  Service Line Replacement  
    7.  Service Line Replacement Plan  
  
The section “Lead Sources Subject to Replacement” states the following:    
  
“Where systems are unable to demonstrate that a galvanized service line never was 
downstream of an LSL, it must be categorized as a GRR service line and be subject to 
the proposed rule’s service line replacement requirement to ensure that all potential 
GRR service lines are eliminated from the system. By downstream, EPA means that the 
galvanized service line was located after the LSL and in the direction of flow. For 
example, a customer’s galvanized line would be downstream of an LSL if the LSL was 
installed in between the galvanized line and the water main.”  
KC WATER 
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR 
 
4800 E. 63rd Street 
Kansas City, Missouri 64130 
816-513-0504 
www.kcwater.us 
Fax: 816-513-0185 
DocuSign Envelope ID: E333643B-2D77-4754-8190-74F7B9FD8591

  
Comment:  Will EPA please confirm and define in the LCRI that when evaluating galvanized 
lines to assess when they should be classified as GRRs, the term “downstream” applies to 
individual service lines, not the entire water main distribution network?  Preliminary guidance at 
the state level indicates that some in the regulatory community may be applying “downstream” 
to the entire water distribution network.  i.e. – if one lead or unknown service line is connected 
to a water main, every galvanized line downstream of that property becomes GRR even if it is 
miles away.  Applying “downstream” to individual service lines is a reasonable interpretation of 
the EPA's guidance and it is implementable.  A broader interpretation applying to the entire 
water distribution network requires complex hydraulic modeling to account for the past and 
current hydraulics of a pressurized flow system, adds significant complexities, and does not 
appear to align to investigation guidelines in the LCRR or LCRI.  It may also unintentionally 
overstate the risk of lead exposure.  
  
The other concern around galvanized service lines is the connection to dissimilar metals and 
the potential for galvanic corrosion.  So, looking across the water system for upstream lead 
isn’t consistent with the thinking around GRR as originally intended.  
  
Comment:  It is understood that galvanized lines may potentially have adsorbed lead particles 
when located downstream of a lead line, even if the lead line was previously removed.  Yet, in 
an older city like Kansas City, which is well over 100 years old, it is virtually impossible to prove 
that upstream portions of service lines were never, ever historically lead.  Will EPA consider 
any alternatives to defaulting to the assumption that upstream lines may have been lead at one 
time if historical records are not available to prove there never was a lead line and provide 
guidelines on how to approach this?  Could a water quality monitoring approach be 
considered?    
  
Presently, no known lead service lines have been conclusively confirmed in our initial inventory 
that is under development, yet a large number of galvanized lines are present (over 
20,000).  Historical records are not available to document the complete service line history of 
every property.  Thus, if virtually every upstream line must be assumed to potentially have 
been lead at one time, the financial ramifications to rate payers for replacing galvanized lines 
could be $20 to 40 million dollars (based on a replacement cost of $10-20,000 per service 
line).  These numbers could potentially double as unknown lines are classified.  The City 
supports the desire to be conservative when protecting drinking water quality.  And yet, this 
issue has significant impacts to costs, schedule, and disturbing properties to replace lines that 
may not present health risks, along with impacting funding for other critical water quality 
infrastructure projects needed in the City.  Consideration of alternative approaches by EPA 
would be encouraged that better align the risk to public health without overburdening water 
systems.  
  
2. Validation Requirements  
  
Reference:    
V. Proposed Revisions to 40 CFR Subpart I, Control of Lead and Copper  
  B.  Service Line Inventory  
    2.  Inventory Validation Requirements  
  
Comment:  Will EPA please clarify the definition of “validation pool,” which service line 
identification methods require validation, and which do not?  The language around these topics 
is confusing.  For example, the referenced section says the following:  
  
DocuSign Envelope ID: E333643B-2D77-4754-8190-74F7B9FD8591

“The “validation pool” would consist of service lines identified as non-lead using 
methods other than records review or visual inspection of at least two points on the 
line.”  
  
This definition appears to say that if a service line is classified based on a review of historical 
records (following methods listed in Section 141.84(b)(2) of the draft regulations), it does not 
require validation.  Is this correct?  
  
Comment:  Table 1 to Paragraph (b)(5)(ii) of Section 141.84 of the draft regulations lists the 
number of validation samples required for each validation pool to achieve a statistically 
significant level of confidence in the historical records.  Preliminary guidance from the state of 
Missouri requires that 10% of all non-lead service lines classified from historical records be 
validated.  This contradicts the language in the LCRI and requires sampling numbers that are 
orders of magnitude greater than the approach outlined in the LCRI.  For KC Water, this would 
increase the number of investigations from hundreds of locations to over 15,000.  Accessing 
that number of properties on a random basis will present serious logistical hurdles, public 
resistance, and financial challenges.  Would EPA please provide further clarification on the 
number of samples required to validate historical records and references supporting the 
statistical approach outlined in the LCRI.  
  
3. Schedule of Compliance  
  
In the interest of protecting public health, we applaud the desire to proactively advance toward 
removing all lead service lines in the country.  For a large city like Kansas City the 10-year 
schedule to identify all unknown lines and remove all lead and GRR service lines is a 
significant and costly undertaking.  Given the present number of galvanized and unknown lines 
found to-date, this is currently projected to involve an estimated 5,000 service lines per year to 
meet the 10-year schedule.  It will also stretch resources currently allocated for other water 
quality projects such as treatment plant upgrades, infrastructure improvements, overflow 
control programs, and planning for emerging contaminants such as PFAS, in addition to taxing 
the local contracting community.  
  
The options presented in the draft LCRI for approving longer schedules are limited.  Please 
consider allowing a longer period to complete removals, say 15- to 20-years, for locations that 
have effective safeguards in-place such as corrosion control treatment, and where water 
quality monitoring remains below the Action Level for lead.  
  
  
  
Sincerely,  
  
  
 
Kelly Postlewait 
 
Assistant City Manager/Interim-Director of KC Water Services 
Office of the City Manager  
City of Kansas City, Missouri  
  
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: E333643B-2D77-4754-8190-74F7B9FD8591

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0761 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0806 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0956 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1
The Honorable Michael Regan 
February 5, 2024
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
For electronic delivery to the docket via https://www.regulations.gov/
RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (Docket 
Id#: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
Dear Administrator Regan,
The Connec;cut Sec;on of the American Water Works Associa;on (CTAWWA) and Connec;cut 
Water Works Associa;on (CWWA) appreciate the opportunity to submit comments for 
considera;on on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). CTAWWA and 
CWWA recognize lead as an important health concern, one the drinking water industry has 
successfully reduced exposure to over many years. We also recognize that the LCRI is an 
opportunity to further reduce risk through exis;ng and new partnerships at all levels. 
CTAWWA includes over 600 members and represents more than 60 u;li;es that supply water
to approximately 2.5 million Connec;cut residents. The organiza;on is dedicated to the
promo;on of public health and welfare by assuring drinking water of unques;onable quality
and suﬃcient quan;ty. CWWA membership is comprised of investor-owned, municipal, and
regional u;li;es with the mission of promo;ng and achieving eﬀec;ve state policies that assure
reliable high-quality public water supplies to protect public health.
CTAWWA and CWWA support the following elements of the LCRI proposal:
1. The crea;on of a lead service line replacement program rather than replacement based 
on an ac;on level exceedance.
2. Recogni;on of legal issues for community water systems related to private-side service 
line access and replacement.
3. Replacing the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) and extending mul;ple compliance 
deadlines allowing for increased accuracy in the data collected.
4. Maintaining the treatment technique approach to regula;ng lead as opposed to 
ins;tu;ng a maximum contaminant level (MCL).
5. Delaying corrosion control op;miza;on un;l aBer replacement of lead service line (LSL)
and galvanized service lines requiring replacement (GRR).
CTAWWA and CWWA respecDully submit the following concerns with the proposed LCRI that 
represent signiﬁcant challenges to drinking water purveyors:
1. The meline and status of the LCRR and LCRI create ambiguity and confusion for all 
stakeholders.  The ﬁnal LCRI is expected to be made eﬀec;ve within months of the LCRR 

2
compliance date of October 16, 2024.  The limited resources of public water systems 
(PWSs) need to be expended eﬃciently on lead and copper, as well as compliance with 
all other regula;ons, to ensure public health is protected, public trust is maintained, 
customer rates are managed, and compliance is achieved.  Other stakeholders, including 
primacy agencies, also need clarity to ensure they can adequately prepare. 
We urge the EPA to provide clarity in a ;mely manner on the LCR, LCRR, and LCRI.  It is 
expected that the extension of many of the exis;ng codiﬁed LCRR deadlines, as included 
in the proposed LCRI, will be required to avoid confusion for PWSs aFemp;ng to plan for 
and meet mul;ple ;melines. 
2. The assumed relaonship between ‘control’ and ‘access’ speciﬁc to service line 
replacement is inaccurate. The homeowner’s permission for a PWS to access their home 
for purposes of service line inspec;on does not necessarily provide the u;lity with 
control over what happens to that service line. In most cases, the PWS does not own 
the en;rety of the service line; this includes plumbing networks in privately owned 
subdivisions, condominium complexes and other scenarios. The expecta;on that a PWS 
is obligated to strong-arm customers to remove lead erodes trust between customers, 
communi;es, and the PWS. In these situa;ons a diﬀerent tac;c, one of community 
building and partnership to achieve public health improvement, needs to be adopted. 
3. Cost esmates should be revised to allow for the across-the-board replacement of 
lead-bearing components regardless of individual household incomes. The economics 
of the proposed regula;on do not adequately cover the actual costs for comple;on of 
the work within the proposed ;me frames, this according to EPA’s own es;mates. In the 
LCRI, the an;cipated annual compliance costs are signiﬁcant, es;mated at between 3-
4.8 billion dollars (water industry es;mates are higher). These costs will be the 
responsibility of thousands of community water systems across the country, who are 
largely supported by the water rates charged to households in those respec;ve 
communi;es. When looked at more closely, most of the increased costs will impact 
households in the ﬁrst 13 years of rule implementa;on, rather than the 35-year span 
over which EPA annualized the cost of the rule. The ﬁnancial impact on the public 
deserves addi;onal review and collabora;ve eﬀorts among all partners to iden;fy an 
achievable ﬁscal path forward. 
4. Extend the proposed implementaon meline. If the proposed implementa;on and 
compliance schedule is adopted, the 10-year ;me frame places signiﬁcant pressure on 
both local and state en;;es; ﬁscal decision-making challenges such as budge;ng and 
borrowing, compliance commodity supply chain shortages including plumbing materials, 
ﬁlters, engineering services and skilled labor are an;cipated, while at the same ;me, 
PWSs are also an;cipa;ng having to meet various other compliance goals. A greater 
chance of success will be recognized if EPA expands the compliance schedule allowing 
for more ;me to plan for and manage requirements of the proposed regula;on, increase 
the total federal funding and applying that funding to all communi;es regardless of size 

3
or ﬁnancial status and considera;on of the elimina;on of unproduc;ve interim and 
administra;ve burdens. 
5. The compliance pathway for PWSs with few LSL and GRR service lines can be 
simpliﬁed. PWSs with limited numbers of LSL and GRR service lines should not be 
compelled to navigate the en;rety of the process to demonstrate LSL absence. 
Implementa;on of public educa;on, a rigorous standard opera;ng procedure (SOP) to 
address LSL and GRR service lines when encountered, and an auditable veriﬁca;on 
review process of exis;ng records can ease the compliance burden for these PWSs and 
the primacy agencies.  
6. Require all PWSs to provide online inventories. Once inventories are online, submiFal 
of detailed inventory related content from PWSs becomes redundant. PWS can submit 
summary documents on progress to keep primacy agencies informed. 
7. The number of customer and consumer communicaon requirements is 
overwhelming. Recurring public no;ﬁca;on is very diﬃcult to track within the context 
of mul;-phased projects, as well as for PWSs with large complex distribu;on systems
under constant modiﬁca;on due to various maintenance, rehabilita;on, and customer-
oriented improvements. Others have promoted the concept of a single communica;on 
and public educa;on plan submiFed for primacy agency approval in advance of the ﬁrst 
compliance date. We see this concept as achieving the same goals without the burden of 
incessant customer no;ﬁca;on direc;ves. 
The proposed LCRI requires a three-calendar day no;ﬁca;on requirement of all sample 
results.  A ﬁve-business day requirement is recommended for samples exceeding an 
ac;on level, as it is more feasible for PWSs.  Communica;ng data within compliance 
values should remain at current ;me frames. 
8. The public health beneﬁt of including ﬁre service lines in the inventory is limited.  
These services are typically much larger than lead or galvanized services lines were ever 
manufactured and are u;lized for non-potable purposes. The limited resources available 
to PWSs must be concentrated on ac;vi;es with greater public health beneﬁt. 
9. If property owners opt out of the LCRI compliance requirements, this decision should 
not be held against the compliance record of the PWS. EPA does not take property 
access refusal into account when establishing the deadlines for service line 
characteriza;on, development of service line replacement plans or inclusion in sampling 
pool determina;on.  
Thank you for carefully considering our comments on the proposed LCRI. We would be
pleased to discuss these comments and any resulting questions with you and your team, as well

4
as collaborate with your agency to address the concerns we have pointed out.
Sincerely,
Daniel Lawrence, P.E. 
President, CWWA 
Alexander M. Cosentino, P.E., BCEE, CCM
Chair, CTAWWA

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0969 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 / 3
Indiana State Conference 
Sadie Harper Scott, President 
February 5th, 2024
Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
US Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
The NAACP State Conference of Indiana submits the following comments regarding the 
US Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”). The Indiana State 
Conference of the NAACP provides leadership for local branches, youth councils, and 
college chapters for environmental and climate justice needs in Indiana. The NAACP 
and its Center for Environmental and Climate Justice have a longstanding interest in 
ensuring that issues of community engagement and environmental justice center Black 
communities and frontline communities most impacted, including communities in 
Indiana.  
The Indiana State Conference of the NAACP applauds EPA for proposing stronger 
regulations to protect communities from lead in drinking water. Lead in drinking water 

has been a historically prevalent issue in Black communities, posing extreme risks to 
the health of young people, mothers, and their families. In Indiana estimates suggest 
that there are as many as 160,001 to 329,000 lead service lines, the 10th highest out of 
the 22 states that have reported, threatening families across our state with exposure to 
a potent and irreversible neurotoxin which even at low levels of exposure is linked to 
damage to the brain and nervous system, learning disabilities, shorter stature, impaired 
hearing, and harm to blood cells. In Indiana, we would derive $24,795,000,000 in public 
health cost savings from full lead service line replacement. 
The children in Indiana have endured a blood level acceptable of 10 dcl long after the 
Center for Disease Control called for 5 dcl. The NAACP/the Indiana conference 
provided listening sessions, food to absorb lead, water filtration systems and “Our Youth 
Scientists “ initiative in East Chicago when the area was identified with 3 superfund 
zones in soil and then in the lead service lines. The NAACP and the conference 
provided testimony to the U.S. Civil Rights Commission. In addition, are units have 
advocated for their schools water to be tested and have supported legislation that 
passed in 2023 requiring daycare centers test for lead in the water. This is a crisis and 
we are concerned that Justice 40 may not deliver to our Black communities. 
2 / 3
For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong 
elements of the proposed LCRI such as the requirement for the removal of all lead 
service lines in ten years, the requirements for water systems to sample both the first 
and fifth liter of water passing through lead pipes and a lower action level; but also 
ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes which undermine their goals and 
ensure that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened. 
Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule 
does not leave black communities in Indiana behind: 
· Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it 
is a fundamental injustice that the communities with the most lead service 
lines would be allowed 40 or more years to fix this issue. 
· Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service 
lines: Removal can cost thousands of dollars, and putting the financial 

burden on impacted communities will result in mostly wealthy and white 
neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced. Removal and 
replacement do not make up major proportions of utility budgets, and 
utilities should be expected to maximize the use of available federal water 
infrastructure funds and other non-ratepayer sources of funds to prioritize 
solving this crisis. 
· Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who 
spend many hours there daily are not at risk of exposure: Black 
children face an increased risk of lead exposure when compared with white 
children. The proposal’s suggested testing program does not differ from 
past ineffective programs, and EPA should move towards incentivizing the 
installation of filters and protecting children. 
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components would 
allow for environmental injustice to persist. Black communities and frontline 
communities have long 
3 / 3
suffered from disinvestment and lack of resources. Past NAACP analysis has 
demonstrated that race, ethnicity, or language spoken had the strongest relationship to 
slow and inadequate enforcement of the SDWA of any sociodemographic characteristic 
analyzed. The final LCRI is a rare opportunity to make significant changes in the lives of 
millions of people in [state], and to provide a measure of environmental justice which 
these families are owed, and we encourage this administration to build on the progress 
made in the proposed rule by strengthening the final rule further. 
Sincerely, 
Denise Abdul-Rahman
Denise Abdul-Rahman 
State Chair, Environmental and Climate Justice 
Indiana State Conference of the NAACP

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0829 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
6909 LAUREL AVE. #11442, TAKOMA PARK, MD 20913 // BIGCITIESHEALTH.ORG 
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
Jennifer McLain, PhD 
Director 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: Proposed Rule: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements (LCRI) [RIN 2040-AG16] 
 
Dear Director McLain, 
 
On behalf of the Big Cities Health Coalition (BCHC), I write to provide comment on the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) proposed rule: National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) [RIN 2040-AG16].  
 
BCHC is comprised of health officials leading 35 of the nation’s largest metropolitan health 
departments, who together serve more than 61 million — or about one in five — Americans. 
Our members work every day to keep America’s communities safe and healthy. 
 
Local health departments, particularly in our nation’s largest cities with their aging 
infrastructure and housing stock, are actively involved in lead poisoning prevention efforts 
especially as it pertains to children. The effects of lead exposure are known to cause permanent 
adverse health and development outcomes, including damage to the brain and nervous 
systems, slowed growth and development, learning and behavior problems, and hearing and 
speech problemsi. In addition, the burden of lead poisoning falls disproportionately on low-
income families and families of color.ii 
 
Examples of childhood lead poisoning prevention activities include blood lead testing, data and 
surveillance activities, linkage to care or other recommended follow-up services, and targeted 
population-based interventions. The role of health departments on this spectrum of activities 
varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, but health officials work closely with other local 
agencies, including residential utilities, health care providers, and other relevant stakeholders 
to identify and ensure that a comprehensive system of referral, follow-up, and evaluation is in 
place for those who are or may be exposed to lead. 

Across the U.S., an estimated 22 million people are serviced by pipes contaminated with lead.iii 
Lead exposure, even in small amounts, poses a significant hazard to public health and is linked 
to cancer, nervous system damage, reproductive problems, and cardiovascular disease.iv The 
problem is particularly acute in our nation’s cities. For example, a recent survey found that 
seven percent of Chicago households have lead levels in their water that exceed federal limits.v 
In Houston, hundreds of children under the age of six test positive for elevated levels of lead in 
their bloodstream annually.vi The City of Philadelphia, meanwhile, estimates that approximately 
20,000 homes are suspected to have lead water service lines.vii And in Kansas City, it is 
estimated that more than 1,500 children suffer from undiagnosed lead poisoning.viii 
 
There is a significant equity consideration as well to further regulating lead pipes, because 
communities of color and lower-income individuals are at highest risk of being serviced by lead 
pipes.ix Further, these populations often lack the resources to get them replaced on their own, 
though in virtually all communities public/private partnerships are integral to addressing lead 
water issues. For example, in Washington, D.C., the local water authority partnered with the 
local health department to launch Lead Free DC by 2030. By pooling their data – and each 
agency’s resources – together, they are working to enhance the implementation strategy for 
lead abatement to be both more focused for impact and more equitable.x, xi  
 
For all these reasons, BCHC strongly supports the EPA’s commitment to achieve 100% lead pipe 
replacement within the next decade as lead pipes remain the greatest source of lead exposure 
in our nation’s communities.  
 
We are also incredibly pleased to see the EPA improving tap sampling, lowering the lead action 
level from 15 µg/L to 10 µg/L, and requiring water systems to act sooner to control corrosion 
and provide public education. 
 
BCHC supports provisions under the proposed LCRI that require water systems across the 
country to provide an inventory of their lead service lines, regularly update these inventories, 
and ensure the public is aware of risk to lead contamination in their water supply. However, the 
proposed deadline of October 16, 2024, is overly ambitious and likely unachievable given the 
resource mobilization that will be necessary. We encourage EPA to keep these provisions in 
place but to extend the timeline so water systems can achieve compliance. Alternatively, if the 
2024 date remains in place, we encourage enforcement discretion for an appropriate period.  
 
Make no mistake, the goals of the proposed LCRI are critically important to the public’s health. 
Preventing lead poisoning particularly among youth should be a top EPA priority. However, we 
fear that without significant federal funds to incentivize, and in some cases fully fund, 
improvements in local jurisdictions, the revised recommendations are simply an unfunded 
mandate that will take considerably more time to achieve. For local jurisdictions and states to 
achieve full lead pipe replacement, robust inventories, and improved sampling, they will need 
not just significant monetary resources, but also federal technical assistance and support in 
planning to implement these new requirements.  

The burden of complying with this new rule will fall on local water systems, most of which are 
chronically underfunded and lack the capacity to meet what is required by the proposed LCRI.xii 
While the federal government has and/or will make $15 billion through the Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law and $11.7 billion from general Drinking Water State Revolving Funds to 
implement changes to comply with the rule, the Brookings Institution estimates that the actual 
cost of achieving 100% lead pipe replacement could cost anywhere between $27 billion and 
$47 billion.xiii That does not include the increased funding and technical assistance needed for 
community water systems to conduct a full inventory of their pipe systems and to implement 
temporary protective measures while awaiting full water line replacement. Insufficient federal 
funding will inevitably lead water utility companies and community water systems to shift 
compliance costs to customers in the form of higher water utility bills at a time when many 
Americans are struggling to make ends meet. It could also make water systems more like to 
address known problems, as we have seen in jurisdictions like Flint, MI. 
 
At a minimum the cost of replacing lead pipes must be a shared federal, state, local investment, 
where federal dollars incentivize state and/or local investments – and in the most extreme 
cases where states or localities cannot – or will not – step in, the federal government must act. 
As we have seen in states and jurisdictions across the country, there is not always a willingness 
to do so, particularly in communities that have traditionally been marginalized. The EPA has an 
opportunity to not just incentivize environmental justice, but also compel states and localities 
to act on lead pipe replacement. 
 
BCHC recognizes lead contamination for the massive public threat that it is, and we look 
forward to working with the EPA to ensure every American has access to safe drinking water. 
These seemingly small, but incredibly powerful tweaks in drinking water policy have the 
potential to lead to more efficient lead detection, intervention, and ultimately, prevention of 
lead in water and lead poisoning.  
 
We at BCHC greatly appreciate the opportunity to provide input on such a critical matter of 
public health. Please do not hesitate to contact me (juliano@bigcitieshealth.org) if we can be of 
further assistance. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Chrissie Juliano, MPP 
Executive Director 
 

 
i The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Health Effects of Lead Exposure. September 2, 2022. Accessible 
at https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/health-effects.htm  
ii Harvard Environmental Law Review, Contaminated Childhood: How the United States Failed to Prevent the 
Chronic Lead Poisoning of Low-income Children and Communities of Color, 2017. Accessible at 
https://heinonline.org/HOL/LandingPage?handle=hein.journals/helr41&div=15&id=&page= 
iii The Economist, Where are America’s Lead Pipes? December 2, 2021. Accessible at 
https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2021/12/02/where-are-americas-lead-pipes  
iv ABC News, EPA finds more than 9 million lead pipes supplying drinking water throughout the U.S. April 5, 2023. 
Accessible at https://www.cbsnews.com/news/epa-more-than-9-million-lead-pipes-drinking-water-us/  
v AP News, Here’s why there is still so much lead pipe in Chicago. July 19, 2023. Accessible at 
https://apnews.com/article/lead-pipes-drinking-water-chicago-a32fc39ab21df64a75e2812042a32f0d  
vi Houston Chronicle, Biden gives Houston 10 years to replace lead pipes. Clock is ticking for families at risk. 
December 5, 2023. Accessible at https://www.houstonchronicle.com/opinion/editorials/article/biden-lead-pipes-
houston-mayor-18527374.php  
vii City of Philadelphia, Lead Guide. Accessible at https://www.phila.gov/guides/lead-guide/where-is-
lead/#:~:text=Lead%20pipes%20in%20your%20home,joined)%20may%20also%20contain%20lead.  
viii Estimates shared with BCHC from the KCMO health department 
ix The White House, Fact Sheet: The Biden-⁠Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan. December 16, 2021. Accessible 
at https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-lead-
pipe-and-paint-action-plan/  
x See: https://www.dcwater.com/lead 
xi See: https://www.bigcitieshealth.org/uha-dc-health-interagency-collaboration/  
xii https://infrastructurereportcard.org/cat-item/drinking-water-infrastructure/ 
xiii Brookings Institution, What would it cost to replace all the nation’s lead water pipes? May 13, 2021. Accessible 
at https://www.brookings.edu/articles/what-would-it-cost-to-replace-all-the-nations-lead-water-pipes/

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0941 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2276 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
March 5, 2024
June
than offer it "on request" for all schools and licensed child care facilities.
3. Further limiting the exceptions to the 10-year replacement timeline, since this would prolong
the exposure to lead in water in the areas with the most lead pipes.
Copies to:
Very truly yours,
Laudato Si Care For Creation subcommittee, Human Concerns Commission 
Lumen Christi Catholic Church, 2750 W. Mequon Road, Mequon Wl 53092
to the U.S.C.C.B. letter (Ref 1) from the Most Reverend Borys Gudziak, Archbishop of Ukrainian 
Catholic Archeparchy of Philadelphia, Chair, Committee on Domestic Justice and human 
Development, we applaud the ERA commitment to solve this problem quickly (Ref 1: Letter to
1 MAR 11 202t B
BY:-----------------
We
Emergency (COLE):
1. Milwaukee, Wl is committed to removing approximately 66,000 main water line lead pipe 
laterals in about 10 years with partial funding from the ERA and the State of Wisconsin. Since 
10 years is a long time, and no amount of lead is acceptable in water supplies, we suggest 
making funds available for home water filters to remove lead from low income households. 
This would be only a temporary fix until the lead pipe laterals are removed from the homes.
2. 
Updating the school and child care facility testing regulations to "require" lead sampling rather
4. Requiring that local water systems pay for the full service line replacement, because 
otherwise, the lowest income customers will be disproportionately impacted financially and 
health-wise.
Postmarked
MAR 0 5 2024
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
ERA Docket Center, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-20Ef;)A^D©cket Center
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket, Mail Code 28221T
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460.
Reference: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) proposed revisions to the National
Primary Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) for lead and copper under the authority of the Safe
Drinking Water Act (SDWA)
Dear Sir or Madam:
We in Wisconsin are grateful to the EPA for funds to remove lead pipes form water supplies. The EPA 
has stated that lead is very detrimental to health, especially in children and the unborn. With respect
Congress Regarding Appropriations for Federal Agencies Charged with Care for the Environment.
23, 2023)
would like for you to consider the following items for future EPA changes from Coalition On Lead

Milwaukee Water Works
Municipal Building, Room 409
841 N. Broadway, Milwaukee Wl 53202
Archbishop BorysGudziak
810 N. Franklin Street, Philadelphia, PS 19123
Tamika Glenn, Coalition On Lead Emergency (COLE) 
1617 W. North Ave #4
Milwaukee, Wl 53205
Archbishop Jerome Listecki
3501 S. Lake Drive, St. Francis, Wl 53235
Fr. Matthew Jacob, Pastor
Lumen Christi Catholic Church, 2750 W. Mequon Road, Mequon Wl 53092

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0873 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments
Bringing Science and Passion to the Environmental Health Movement
February 5, 2024
Re: Comments to Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (Docket #: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801)
Please see the attached comments from the Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments (ANHE) endorsed
by 24 nursing and health organizations.

Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments
Bringing Science and Passion to the Environmental Health Movement
January 16, 2024
The Honorable Michael S. Regan
Administrator
United States Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20004
Re: Comments to Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (Docket #:
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801)
Dear Administrator Regan,
The undersigned national and state nursing organizations represent nurses and
advanced practice nurses who serve patients and communities across America
who rely on strong federal environmental safeguards. We thank EPA for acting
to address public health concerns around lead in drinking water, and we
strongly urge EPA to quickly finalize the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR)
Improvements.
Nurses are crucial in creating policies and programs that prevent disease, solve
environmental health problems, and reduce disease burdens.1 There are over 5
million nurses in the U.S. We are on the frontlines and are present in almost
every community across the US. Nurses spend the highest contact time with
patients in all care settings and we are led by professional obligations2 which
make addressing health, environment, and safety, a core professional focus.
While we as nurses often ask individual patients to take on extra measures to
protect themselves, nurses are also asking EPA to continue to strengthen
measures to reduce factors that can contribute to our health conditions in the
first place. At the forefront of this issue is preventing exposure to toxic
substances like lead.
There is no safe level of lead. Lead can affect almost every organ and system
in the human body; even at very low levels lead can cause serious, irreversible
damage to the developing brains and nervous systems of babies and young
children. Lead is dangerous to adults too. Lead exposure in children
contributes to potentially irreversible neurological impacts, with those
exposed, especially children of color, facing life-long health impacts. Lead has
also long been recognized to be a cause of hypertension3 and a risk factor4 for
heart disease, stroke, and chronic kidney disease.
4 Landrigan, P.J. (2018). Lead and the heart: an ancient metal's contribution to modern disease. The Lancet, 3(4), E156-E157.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-2667(18)30043-4
3 Tsoi, M.F., Lo, C.W.H., Cheung, T.T. et al. (2021). Blood lead level and risk of hypertension in the United States National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey 1999–2016. Scientific Reports, 11, 3010. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-82435-6
2 American Nurses Assoc. (2020). Nursing: Scope and standards of practice (4th ed.). Standard 18: Env Health. Silver Spring, MD.
1 ANHE. (2009). Bringing science and passion to the environmental health movement: Wingspread Statement.
1

Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments
Bringing Science and Passion to the Environmental Health Movement
Access to safe drinking water is essential for families to live healthy and productive lives. Yet, in states
across the nation, children, especially children of color, are exposed to lead and other toxic chemicals in their
tap water at home and at school because of lead service lines. Lead pipes exist in every single state5 in our
country, and millions6 are drinking contaminated water from their kitchen taps. This isn’t a problem we can
forget about, it’s one that impacts community health directly.
We appreciate the Biden administration’s top priority of replacing all lead service lines in the next ten years.
EPA’s proposed essential improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) are a step in the right direction
for promoting public health for communities across the country. However, the proposed rule falls short. As
the science is clear that there are no safe levels of lead in water, we strongly support the following measures
to strengthen this proposal:
Prioritizing Health Based Standards
The current proposed action level of 10 ppb is not a health based standard. While lowering the action level
from 15 ppb to 10 ppb is an improvement, this lowered level remains inadequate and still leaves many
communities and children unprotected. The current level of 15 ppb is the Lead Action Level set by the 1991
Lead and Copper Rule and this standard is also not based on health. EPA itself, notes that this proposed
action level is not a health-based level7. EPA8 has set the maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG) for lead
in drinking water at 0 (zero) ppb as lead is a toxic metal that can be harmful to human health even at very
low exposure levels. Lead is persistent, and it can bioaccumulate in the body over time. The American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that state and local governments take steps to ensure that water
fountains in schools do not exceed water lead concentrations of 1 ppb (AAP, 2016)9. We strongly support this
recommendation from AAP and recommend EPA establish a maximum contaminant level (or at a minimum
an action level) for lead in drinking water to 1 ppb as a health based standard.
Schools and Childcare Centers
There are portions of the rule specifically addressing schools and childcare facilities that show no signs of
improvement. According to EPA,10 young children, infants, and fetuses are particularly vulnerable to lead,
with low levels of exposure having a more dramatic impact on children than adults. In children, low levels of
exposure have been linked to damage to the central and peripheral nervous system, learning disabilities,
shorter stature, impaired hearing, and impaired formation and function of blood cells.11 EPA recently
estimated12 that formula-fed babies get up to 40 to 60 percent13 of their lead exposure from drinking water.
13 Federal Register. (1991). Environmental Protection Agency 40 CFR Parts 141 and 142. Maximum contaminant level goals and National
primary drinking water regulations for lead and copper; Final rule.
12 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (Last updated Jan 5, 2024). Ground water and drinking water: Basic information about lead in
drinking water.
11 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (January 27, 2023). EPA launches new initiative to accelerate lead pipe replacement to protect
underserved communities.
10 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (Last updated Jan 5, 2024). Ground water and drinking water: Basic information about lead in
drinking water.
9 American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). (July 1, 2016). Prevention of childhood lead toxicity. Pediatrics, 138,(1): e20161493.
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-1493
8 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (Last updated Jan 5, 2024). Ground water and drinking water: Basic information about lead in
drinking water.
7 Federal Register. National primary drinking water regulations for lead and copper: Improvements (LCRI). A proposed rule by the
Environmental Protection Agency on 12/06/2023.
6 Fedinick, K.P. (2021, May 13). Millions served by water systems detecting lead. Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC).
5 Olson, E.D. & Stubblefield, A. (2021, July 8). Lead pipes are widespread and used in every state. Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC).
2

Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments
Bringing Science and Passion to the Environmental Health Movement
Lead can decrease a child’s cognitive capacity, cause behavioral problems, and limit their ability to
concentrate—all of which affect their learning potential in school.14 Lead is toxic at low levels and especially
damaging to children— impairing how they learn, grow and behave. Most schools are likely to have lead in
their plumbing and/or fixtures, and lead contamination of schools’ drinking water is widespread.
Therefore, we ask EPA to set a health based regulation of 1 ppb maximum contaminant level (or at a
minimum, an action level) for lead in water at schools and childcare centers. Funds have been provided to
states without requirements, such as filter first or requirements for 1 ppb for schools and child care centers,
which makes it essential that the LCR emphasize this as a requirement. Further, the LCR should require full
replacement of lead service lines at schools as soon as possible. We additionally recommend that
lead-bearing fixtures and plumbing be replaced - especially where filters cannot be mounted at the point
water leaves the tap since the vast majority of school drinking fixtures are not tested for lead on a regular
basis.15 Only 8% of U.S. schools operate their own water systems, such as on site wells, and until 2021, were
the only schools mandated to regularly test water lead levels in a sample of school fixtures.16 The other 92%
of U.S. schools rely on community water systems serving the public and it wasn’t until 2021 that a revision
to the LCR required water testing at 20% of elementary schools and daycares per year; however the vast
majority of school drinking fixtures are still not tested for lead on a regular basis.17
We recommend the installation and maintenance of point of use filters certified to remove lead on all taps
used for drinking water, cooking or beverage preparation in schools and childcare centers. A number of
school districts have already embraced a “filter first” approach - from Portland to the District of Columbia.
This short-term, low-cost intervention is critical. Michigan became the first state to implement a filter first
approach in schools in October 2023.
Lead Service Line Replacement (LSLR)
There are components of EPA’s proposed rule that could exacerbate health disparities - especially for
lower-income communities and communities with aging infrastructure. The EPA must finalize stronger Lead
and Copper Rule Improvements which will replace all lead service lines within 10 years and require utilities
to cover the full cost. The proposal does not require water systems to pay the full costs of removing the entire
lead service line. While EPA claims it does not have the legal authority to require this, legal experts disagree
and argue for water utilities to be responsible for the cost of replacing the entire lead service line (as is
required in the State of Michigan), not the impacted community members dealing with lead-contaminated
drinking water. Studies have shown, and even EPA has recognized, that allowing water systems to charge
individual homeowners for replacement of lead pipes under their property leads to fewer replacements of
lead service lines for non-white and low-income homeowners and renters.
It is critical that all lead service lines are replaced within ten years. However, the proposal allows some water
systems, like Chicago, to get extensions well beyond 10 years to replace their lead pipes – in fact, possibly
17 McNamara et al. in Latham, S. & Jennings, J.L. (2022). Elevated water lead levels in schools using water from on-site wells. Journal of Water
and Health, 20(9): 1425–1435. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2022.141
16 Cradock, A.L., Jones, S.E. & Merlo, C. (2019). Examining differences in the implementation of school water-quality practices and
water-access policies by school demographic characteristics. Preventive Medicine Reports, 14, 100823. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmedr.2019.100823
15 McNamara, R., Estes-Smargiassi,S., Masters, S.V., Roberson, A., Tobiason, J.E., Beighley, R.E. & Pieper, K.J. (2022). Using the lead and
copper rule revisions five-sample approach to identify schools with increased lead in drinking water risks. Environmental Science & Technology
Letters, 9(1), 84-89.
14 Bell, C. (December 12, 2023). Lead and copper rule school report card: No sign of improvement. Natural Resources Defense Council.
(NRDC).
3

Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments
Bringing Science and Passion to the Environmental Health Movement
from 40-50 years. This is unacceptable and leaves many communities at risk. Utilities should also be
required to conduct water lead testing after lead service line (LSL) replacement, using testing techniques that
most accurately gauge the risk of lead in drinking water.
The LSL replacement process can increase lead levels because the construction activity itself may dislodge
more lead from lead service lines. We recommend the importance of the municipality/water system in
providing certified filters to deliver safe drinking water within residences or provide an alternative water
source, including (1) water buffaloes (large tanks that have multiple taps for residents to fill containers)
and/or (2) bottled water during LSL construction processes.
While plastic is cheaper, there are significant questions about plastic pipes including whether they will leach
chemicals, whether they will allow permeation of toxic chemicals into the water from contaminated
groundwater, and how long they will last. Plastic pipes also are vulnerable to melting and contamination of
the distribution system with toxic chemicals in the event of fires. The Healthy Building Network
recommends using copper pipes without solder, fluxes or other filler metals18 for lead service line
replacement. The International Association of Fire Fighters and United Association (plumbers & pipefitters
union) have raised major concerns with plastic pipes including emission of toxic gasses in fires, leaching of
chemicals into drinking water, and off-gassing of chemicals during construction posing health risks to
workers.
Communities across the country should be protected from exposure to lead. We thank the EPA for taking
action to reduce health harms from lead exposure. We strongly urge EPA to quickly finalize the most
thorough Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) Improvements as soon as possible and finalize a rule that prioritizes
replacing all lead service lines within 10 years with utilities covering the full cost of replacement. In this
laudable effort to remove lead from drinking water, it is critical that health remains the priority.
Sincerely,
Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments (ANHE)
American Association of Occupational Health Nurses (AAOHN)
American Federation of Teachers (AFT)
American Nurses Association (ANA)
American Nurses Association\California
American College of Nurse-Midwives
Association of Community Health Nursing Educators (ACHNE)
Association of Public Health Nurses (APHN)
California Nurses for Environmental Health & Justice (CNEHJ)
Clean Air Now
18 Healthy Building Network. (Last updated April 25, 2023). Potable water piping product guidance.
4

Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments
Bringing Science and Passion to the Environmental Health Movement
Council of Public Health Nursing Organizations (CPHNO)
Delaware Nurses Association
Michigan Nurses Association
National Association of Hispanic Nurses (NAHN)
National Association of Neonatal Nurses
National Association of Nurse Practitioners in Women's Health (NPWH)
National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners
National Association of School Nurses
National Black Nurses Association, Inc
National Coalition of Ethnic Minority Nurse Associations
National League for Nursing
New Hampshire Nurses Association Commission on Planetary Health
Ohio Nurses Association
SEIU
Society of Latinx Nurses
5

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0922 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
To Whom it May Concern:
My name is Steven P. Lefebvre and I am the Superintendent of the Berlin Water Works, in Berlin New 
Hampshire. I will have been employed at Berlin Water Works for 32 years this June.  In all my years of 
working for the water department, I have never encountered a lead service line which ran from the 
water main into the house.  All lead we located was located at the main as only a lead gooseneck.  Under 
the Berlin Water Works rules and regula-ons, the homeowner owns the service line from the main into 
their house.  The Board of Water Commission decided that the homeowner should not have to pay for 
digging in the streets.  Even though technically the homeowner owns the en-re service line, if there is a 
leak or the service line needs replacing in the road, the Berlin Water works will maintain the service line 
from the main to the curb at our expense. All private property work is the responsibility of the 
homeowner. Berlin Water Works does not want the liability of damaging private property and we do not 
want to take work away from private contractors. Since the 1990s, we have replaced 30.75 miles of old,
lead joint cast iron mains and 2" galvanized lines. Water Works has paid down our debt of $35 million 
since 1993 and have $4,519078 le; to pay un-l will be debt free.  We are also self-funding our water 
main and service line upgrades by budge-ng $150,000 per year.  However, with rising costs, we did not 
allocate any money in 2023, and had to raise the water rates by ﬁve percent to balance the budget.  We 
are currently working on gathering informa-on on our Lead service inventory.  The EPA and the DES 
wants us to pothole, preferably at the curb stop, to determine if the line is lead or galvanized. In my 32 
years of experience, if there is going to be lead, it will be at the corpora-on at the main.  Potholing does 
nothing beneﬁcial to remove the lead from the system if the line is copper at both the street side and 
property side ends of the curb stop.  The lead will s-ll be there at the main, and money and -me will be 
wasted. The Berlin Water Works is a bit unique, unlike most water districts, we do all of our own 
construc-on laying water mains and service lines in the street.  We are also mandated to install 200 
meters per year at a cost of $75,000.  We have a small crew of six members to do this.  We highly agree 
with the EPA and the DES that all galvanized and lead should be removed from the distribu-on system, 
as galvanized services and lead goosenecks are going to leak it is just a ma@er of -me.  We replace them 
whenever encountered to the property and send a le@er recommending replacement to the owner on 
their side.  If the EPA and the DES are manda-ng these rules, they should be funding the work to dig in 
the streets 100%. If this was funded 100% then we would contract it out allowing us to change out old 
unlined lead joint water mains and services.  If it is not funded 100%, the diﬀerence in cost will fall on 
the customer.  The Water Commission does not want to take on anymore debt, as it would require us to 
raise the water rates to cover this expense.    We hadn’t raised water rates in over 26 years, un-l the cost 
of living skyrocketed in 2023.  We have passed all lead and copper tes-ng for the last 13 years. While we 
agree that lead and galvanized need to be removed, we think the EPA and the DES should focus more on 
the water districts that are failing lead and copper tes-ng, and have these loca-ons a top priority for 
monitoring and replacement.. Berlin Water Works is not looking to undergo unnecessary construc-on as 
part of the LCRR. We are dedicated to upgrading our water system to provide our customers with 
potable water, at an aﬀordable rate. Thank you for your -me and considera-on to hear our feedback, as 
we feel the LCRR is not a one size ﬁts all scenario.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2257 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1
Ulrich, Jake
From:
grenardmarkhayduke@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Mark Hayduke Grenard 
<grenardmarkhayduke@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 9:15 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Mark Hayduke Grenard 
4222 E Windrose Dr Apt 2009  Phoenix, AZ 85032-7562 grenardmarkhayduke@yahoo.com 

2
Ulrich, Jake
From:
numkamaber@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Kathleen Nummerdor 
<numkamaber@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 9:11 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Kathleen Nummerdor 
236 W Vfw Rd  Cheboygan, MI 49721-9702 
numkamaber@yahoo.com 

6
Ulrich, Jake
From:
whaddaluckyguy1975@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Guy Taylor 
<whaddaluckyguy1975@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 6:05 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr Guy Taylor 
19111 Angling St  Livonia, MI 48152-2501 whaddaluckyguy1975@yahoo.com 

8
Ulrich, Jake
From:
gbglide@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Gavin Bornholtz 
<gbglide@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 4:00 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Gavin Bornholtz 
9090 Creekwood Lake Trl  Grand Blanc, MI 48439-9488 gbglide@comcast.net 

9
Ulrich, Jake
From:
batoullhaidar@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Batoull Haidar 
<batoullhaidar@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 3:52 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Miss Batoull Haidar 
10330 S Morrow Cir  Dearborn, MI 48126-1646 batoullhaidar@gmail.com 

11
Ulrich, Jake
From:
svandam@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Suzanne Van Dam 
<svandam@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 3:28 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Suzanne Van Dam 
601 Hollis Ave  YpsilanƟ, MI 48198-3920 svandam@michiganlcv.org 

12
Ulrich, Jake
From:
rsaguirre@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Robert Aguirre 
<rsaguirre@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 2:19 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr Robert Aguirre 
14465 Mccaslin Lake Rd  Linden, MI 48451-9793 rsaguirre@msn.com 

13
Ulrich, Jake
From:
adamartwilliams@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Adam Williams 
<adamartwilliams@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 1:19 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Adam Williams 
3228 Bridgeﬁeld Dr  Ann Arbor, MI 48108-9125 adamartwilliams@gmail.com 

14
Ulrich, Jake
From:
jace.B27@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Jace Bylenga <jace.B27
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 12:30 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Jace Bylenga 
38681 52nd St  Bangor, MI 49013-9792 
jace.B27@gmail.com 

15
Ulrich, Jake
From:
joel_finley2002@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Joel F <joel_finley2002
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 11:41 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Joel F 
809 Ford St # B  Ogdensburg, NY 13669-1748 joel_ﬁnley2002@yahoo.com 

16
Ulrich, Jake
From:
patriciabsmith@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Patricia Smith 
<patriciabsmith@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 11:23 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mrs Patricia Smith 
7380 W Old Channel Trl  Montague, MI 49437-9374 patriciabsmith@hotmail.com 

17
Ulrich, Jake
From:
blowen02@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Benjamin Lowen <blowen02
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 10:17 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Benjamin Lowen 
425 Ann St  East Lansing, MI 48823-4410 
blowen02@gmail.com 

18
Ulrich, Jake
From:
alehman@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Ann Lehman 
<alehman@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 10:13 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Ann Lehman 
9873 Boulder Ct  Davisburg, MI 48350-2053 alehman@riƫnger.net 

19
Ulrich, Jake
From:
2unionthug@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Curt Herman 
<2unionthug@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 9:59 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Curt Herman 
863 W Colon Rd  Bronson, MI 49028-9339 
2unionthug@gmail.com 

20
Ulrich, Jake
From:
julie.foley@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Julie Foley 
<julie.foley@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 9:54 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mrs. Julie Foley 
59701 Sunridge Dr  New Hudson, MI 48165-9407 julie.foley@summitde.com 

21
Ulrich, Jake
From:
sumsym@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Jon Krueger 
<sumsym@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 9:45 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Jon Krueger 
5843 Seymour Rd  Jackson, MI 49201-9607 
sumsym@yahoo.com 

22
Ulrich, Jake
From:
jeromemiller1@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of jerome miller <jeromemiller1
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 9:42 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
mr jerome miller 
19153 Flamingo Blvd  Livonia, MI 48152-1708 jeromemiller1@me.com 

23
Ulrich, Jake
From:
joe.sidor@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Joe Sidor 
<joe.sidor@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 9:32 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Joe Sidor 
59254 Madi Ln  New Hudson, MI 48165-8112 joe.sidor@yahoo.com 

24
Ulrich, Jake
From:
luevergreen37@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Lu Evergreen <luevergreen37
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 8:56 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mx. Lu Evergreen 
111 Glendale Dr Apt 2  Ann Arbor, MI 48103-4193 luevergreen37@gmail.com 

25
Ulrich, Jake
From:
bizkitsmum@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Denise Snyder 
<bizkitsmum@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 8:53 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Denise Snyder 
625 Denner St  Kalamazoo, MI 49006-3113 
bizkitsmum@yahoo.com 

27
Ulrich, Jake
From:
KitKitforest@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Kit Hoffmann 
<KitKitforest@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Monday, February 5, 2024 8:45 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Kit Hoﬀmann 
2827 Kweo Trl  Flagstaﬀ, AZ 86005-3525 
KitKiƞorest@aol.com 

1
Ulrich, Jake
From:
Janet9Cats@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Janet Ginepro 
<Janet9Cats@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Sunday, February 4, 2024 9:28 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Janet Ginepro 
202 Donnalee Dr  Monroe, MI 48162-3207 
Janet9Cats@gmail.com 

2
Ulrich, Jake
From:
siriannablanck@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Sirianna Blanck 
<siriannablanck@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Sunday, February 4, 2024 2:20 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. Don't let Flint, MI become a more common occurrence that it already is. Access to 
clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use 
across the country, we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the 
health of our communiƟes. 
 
 Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Sirianna Blanck 
27 Oakley Pl  Asheville, NC 28806-4208 
siriannablanck@gmail.com 

3
Ulrich, Jake
From:
gooddays@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Dan Blakey 
<gooddays@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Sunday, February 4, 2024 12:26 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Dan Blakey 
5571 Okemos Rd  East Lansing, MI 48823-2924 gooddays@sbcglobal.net 

4
Ulrich, Jake
From:
deniseclay62@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Denise Clay <deniseclay62
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Sunday, February 4, 2024 8:33 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mrs. Denise Clay 
12810 27 Mile Rd  Albion, MI 49224-9571 
deniseclay62@gmail.com 

5
Ulrich, Jake
From:
n.m.iacob@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Noa Iacob 
<n.m.iacob@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Saturday, February 3, 2024 3:36 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms Noa Iacob 
2603 Braeburn Cir  Ann Arbor, MI 48108-2603 n.m.iacob@gmail.com 

6
Ulrich, Jake
From:
mreynolds9@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Michele Reynolds <mreynolds9
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Saturday, February 3, 2024 11:57 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Michele Reynolds 
24230 Beverly St  Oak Park, MI 48237-1552 mreynolds9@aol.com 

7
Ulrich, Jake
From:
indenver2014@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Carolyn Green <indenver2014
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Saturday, February 3, 2024 9:21 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Dr. Carolyn Green 
2960 Barclay Way  Ann Arbor, MI 48105-9463 indenver2014@gmail.com 

8
Ulrich, Jake
From:
georgiagriffindo@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Georgia Griffin 
<georgiagriffindo@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Saturday, February 3, 2024 9:16 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Dr. Georgia Griﬃn 
52825 Fairchild Rd  Chesterﬁeld, MI 48051-1950 georgiagriﬃndo@gmail.com 

9
Ulrich, Jake
From:
addington.cheryl@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Cheryl Voglesong 
<addington.cheryl@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Saturday, February 3, 2024 8:26 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Cheryl Voglesong 
1433 Wrenwood Dr  Troy, MI 48084-2636 
addington.cheryl@gmail.com 

10
Ulrich, Jake
From:
schmidtroger1000@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Roger Schmidt 
<schmidtroger1000@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 10:26 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Roger Schmidt 
6710 Elmwood Ave Apt 106  Middleton, WI 53562-3266 schmidtroger1000@hotmail.com 

11
Ulrich, Jake
From:
fdolins13@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Francine Dolins <fdolins13
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 10:03 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Dr. Francine Dolins 
350 N Territorial Rd W  Ann Arbor, MI 48105-9617 fdolins13@gmail.com 

12
Ulrich, Jake
From:
cyberkedi@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Freya Harris 
<cyberkedi@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 9:35 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Freya Harris 
1374 Donnelly Ave SW  Atlanta, GA 30310-2550 cyberkedi@hotmail.com 

13
Ulrich, Jake
From:
jimheadjr@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Jim Head 
<jimheadjr@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 9:23 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Jim Head 
15307 Northgate Blvd  Oak Park, MI 48237-1220 jimheadjr@hotmail.com 

14
Ulrich, Jake
From:
2mamorell@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of mary more 
<2mamorell@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 9:17 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
ms mary more 
6 Haws Ln  Flourtown, PA 19031-2037 
2mamorell@gmail.com 

15
Ulrich, Jake
From:
amccombs269@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Annie McCombs <amccombs269
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 9:03 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms Annie McCombs 
PO Box 50269  Kalamazoo, MI 49005-0269 
amccombs269@netscape.net 

16
Ulrich, Jake
From:
gbglide@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Gavin Bornholtz 
<gbglide@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 8:52 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Gavin Bornholtz 
9090 Creekwood Lake Trl  Grand Blanc, MI 48439-9488 gbglide@comcast.net 

17
Ulrich, Jake
From:
kmason633@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Kathy Mason <kmason633
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 8:20 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Kathy Mason 
11455 Sebewaing Rd  Sebewaing, MI 48759-9705 kmason633@yahoo.com 

18
Ulrich, Jake
From:
lukeatlake@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Linda Luke 
<lukeatlake@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 7:20 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Linda Luke 
47762 N Shore Dr  Van Buren Township, MI 48111-2231 lukeatlake@sbcglobal.net 

19
Ulrich, Jake
From:
svanet@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Janet Anderson 
<svanet@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 6:34 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Janet Anderson 
21920 Whitmore St  Oak Park, MI 48237-2617 svanet@comcast.net 

20
Ulrich, Jake
From:
amccombs269@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Annie McCombs <amccombs269
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 6:01 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Annie McCombs 
PO Box 50269  Kalamazoo, MI 49005-0269 
amccombs269@netscape.net 

21
Ulrich, Jake
From:
scp14@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Susan Peterson <scp14
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 5:40 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Susan Peterson 
1105 College Ave  Houghton, MI 49931-1307 scp14@sbcglobal.net 

22
Ulrich, Jake
From:
grenardmarkhayduke@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Mark Hayduke Grenard 
<grenardmarkhayduke@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 5:38 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Mark Hayduke Grenard 
4222 E Windrose Dr Apt 2009  Phoenix, AZ 85032-7562 grenardmarkhayduke@yahoo.com 

23
Ulrich, Jake
From:
lprostko@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Linda Prostko 
<lprostko@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 5:32 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms Linda Prostko 
7875 Marsh Hollow Dr  Middleville, MI 49333-9314 lprostko@gmail.com 

24
Ulrich, Jake
From:
bonoone@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Matt Brzezinski 
<bonoone@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 5:24 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. MaƩ Brzezinski 
21216 Briar Ct  Saint Clair Shores, MI 48081-1511 bonoone@aol.com 

25
Ulrich, Jake
From:
dgendvil@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Derek Gendvil 
<dgendvil@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 5:03 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Derek Gendvil 
9030 W Sahara Ave Apt 360  Las Vegas, NV 89117-5744 dgendvil@gmail.com 

26
Ulrich, Jake
From:
schaef.sarah@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Sarah Schaefer 
<schaef.sarah@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 4:39 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms Sarah Schaefer 
190 E Division St  Rockford, MI 49341-1259 schaef.sarah@gmail.com 

27
Ulrich, Jake
From:
S.bodek60750@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Sharon Bodek <S.bodek60750
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 3:52 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Sharon Bodek 
60750 Pennington Way  Rochester, MI 48306-2067 S.bodek60750@comcast.net 

28
Ulrich, Jake
From:
donnabrown888@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of donna brown <donnabrown888
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 3:10 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. donna brown 
PO Box 174  Minden City, MI 48456-0174 
donnabrown888@msn.com 

29
Ulrich, Jake
From:
samantha@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Samantha Schubert 
<samantha@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 2:51 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Miss Samantha Schubert 
1815 Nemoke Ct  HasleƩ, MI 48840-8625 
samantha@michiganlcv.org 

30
Ulrich, Jake
From:
apavlic@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Anne Pavlic 
<apavlic@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 2:48 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Anne Pavlic 
21390 E Glen Haven Cir  Northville, MI 48167-2410 apavlic@duck.com 

31
Ulrich, Jake
From:
dwightsanders@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Dwight Sanders 
<dwightsanders@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 2:28 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Dwight Sanders 
5176 Belmonte Dr  Rochester, MI 48306-4785 dwightsanders@hotmail.com 

32
Ulrich, Jake
From:
sarah.mclusky@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Sarah McLusky 
<sarah.mclusky@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 2:27 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Sarah McLusky 
3125 Woodland Hills Dr  Ann Arbor, MI 48108-4201 sarah.mclusky@gmail.com 

33
Ulrich, Jake
From:
eckhoff55@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of MARIANNE FIX <eckhoff55
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 2:08 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. MARIANNE FIX 
1502 Pinetree Dr  Trenton, MI 48183-1711 eckhoﬀ55@yahoo.com 

34
Ulrich, Jake
From:
thyfault@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Isabelle Thyfault 
<thyfault@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 2:08 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
m Isabelle Thyfault 
406 Packard St Apt 103  Ann Arbor, MI 48104-3066 thyfault@umich.edu 

35
Ulrich, Jake
From:
photodude48@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Gerald Hallead <photodude48
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 2:06 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. Gerald Hallead 
625 Bay Hill Dr Apt 7  Traverse City, MI 49684-6605 photodude48@gmail.com 

36
Ulrich, Jake
From:
ibis4247@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Doris Applebaum <ibis4247
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 1:59 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Doris Applebaum 
13680 Winchester St  Oak Park, MI 48237-1360 ibis4247@sbcglobal.net 

37
Ulrich, Jake
From:
mcgladdery3@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Martin and Sharon McGladdery 
<mcgladdery3@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Friday, February 2, 2024 1:57 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. MarƟn and Sharon McGladdery 
35310 Edythe Dr  Farmington Hills, MI 48331-2025 mcgladdery3@gmail.com 

38
Ulrich, Jake
From:
scp14@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Susan Peterson <scp14
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Thursday, February 1, 2024 10:09 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Susan Peterson 
1105 College Ave  Houghton, MI 49931-1307 scp14@sbcglobal.net 

39
Ulrich, Jake
From:
helenmountfordhankins@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Helen Hankins 
<helenmountfordhankins@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Thursday, February 1, 2024 3:50 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mrs Helen Hankins 
4671 Lakeview Dr  Interlochen, MI 49643-9594 helenmounƞordhankins@gmail.com 

40
Ulrich, Jake
From:
awilkinson182@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Annabelle Wilkinson 
<awilkinson182@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Thursday, February 1, 2024 12:08 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country, 
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Annabelle Wilkinson 
908 Beechwood St NE  Grand Rapids, MI 49505-3710 awilkinson182@gmail.com 

41
Ulrich, Jake
From:
lsmalley6872@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of loren Smalley <lsmalley6872
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Thursday, February 1, 2024 4:25 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mr. loren Smalley 
608 Concord Ct  PoƩerville, MI 48876-9504 lsmalley6872@gmail.com 

42
Ulrich, Jake
From:
foxbob1298@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Barbara Fox <foxbob1298
@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Wednesday, January 31, 2024 10:21 PM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Barbara Fox 
330 Chidester St Apt 701  YpsilanƟ, MI 48197-5513 foxbob1298@yahoo.com 

43
Ulrich, Jake
From:
wingnutball@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of Karyn Goff 
<wingnutball@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Wednesday, January 31, 2024 10:34 AM
To:
LCRI
Subject:
Finalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to replace lead water pipes
CauƟon: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise addiƟonal cauƟon when deciding whether to open 
aƩachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear EPA Docket Center LCRI, 
 
I urge you to ﬁnalize EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 to implement a strong Lead & Copper Rule that requires all lead water pipes 
to be replaced in the next decade. 
 
Old, outdated lead drinking water pipes are a serious threat to human health. Lead contaminaƟon can cause severe 
health issues, including irreversible brain damage in children. With thousands of lead pipes sƟll in use across the country,
we need a robust new Lead & Copper Rule that gets the lead out of drinking water and protects the health of our 
communiƟes. 
 
Access to clean, safe drinking water is a basic human right that we must protect. Please ﬁnalize the strongest possible 
Lead & Copper Rule and help solve the lead contaminaƟon crisis once and for all. 
 
Thank you for your Ɵme and consideraƟon. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. Karyn Goﬀ 
14055 Shadywood Dr  Plymouth, MI 48170-3150 wingnutball@yahoo.com

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0964 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 2, 2024 
The Honorable Michael Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC  20460 
 
FOR ELECTRONIC DELIVERY 
RE: 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper:  Improvements (Docket 
Id#:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
The American Water Works Association (AWWA) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI or Proposed Rule).1  AWWA is a proponent of 
strong protections for water consumers today while we work for a future when lead is no longer in 
contact with drinking water.  
The Proposed Rule contains a number of positive developments that AWWA strongly supports, 
especially the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) decision to continue the use of a treatment 
technique-based primary standard for lead and copper.  AWWA also supports the decision to make 
service line replacement a separate requirement from triggered actions following a lead action level 
exceedance. We remain a strong proponent of the complete removal of all lead service lines – in their 
entirety – through a reasonable approach over time. 
However, AWWA has significant concerns that the requirements, as proposed, are not feasible to 
implement.  By EPA’s own estimate, the cost ($3.0 – 4.9 billion annualized) associated with the LCRI is 
higher than virtually all prior Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) rulemakings.  We are concerned that 
most, if not all regulated systems will not have the resources needed to meet EPA’s ambitious timeline 
for lead service line removals.  We are also concerned with the potential impacts on households that 
cannot afford higher water bills, as increased compliance costs are directly passed on to customers in 
many cases.   
In finalizing the LCRI, EPA has the opportunity to revise the current proposal so that it enhances the 
protection of public health, builds public confidence in the regulation of water systems, and allows for 
efficient oversight and enforcement.  The public is best served by a lead and copper regulation that is 
practical to implement and legally sound.  A final rule that is feasible for public water systems and states 
 
1 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,878 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
Government Affairs Office 
1300 Eye Street NW 
Suite 701W 
Washington, DC 20005-3314 
T 202.628.8303 
F 202.628.2846 

Docket Id#:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 2, 2024 
Page 2 
to implement is essential to achieving our shared goal of reducing the risk of lead from drinking water.  
Community water systems and the public are ill-served by shifting and uncertain legal requirements, 
which can cause systems to spend limited resources inefficiently or distract from other urgent public 
health concerns.   
The Safe Drinking Water Act requires that the LCRI be “feasible,” and in finalizing the LCRI requirements, 
EPA must also consider the nature of the entities that it is regulating: many public water systems (PWSs) 
are small, rural, public, or quasi-public entities with limited resources, complex budgeting and 
contracting procedures, and aging infrastructure. They are being asked to simultaneously implement a 
number of new EPA regulatory proposals that are capital and resource intensive.  These entities will face 
significant logistical, financial, and practical challenges to securing the qualified personnel they need to 
complete this work, as well as to obtain and deploy any grant money that may be available to assist 
them. We are concerned that many of the regulated PWSs will simply be unable to comply.  
AWWA supports EPA’s proposal to largely transition directly from the 1991 Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) 
to the LCRI, which will prevent regulated systems and states with primacy from inefficiently spending 
resources on regulatory requirements that will soon be superseded by a fundamentally different set of 
requirements. As EPA has correctly recognized, preparing for and implementing the Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR) will not help water systems or states be further prepared for the LCRI but will 
instead detract and distract from their ability to do so.  However, we further urge EPA to immediately 
postpone the compliance dates for the LCRR not otherwise continuing under the LCRI.  Given the 
substantial changes proposed in the LCRI and the fact that the compliance date for the LCRR is October 
16, 2024, local resources may be inefficiently spent on complying with the LCRR rather than toward 
compliance with the LCRI. 
The following detailed comments contain suggestions that (1) clarify, (2) simplify, and (3) revise the 
Proposed Rule with the specific goals of increasing the efficiency of public health risk reduction and 
reducing the burden of rule implementation on states, water systems and customers.   
AWWA is concerned that there are elements of the proposed LCRI that violate the SDWA and 
Administrative Procedure Act (APA) and will not withstand legal scrutiny in the courts.  If these and 
other considerations are not addressed in the final rule, water systems will be faced with more 
uncertainty going forward. The attached detailed comments point out a number of issues that EPA must 
address in finalizing the LCRI, but the most critical are   
1.
The proposed LCRI inaccurately equates community water systems having “access” to
private property with a system having “control” over the service line on private property
as described in the SDWA.
2.
The proposed LCRI asserts without demonstration in the record that the rule is feasible as
proposed. Particularly, EPA has not demonstrated the feasibility of:
a.
Replacing all lead and galvanized requiring replacement service lines within 10
years without substantial and currently unavailable federal subsidies and
b.
Lowering the lead action level to 10 µg/L, while also substantially altering the
dataset on which the lead action level exceedance is determined

Docket Id#:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 2, 2024 
Page 3 
AWWA agrees that water systems, communities, states, and the federal government should be striving 
to fully remove all lead service lines in their entirety and that water systems should be actively managing 
the corrosivity of the water they distribute.  The regulatory requirements aimed at reaching those goals 
must be reliably achievable. Timeframes for required actions must be possible within the resources 
reasonably available to water systems, and complying with this regulation should not negatively impact 
the time and resources required to address other high priority risks and system improvements.  
Over the last several decades, the drinking water community has made tremendous strides in reducing 
lead levels in drinking water.  More can and should be done.  The next steps in drinking water policy to 
further lead risk reduction must be credible, legally sound, truly feasible, and appropriate to the 
challenge at hand. AWWA hopes that these comments will assist EPA as it formulates a final LCRI that 
achieves additional risk reduction while recognizing the additional resource-intensive challenges facing 
water systems, including per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), cybersecurity, climate change and 
aging infrastructure. 
If you have any questions regarding this correspondence, please contact me at your convenience. 
Best regards, 
SUBMITTED ON BEHALF OF AWWA 
G. Tracy Mehan, III
Executive Director for Government Affairs
cc: 
Bruno Pigott, EPA/OW 
Jeffrey Prieto, EPA/OGC 
Jennifer McLain, EPA/OGWDW 
Eric Burneson, EPA/OGWDW 
Hannah Holsinger, EPA/OGWDW/SRMD 
Jeffrey Kempic, EPA/OGWDW/SRMD 
Michael Goldberg, EPA/OGWDW/SRMD 
Attachments (1 with appendices) 
Who is AWWA 
The American Water Works Association (AWWA) is an international, nonprofit, scientific and educational 
society dedicated to providing total water solutions assuring the effective management of water. Founded 
in 1881, the Association is the largest organization of water supply professionals in the world. Our 
membership includes more than 4,000 utilities that supply roughly 80 percent of the nation's drinking 
water and treat almost half of the nation’s wastewater. Our 50,000-plus total membership represents the 
full spectrum of the water community: public water and wastewater systems, environmental advocates, 
scientists, academicians, and others who hold a genuine interest in water, our most important resource. 
AWWA unites the diverse water community to advance public health, safety, the economy, and the 
environment.  


Attachment 1 
FORMAL COMMENTS ON THE 
NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATIONS FOR LEAD AND COPPER: 
IMPROVEMENTS PROPOSED RULE 
88 Federal Register 84878, December 6, 2023 
Docket Id#:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Prepared by: 
American Water Works Association 
1300 Eye Street, NW, Suite 701W 
Washington, DC  20005 
February 2, 2024 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... i  
1 
Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 1 
2 
General Comments .............................................................................................................................. 2 
2.1 Positive Aspects of LCRI Proposal .................................................................................................... 2 
2.2 Critical Revisions Essential to Rulemaking ....................................................................................... 3 
2.3 Essential Policy Support Needed ..................................................................................................... 5 
2.4 Affordability ..................................................................................................................................... 6 
2.5 Opportunities for Greater Clarity................................................................................................... 11 
2.6 Guidance to Support Rulemaking .................................................................................................. 13 
2.7 Public Education – Required Communication ............................................................................... 13 
2.8 Corrections to Avoid Misinterpretation ......................................................................................... 15 
2.9 Opportunity for Future Improvement ........................................................................................... 16 
3 
Requested Comments ........................................................................................................................ 17 
3.1 General Matters ............................................................................................................................. 17 
3.2 Reduce Burden ............................................................................................................................... 19 
3.3 Prompt, Fair, and Equitable Enforcement ..................................................................................... 23 
3.4 Service Line Replacement .............................................................................................................. 26 
3.5 Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper ................................................................................................ 49 
3.6 Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan ........................................................... 56 
3.7 Lead Action and Trigger Levels ...................................................................................................... 61 
3.8 Corrosion Control ........................................................................................................................... 65 
3.9 Compliance Alternatives for Lead Action Level Exceedance by a Small CWS or NTNCWS ............ 69 
3.10 Public Education ............................................................................................................................. 70 
3.11 Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances .................. 78 
3.12 Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities ........................................................................ 83 
3.13 Reporting and Recordkeeping ....................................................................................................... 86 
3.14 Compliance Dates .......................................................................................................................... 90 
3.15 Consumer Confidence Report ........................................................................................................ 93 
3.16 Definitions ...................................................................................................................................... 94 
3.17 Questions from within Preamble ................................................................................................... 95 
4 
Legal Review ....................................................................................................................................... 97 
4.1 Introduction to Legal Section ......................................................................................................... 97 

4.2 Legal Standard ............................................................................................................................... 99 
4.3 EPA Reasonably Determined Not to Set an MCL for Lead Because it Remains Infeasible to 
Do So..........................................................................................................................................  100 
4.4 A Treatment Technique-Based Rule Remains the Most Sound Approach for Regulating Lead in 
Drinking Water and EPA is Within its Discretion to Continue to Use This Approach. .......................... 104 
4.5 A more stringent regulatory regime or implementing LCRR until LCRI goes into effect would not 
be feasible. ............................................................................................................................................ 105 
4.6 EPA Reasonably Interpreted the SDWA’s Anti-Backsliding Provision in Light of the Treatment 
Technique Approach ............................................................................................................................. 111 
4.7 The SDWA does not allow regulation of private property outside of public water systems and 
“control” cannot be equated with “access.” ........................................................................................ 113 
4.8 The Proposed Rule creates federalism concerns and risks creating unnecessary conflicts with 
state and local laws. .............................................................................................................................. 121 
5 
Economic Analysis ............................................................................................................................ 122 
5.1 Estimate of Lead Risk Reduction is Not Substantiated ................................................................ 122 
5.2 Health Burdens (Costs) Not Addressed in Analysis ...................................................................... 125 
5.3 Distributing Cost over Time ......................................................................................................... 128 
5.4 Cost of Service Line Replacement ................................................................................................ 129 
5.5 Likelihood of Additional WQP Sampling Site ............................................................................... 133 
5.6 Assuming No Reduction in Lead Exposure ................................................................................... 134 
5.7 Understanding Post-Partial Lead Concentrations ........................................................................ 135 
5.8 Costing Expectations for CCT Decision-making ........................................................................... 135 
5.9 Analysis Misjudges the Impact of Orthophosphate Addition on Cost ......................................... 135 
5.10 Alternative Definition of Lead Content Service Lines to be Replaced ......................................... 137 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A 
Implications of the Draft EPA Lead and Copper Rule Improvements: Human Health Risk 
and Benefits 
Appendix B 
Full Lead Service Line Replacement Guidance (WRF 4713) (copyrighted) 
Appendix C 
AWWA Comments on Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-
1012) 
Appendix D 
Corrosion Control Treatment Training (copyrighted) 
Appendix E 
When and How to Evaluate Corrosion Control Treatment When Conditions Change (WRF 
5032) (copyrighted) 

Appendix F 
Guidance for Using Pipe Rigs to Inform Lead and Copper Corrosion Control Treatment 
Decisions (WRF #5081) (copyrighted) 
Appendix G Strategies for assessing optimized corrosion control treatment of lead and copper 
(copyrighted) 
Appendix H 
Analysis of Impacts of Corrosion Control Treatment on Lead and Copper Levels over Time 
Appendix I 
Comparing the Cost of Bottled Water vs In-Home Filter Provision for a Lead Action Level 
Exceedance and Review of Filter Cost Estimates for LCRI 
Appendix J 
ANSI/AWWA C810 - Replacement and Flushing of Lead Service Lines (copyrighted) 
Appendix K 
CDM Smith Final Report. Considerations when Costing Lead Service Line Identification and 
Replacement.  

 
 
GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS 
ABC 
 
Associated Builders and Contractors 
ALICE  
Asset Limited, Income Constrained, Employed 
APA 
 
Administrative Procedures Act 
ASDWA  
Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
AWWA  
American Water Works Association 
BIL 
 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law 
BIOPOC  
Black, Indigenous, and People of Color 
BLL 
 
Blood Lead Level 
BOY 
 
Beginning of Month 
CCR 
 
Consumer Confidence Report 
CCT 
 
Corrosion Control Treatment 
CDC 
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
CERCLA  
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 
CIFA 
 
Council of Infrastructure Financing Authorities 
CPI 
 
Consumer Price Index 
CVP 
 
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary   
CWA 
 
Clean Water Act 
CWS 
 
Community Water System 
DWINSA 
Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment 
DWSRF   
Drinking Water State Revolving Loan Fund  
EOY 
 
End of Year 
EPA 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EUM 
 
Effective Utility Management 
FOIA  
 
Freedom of Information Act  
GDP 
 
Gross Domestic Product 
GIS 
 
Geographic Information System 
GRRSL  
Galvanized Requiring Replacement Service Line 
IQ 
 
Intelligence quotient 
IRS 
 
Internal Revenue Service 
ISA 
 
Integrated Science Assessment for Lead 
IESWTR  
Interim Enhanced Surface Water Treatment Rule 
LCR 
 
Lead and Copper Rule 
LCRI 
 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
LCRR 
 
Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
LSL 
 
Lead Service Line 
LSUSL  
Lead Status Unknown Service Line 
LT2ESWTR 
Long-Term 2 Enhanced Surface Water Treatment Rule  
MCL 
 
Maximum Contaminant Level 

 
 
MCLG  
Maximum Contaminant Level Goal 
M/DBP  
Microbial / Disinfection Byproduct Rulemakings 
NHANES  
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
NPDWR  
National Primary Drinking Water Regulation 
NTNCWS  
Non-transient Noncommunity Water System 
OCCT 
 
Optimized Corrosion Control Treatment  
PFAS 
 
Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
PFOA 
 
Perfluorooctanoic acid 
PFOS 
 
Perfluorooctane sulfonate  
POTW  
Publicly Operated Treatment Works 
PQL 
 
Practical Quantitation Level 
PUC 
 
Public Utility Commission 
PWS 
 
Public Water System 
SBREFA  
Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act 
SDWA  
Safe Drinking Water Act 
Stage 2 DBPR 
Stage 2 Disinfection and Disinfection Byproduct Rule  
TWA 
 
Time-weighted Average 
UMRA  
Unfunded Mandates Reform Act 
VSL 
 
Value of a Statistical Life 
WQP 
 
Water Quality Parameter 
WRF 
 
Water Research Foundation (aka AWWARF, AwwaRF, WaterRF) 
 
 

 
i 
 
FORMAL COMMENTS BY THE 
AMERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION 
ON THE 
NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATIONS FOR LEAD AND COPPER: 
IMPROVEMENTS PROPOSED RULE 
88 Federal Register 84878, December 6, 2023 
Docket Id#:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The American Water Works Association (AWWA) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI).2  AWWA is a proponent of strong protections for 
water consumers today while we work for a future when lead no longer is in contact with drinking 
water.  
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has proposed a rule framework that addresses a 
number of stakeholder concerns.  The proposal is an important step toward developing a clear 
regulatory framework that the drinking water community can implement for the benefit of the public 
we serve. 
Lead is a serious and well-recognized public health concern. Our nation’s history of reducing 
environmental lead exposure is a tremendous success story, including the reduction of lead in drinking 
water accomplished under the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA).  In revising the Lead and Copper Rule 
(LCR), the next major opportunity for reducing lead release is taking steps to ensure there is less lead in 
contact with drinking water.  Further reductions in lead in water must recognize the practical realities 
facing regulated systems and state primacy agencies be accomplished within the technical, managerial, 
and fiscal means of local communities.  Proactive, incremental risk reduction measures like lead service 
line (LSL) replacement and improved corrosion control treatment (CCT) should not come at the cost of 
delaying essential infrastructure investments in any community water system (CWS).   
A SIGNIFICANT STEP MISSING IN LCRI RULEMAKING 
As EPA has correctly recognized, preparing for and implementing the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
(LCRR) will not cause water systems or states to be further prepared for the LCRI but will instead detract 
and distract from their ability to do so.   Given the substantial changes proposed in the LCRI, EPA must 
immediately postpone the compliance dates for the LCRR through a separate, targeted rulemaking.  The 
compliance deadlines for the LCRR are set to go into effect on October 16, 2024.  Despite the fact that 
EPA has proposed removing many of these compliance requirements through the finalized LCRI prior to 
the October 2024 compliance deadline, until EPA changes the federal regulation with which water 
systems must comply, local resources must continue be spent on complying with the LCRR rather than 
toward compliance with the LCRI. 
As EPA weighed whether to pursue the LCRI rulemaking, the agency delayed the effective date and 
compliance dates of the LCRR, but then let the rule become effective.  Today, water systems must 
assume that the LCRR is a binding regulation and must spend resources to focus on complying with that 
 
2 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,878. 

 
ii 
 
rule’s October 2024 and January 2025 milestones, regardless of EPA’s new proposal to remove those 
requirements prior to the LCRR compliance deadline.  Had EPA not so substantially altered the structure 
of the LCR in its proposal, this step might not have been needed, but the LCRI proposal makes clear that 
postponing LCRR compliance dates except for those described in Proposed § 141.80(a)(4)(d)(i) is a 
necessary and urgently needed action.  
ELIMINATING BARRIERS TO SUCCESS 
The proposed LCRI has two fundamental objectives (1) removing lead service lines (LSLs) and galvanized 
requiring replacement service lines (GRRSLs) that may contribute lead to consumer’s taps and (2) 
bringing additional focus to CCT where it is not reliably limiting soluble lead to very low concentrations.  
These are both sound goals.  It is important that the final LCRI be crafted with these goals and practical 
implementation in mind.  Steps that EPA can easily take in finalizing the rule include: 
1. Focus service line replacement requirements on replacing service lines where there is the 
potential for real risk reduction (i.e., service lines that are in active use providing water to 
drinking water taps in structures) and revise the definition of service line to prevent 
misinterpretation of customer-owned pipe networks as “service lines” subject to the LCRI 
requirements. 
2. More clearly recognize that systems with a very low probability of LSLs or GRRSLs should 
have a clear, simple path to compliance, focused on having field and communication 
protocols for the unlikely situation where a LSL or GRRSL is encountered. 
3. Eliminate the Proposed Rule’s annual replacement rate as a regulatory metric. 
4. Simplify and eliminate public water system (PWS) reporting and state record retention 
requirements that are of limited value for rule implementation or oversight. 
5. Simplify customer notification requirements, allowing PWSs to target communication 
effectively, work within practical timeframes, and use electronic notification strategies 
that are auditable. 
6. Clearly establish in regulatory text that good-faith outreach efforts are adequate to meet 
treatment technique requirements for service line characterization and replacement. 
7. Affirm that community water systems (CWSs) can include lead observations from Tier 3, 4, 
or 5 sample sites when good-faith system outreach to remaining Tier 1 and 2 sample sites 
in the approved monitoring plan do not produce sufficient Tier 1 and 2 sample site 
observations. 
8. Require tracking of lead connectors within the LCR’s materials evaluation requirement 
rather than within the service line inventory requirements. 
9. Assure that efforts that occurred prior to the LCRR and LCRI effective dates are properly 
credited. Specifically, appropriately accomplished proactive efforts—including corrosion 
control pipe rig studies and school and child-care facility monitoring—should “count” 
toward compliance with the final rule even if they take place now.  
10. The rule should not include any ban on partial replacement of LSLs or GRRSLs when risk 
reduction measures are implemented, including replacement practice in keeping with the 

 
iii 
 
notification provisions of the LCRI and practices described in ANSI/AWWA C810 - 
Replacement and Flushing of Lead Service Lines.3 
AWWA’s comments include additional opportunities to streamline the Proposed Rule so that it more 
efficiently delivers the desired increased public health protection and is more readily implemented by 
states and PWSs. 
COMPLY WITH RELEVANT STATUTES AND LEGAL LIMITS 
EPA, states, and PWSs must achieve policy objectives within the boundaries of all applicable and 
relevant laws and regulations.  The SDWA requires that that the Proposed Rule be “feasible.”  EPA must 
craft a rule that takes into account the resource constraints and other challenges simultaneously facing 
PWSs.  As drafted, EPA’s proposed requirements ignore the shortages on available personnel to perform 
the require work and constraints on systems’ budgets and ability to pass on compliance costs, while 
overestimating the ability of systems to timely receive grant money that can make up for the significant 
financial impacts of the Proposed Rule.  Drafting a rule that many, if not almost of the targeted PWSs, 
cannot accomplish not only violates the SDWA but creates a greater public health risk by distracting 
from other more pressing concerns.  While AWWA recommends that EPA scale back the more 
burdensome requirements and extend the timeline for service line removal, at the very least the final 
regulation must have off-ramps in instances when the underpinning assumptions for EPA’s projection of 
the rule’s feasible prove to be unsound.   
EPA is also proposing a definition of “control” that goes beyond the bounds of the SDWA.  Specifically, 
the Proposed Rule takes the unsupportable position that a PWS having “access” to private property is 
equivalent to having “control” as defined by the SDWA. Water systems as described in SDWA do not 
include piping not owned by the water system, even when actual owners use their “control” to grant 
“access” to water systems. This aspect of the Proposed Rule is not legally sound. 
The federal government, states, and local government all have a role in ensuring that the portions of 
service lines on private property warranting replacement are adequately addressed.  EPA should finalize 
the LCRI within the bounds of current applicable laws and regulations.  And importantly, EPA, states and 
the water sector should work collaboratively to identify and remove barriers to full-service line 
replacement beyond EPA’s immediate jurisdiction under SDWA. 
REFLECT FEDERAL FUNDING BARRIERS IN RULEMAKING 
One of the significant barriers to achieving the goals of the LCRI is available discretionary funding.  In 
proposing the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI), EPA estimated that nationally, PWSs will 
need to expend $3–4.9 billion annually to comply with the proposal.  While AWWA’s analysis indicates 
EPA has underestimated the cost of Proposed Rule requirements, the financial challenge is very large, by 
the agency’s own analysis.  This cost will be borne by thousands of water systems, but will primarily be 
supported by the water rates charged to households in about 4,400 CWSs.  Moreover, most of the 
increased capital and operating expenses from the proposal that CWSs and individual households will 
incur occurs in the first 13 years of rule implementation, rather than the 35-year span over which EPA 
annualized the cost of the Proposed Rule. 
 
3 ANSI / AWWA. C810 - Replacement and Flushing of Lead Service Lines. (2017) (copy enclosed in Appendix J) 

 
iv 
 
EPA should work with the water sector to develop a more robust estimate of the cost of service line 
replacement and CCT changes likely to result from the rule—in particular the cost of service line 
replacement on private property.  Such an estimate would inform the administration’s budget request 
and legislative agenda for federal funding support and help define an achievable milestone for replacing 
all LSLs and GRRSLs. 
EPA should also prompt the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to provide clarity to EPA, states, 
communities, and individual taxpayers regarding the tax consequences of a publicly funded service line 
replacement.  Individual taxpayers can ill afford additional tax consequences from receiving publicly 
funded replacements. This is an especially troubling issue for taxpayers for whom a taxable benefit 
would impact their access to the nation’s social safety net programs. 
RECOGNIZING PROPOSED IMPROVEMENTS 
EPA made several important and sound policy decisions in this most recent review of the LCR.  Those 
decisions warrant attention and support.  For example, the agency: 
1. Properly chose to continue to regulate these contaminants through a treatment technique 
after carefully reviewing options to regulate lead and copper using a Maximum 
Contaminant Level (MCL) or treatment technique. 
2. Delayed implementation of ancillary aspects of the LCRR, such as changes in requirements 
for monitoring, public education, sampling in schools, and associated reporting, so that 
work can proceed in an organized and efficient manner. 
3. Established a separate requirement for LSL and GRRSL replacement with the objective of 
full replacement to the extent feasible so that PWSs can pursue service line replacement 
in an appropriately planned approach. 
4. Recognized that CCT changes resulting from the rule should, where possible, be delayed 
until LSLs and GRRSLs are removed. 
5. Recognized that the lead action level is not a health-based concentration of lead in water 
that should guide individual household actions. 
FINALIZING THE LCRI 
Public health is best protected when regulations are based on a sound premise and regulated entities 
are focused on meaningful opportunities for risk reduction that are actually feasible for PWSs and the 
state primacy agencies to implement. In finalizing the LCRI, EPA should revise the Proposed Rule 
requirements and supporting documentation to that end.  AWWA hopes that its comments will assist 
EPA in doing so.

 
 
 
FORMAL COMMENTS BY THE 
AMERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION 
ON THE 
NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATIONS FOR LEAD AND COPPER: 
IMPROVEMENTS PROPOSED RULE 
88 Federal Register 84878, December 6, 2023 
Docket Id#:  EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
The Lead and Copper Rule Improvements proposal (LCRI or Proposed Rule) represent an important step 
for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).  In making revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule 
(LCR) as modified in 2021 by the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) EPA acknowledged that the 
long-term goal of removing sources of lead in contact with drinking water, particularly lead service lines 
(LSLs), is an important opportunity to reduce the potential for lead release to drinking water.  EPA also 
correctly recognized that that public water systems (PWSs) should not alter corrosion control practice 
that is already performing well until large sources of lead that influence corrosion control practice 
selection are removed.  In these respects, EPA’s current proposal is aligned with AWWA’s policy 
statements on Drinking Water Quality, Lead Service Line Management, and Distribution System Water 
Quality.  EPA and the drinking water community are united in the goal to replace all LSLs completely and 
to effectively manage water’s corrosivity to the materials used to deliver that water to customers. 
While AWWA supports the overall goal of EPA’s Proposed Rule, the proposal asks more of community 
water systems (CWS) than will be achievable by many systems and is therefore not feasible.  If finalized 
as drafted: 
1. In the absence of substantial additional federal and state funding CWSs will be forced to 
defer important water infrastructure investments. 
2. There are not sufficient federal or state infrastructure funding assistance to enable CWSs 
to achieve the service line material characterization and replacements required by the 
Proposed Rule.  The associated increases in household water rates (i.e., costs to 
consumers) in some communities will be substantial. 
3. The public education requirements will result in high violation rates because the 
expectations for performance are not achievable within the LCRI’s proposed structure 
even when a water system makes best efforts to comply. 
4. CWSs with many lead status unknown service lines (LSUSLs) and few LSLs could be out of 
compliance with the minimum 10% replacement rate and expend limited resources trying 
to “prove” LSUSLs are not lead. 
Importantly, the Proposed Rule will create an environment where EPA, state primacy agencies, and 
CWSs are in repeated and ongoing conflict with the communities they serve.  Delivering information and 
making demands of private citizens and rate payers that will erode public trust in both CWSs and the 
government agencies overseeing the rule’s implementation.   
 

 
2 
 
In finalizing the LCRI, EPA has the opportunity to revise the current proposal so that it instead builds 
public confidence in the regulatory oversight of water systems, enhances existing strong public health 
protections, and allows for efficient oversight and enforcement.  AWWA also notes that the public is 
best served by a regulation of lead and copper that is practical to implement and legally defensible as 
such a rule will allow PWSs to be able to address the issue of lead in drinking water.  CWSs and the 
public are ill-served by shifting and uncertain legal requirements, which force systems to mis-allocated 
limited resources in response to changing regulatory regimes.  AWWA is particularly concerned that 
because the Proposed Rule violates the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) and Administrative Procedure 
Act (APA), it will not withstand legal scrutiny in the courts, creating even more uncertainty going 
forward. AWWA offers the following recommendations with these concerns in mind. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
If EPA’s goal is to protect public health, it must craft regulations that take into account the nature of 
entities it is regulating, as well as the primacy agencies responsible for implementing those regulations.  
EPA must also take into account the rate-based structures of these systems, which means that 
compliance costs will be directly passed on to local customers, many of which are individual households.  
It is useful to keep the following in mind when considering the burdens associated with the Proposed 
Rule and when considering how to improve the agency’s Proposal: 
1. There are almost 70,000 CWSs and non-transient noncommunity (NTNCW) systems 
subject to the LCR and supervising compliance of all of these systems falls on primacy 
agencies. 
2. The vast majority PWSs that must comply with the LCR serve less than 10,000 persons 
(67% of PWSs and 91% of CWSs subject to the rule).  More than 40,000 of the CWSs 
managed under the LCR serve less than 3,300 persons. 
As EPA has structured the proposed LCRI, the vast majority of the costs and implementation challenges 
fall on just 4,390 CWSs and the greatest system-level burden falls on an even smaller group of 1,016 
CWSs serving more than 50,000 persons.  Said differently, the $3 – 4.8 billion in annualized burden on 
PWSs EPA estimates for implementing the proposed LCRI fall primarily on roughly 4,400 CWS that each 
must comply within the means of their local community’s ability to pay for expenses associated with this 
rulemaking while also making investments in infrastructure, personnel, and operations to assure safe 
and reliable water service in all other respects.  The cost of implementing the rule is not equally 
distributed across the United States but rather highly localized.   
2.1 
Positive Aspects of LCRI Proposal 
The proposed LCRI would make several important improvements over the current codified requirements 
of 40 CFR 141.  AWWA supports the inclusion of these aspects of the Proposal in the final LCRI.  
Improvements of note include: 
1. Retaining the treatment technique regulatory framework for the control of lead and 
copper in drinking water 
2. Moving lead service line replacement from a triggered requirement to a sustained 
program, separate from reliably maintaining observed lead levels below the action level 

 
3 
 
3. Recognizing that the lead action level is not a health-based concentration of lead in water 
that should guide individual household actions. 
4. Recognizing the importance of delaying changes to optimized corrosion control until lead 
service line materials are replaced as directed by the LCRI are achieved 
5. Continuing recognition that CWSs face legal constraints over and above the SDWA that 
limit their ability to accomplish full-lead service line replacement  
6. Recognizing the importance of customer education with respect to achieving effective 
lead risk reduction 
7. Delaying implementation of ancillary aspects of the LCRR such as changes in requirements 
for monitoring, public education, sampling in schools, and associated reporting so that 
work can proceed in an organized and efficient manner 
8. Recognizes the importance of simplifying the rule in order to facilitate correct and 
effective implementation 
The proposed LCRI also takes steps toward making regulatory requirements of the LCRR more 
implementable.  Adherence to the rule requirements is documented through annual certifications rather 
than extensive documentation submissions for: 
1. The number of service lines not replaced due to a lack of consent4 
2. Offer to inspect any incorrectly categorized service lines5 
2.2 
Critical Revisions Essential to Rulemaking 
There are provisions in the proposed LCRI that must be changed prior to the rule being finalized.  
Without these changes water systems will be subject to regulatory requirements that are not legally 
sound because they are beyond the scope of the SDWA, in tension with many state and local laws, 
arbitrarily require the significant misuse of community resources, or are impossible to successfully 
achieve: 
1. Given that the compliance dates for the LCRR go into effect on October 16, 2024, and the 
substantial changes proposed in the LCRI, EPA must act immediately (prior to the intended 
promulgation of the final LCRI) to extend the compliance dates for the provisions of the 
LCRR that EPA does not intend to continue under the LCRI.  Currently, systems are 
expending resources to prepare to comply with the LCRR as it is the codified regulation, 
while EPA is proposing to dramatically change both the substance and deadlines for all but 
three of the LCRR requirements.  Water systems have a duty to comply with applicable 
regulations and have no assurance EPA will meet its promulgation timeline nor that 
enforcement discretion will occur should EPA not publish the final rule prior to the LCRR 
compliance dates. 
2. EPA must return to the definition of “control” it adopted in the LCR revisions in 2000, that 
“control” is based on ownership.  The definition of what is “under the control” of water 
 
4 Proposed Rule § 141.90(e)(7)(i). 
5 Proposed Rule § 141.90(e)(14). 

 
4 
 
systems as described in SDWA does not include piping not owned by the water system, 
even when the actual owner uses their “control” to grant “access” to a water system.   
3. EPA must prepare an economic analysis that is in keeping with the Office of Management 
and Budget and the agency’s own guidelines for credibility and being fit-for-purpose: 
a. The calculations of risks and benefits underlying the LCRI analysis use profile data 
centered around the fifth liter data as the basis for assigning water lead levels. 
Fifth liter samples are on average approximately a factor of five higher than time-
weighted average values presumed in health effects models. If this factor of five is 
accounted for, both intelligence quotient (IQ) and cardiovascular benefits 
calculated on the basis of a compliance sample would be reduced by a factor of 
five and the net benefit to cost ratio considerably reduced. 
b. The economic analysis annualizes costs that will be accrued over the space of less 
than 13 years to a period of 35 years misrepresenting the acute economic burden 
the rule presents for impacted communities because PWSs pass compliance cost 
on directly to their local customer-base. 
c. Throughout the economic analysis EPA underestimates the cost of 
implementation.  EPA underestimates the cost of specific required activities, does 
not include aspects of compliance not specifically enumerated in the regulatory 
requirement, and underestimates the number of systems impacted or instances 
when a cost will be incurred.  
Without a credible federal estimate of benefits and costs for the final LCRI, neither policy 
makers at any level of government or the general public will truly understand the magnitude of 
the tasks that are envisioned in this rulemaking or the likely benefit.  This undermines the 
public’s ability to meaningfully comment on the Proposed Rule.  Moreover, without that 
credible backdrop for future funding and policy conversations, neither decision-makers or the 
public will support water system and state regulatory agencies as they attempt to fulfill the rule 
requirements. 
4. EPA must recognize in the rule structure that there are two categories of CWSs following 
the LCRR inventory process.  Category 1 operates a distribution system where a 
recognizable fraction of service lines are LSLs or GRRSLs and Category 2 which operates a 
distribution system where there is a very low probability that any appreciable number of 
LSLs or GRRSLs exist.   
a. The LCRI should not require the latter category to expend resources needlessly.  
Rather than requiring such Category 2 systems to proceed through the LCRI 
service line replacement requirements as though they actually have many LSLs 
and GRRSLs, this group of systems should have a second path to compliance that 
focuses primarily on (1) having a protocol for the rare instance when a LSL or 
GRRSL is discovered and (2) the validation study to assure the initial 
characterization of the system’s inventory is correct.   
b. Important from the agency’s perspective, this approach incentivizes CWSs to take 
steps prior to the beginning of the final LCRI compliance window to transition to 

 
5 
 
Category 2 if they are currently a Category 1 system (e.g., accelerate service line 
characterization and validation studies).  This revision will be very important to 
smaller CWSs. 
2.3 
Essential Policy Support Needed 
Since early 2021 EPA has focused its lead service line replacement policy work on three facets to the 
challenge: allotment of state revolving loan fund monies made available by congress, adding technical 
assistance capacity, and establishing a regulatory requirement for full lead service line replacement.  
Achieving the goal of full replacement of all LSLs and GRRSLs nationwide will require the Biden 
Administration to take additional policy actions, beyond those it is currently pursuing: 
1. Obtaining congressional appropriations will be necessary to support the regulatory 
requirements of the LCRI, and at best such funding is uncertain.  Achieving the service line 
replacement objective of the proposed LCRI, removing all LSLs and GRRSLs within a 
decade will easily cost $12,000 - $15,000 per replaced service line, with much of that cost 
resulting from the replacement of privately-owned service lines if that requirement 
remains in the final rule.   
Removing all lead service lines fully is a goal the water sector shares with the 
administration but if that goal is to be achieved it will require substantial additional 
federal funding than is available at present.  Moreover, if more federal funds are made 
available those funds cannot be directed only to disadvantaged communities.  Municipally 
and investor operated water systems of all sizes and financial condition will need 
assistance to implement the Final LCRI.  Proactive, incremental risk reduction measures 
like LSL replacement should not come at the cost of delaying essential infrastructure 
investments in any CWS.  
EPA’s current estimate in the proposed LCRI Economic Analysis is inadequate to support 
the federal funding required.  The sector, including AWWA, would be glad to join in a 
cooperative effort to develop a sound estimate of the national cost of the required service 
line replacement, so that the administration and Congress can determine what service line 
replacement schedule the federal government is prepared to support. 
2. Obtain relief for taxpayers who receive federal, state or locally funded LSL or GRRSL 
replacements.  The use of public dollars to benefit an individual property owner (i.e., the 
replacement of a LSL or GRRSL) could be treated by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) as 
taxable income.  Taxable income has implications both for individual households annual 
revenue tax bills, as well as their ability to access income-based elements of our nation’s 
social safety net.  This issue has been brought forward to EPA repeatedly without 
resolution.  EPA’s successful intervention with its sister agency, the IRS, is necessary to 
obtain 
a. A determination that these property owners do not face a tax liability.  That IRS 
exemption is needed immediately to facilitate property owner participation in 
service line replacement programs. 
b. A separate, but related, decision by the IRS that the provision of a LSL or GRRSL 
replacement using public resources does not require preparation of an IRS 1099, a 

 
6 
 
document that to be completed requires the recipient’s social security number or 
business tax identification number. 
2.4 
Affordability 
EPA must take cost into account with setting primary standards including the development of treatment 
techniques, including the environmental justice implications of these burdens, and has failed to do so in 
violation of the SDWA, APA, and executive orders.   
CWS Ratepayers will Bear Cost of Final LCRI -- The cost impacts of the proposed LCRI are substantial and 
at present will fall directly on CWS households either in the form of direct charges or through increases 
in water rates.  The cost of drinking water infrastructure is borne almost entirely by the rates and 
charges paid by the CWS’s customers.  Even if available, outside funding will not resolve this issue as 
most federal and state infrastructure funding comes in the form of loans.  Also, with few exceptions 
(e.g., preparation of service line inventories) federal funding is not available to subsidize operational 
expenses.  Consequently, federal infrastructure funding to the degree it is available may reduce the 
additional burden placed on households but that effect is marginal and limited to a few systems.  
Costs of Water Service are Already Rising -- The cost of water services (i.e., drinking water, wastewater, 
stormwater, and reuse) are rising both to meet new challenges and to repair and replace aging 
infrastructure.  This challenge is familiar to EPA.  Awareness rose to the level of EPA’s water finance 
center (now known as the “Water Infrastructure and Resiliency Finance Center”) highlighting the need 
for customer assistance programs in 2016. 6 More detailed analysis of affordability as a constraint in 
water infrastructure planning, including regulatory compliance, has been the topic of substantial 
discussion. Raucher et al.7 highlighted relevant trends including the cumulative increase in household 
cost for water service relative to the consumer price index (CPI) (see following graph). 
 
 
 
Source: Raucher et al. (2019) citing Bureau of Labor Statistics 
 
6 EPA, Drinking Water and Wastewater Customer Assistance Programs (2016).  
7 Raucher, Robert, J. Clements, E. Rothstein, J. Mastracchio, and Z. Green, Developing a New Framework for 
Household Affordability and Financial Capability Assessment in the Water Sector (2019). 
Annual cumulative increase in household costs for 
water, sewer, and trash compared to increase in CPI 
for all items 

 
7 
 
Raucher et al (2019) also describes how water service is increasing as water at the same time as other 
critical household expenses (see following graph).   
 
Source: Raucher et al. (2019) citing Bureau of Labor Statistics 
The above analyses do not reflect the social disruption associated with the COVID pandemic, the 
economic turmoil associated with recovery from the pandemic, current inflationary pressures, or 
international events.  The affordability challenge has been developing over more than a decade and will 
continue even in a stable, post-pandemic economy.   
While the CPI is a long-standing indicator of price trends.  It does not fully capture the affordability 
challenge of disadvantaged households.  An alternative metric Asset Limited, Income Constrained, 
Employed (ALICE) worker household essentials index.  Over the last 15 years the ALICE Essentials Index 
has increased at a higher rate than the CPI, including the most recent estimates for the 2021 – 2023 
period (see following graph).8 
 
 
           Source:  Alice Essentials Index. https://www.unitedforalice.org/essentials-index.  
 
8 United for Alice. Alice Essentials Index. Measuring Inflation for Basic Needs. 2023 National Report (2023). 
Annual cumulative increase 
in household costs for water, 
sewer, and trash compared 
to increase in CPI 

 
8 
 
 
United for ALICE estimates that financial hardship is a real concern for not just the 13% of U.S. 
households below the federal poverty level but another 29% of households that earn less than is 
required to cover the ALICE household survival budget.9 
Like the ALICE Index Bluefield Research’s December 2023 report illustrates that specifically water rates 
are rising (see the following excerpted figure) continuing trends illustrated in previous reports.10  This 
figure reflects the combined burden of water and wastewater service for 50 cities found that “combined 
water and sewer bill for a typical U.S. household has increased by 54.8% since 2012, or on average 4.1% 
annually.”  
Source: https://www.bluefieldresearch.com/ns/water-challenges-
drive-u-s-water-utility-rates/   
Affordability is Already a Challenge for Many Communities – Analyses like those shared with EPA in in 
201911 in support of EPA decision-making and more recently with Congress regarding development of a 
low-income water customer assistance program are reenforced by recent work from outside the water 
sector.12 
 
9 United for ALICE. ALICE in the Crosscurrents, COVID and Financial Hardship in the United States. (2023).  
10 Bluefield Research. U.S. Municipal Water & Sewer: Annual Utility Rate Index, (Nov. 8, 2023).  
11 Raucher, Robert, J. Clements, E. Rothstein, J. Mastracchio, and Z. Green, Developing a New Framework for 
Household Affordability and Financial Capability Assessment in the Water Sector (2019). 
12 Berahzer, Stacey Isaac, J. Clements, Z. Green, J. Mastracchio, R. Raucher, E. Rothstein, and M. Teodoro, Low-
Income Water Customer Assistance Program Assessment (2023).  

 
9 
 
The following figure illustrates the unaffordability of water services in the United States as analyzed in 
2023 by authors at the Nicholas Institute.13 The authors note, “The analysis shows that 28.3 million 
people in those communities live in households that spend more than one day each month working to 
pay for water services and sanitation services.” 
 
 
Source:  https://today.duke.edu/2023/05/17-percent-us-households-face-
growing-water-affordability-challenge  
Proposed LCRI Costs in Larger Context -- Reports like the above referenced prior analyses and EPA’s 7th 
Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment (7th DWINSA) draw attention to the need 
for investment in distribution system renewal and water infrastructure.  The 7th DWINSA estimates the 
traditional 20-year national drinking water infrastructure need to be $625 billion.14  These analyses fall 
short of reflecting the full range of infrastructure needs associated with constructing additional water 
supply storage, developing alternative supply, futureproofing water infrastructure in the face of climate 
change, right-sizing existing facilities to improve water quality, improving long-term sustainability, 
improving cybersecurity protections, reducing carbon footprint by integrating alternative sources of 
power, and reducing water loss by systems and customers.  The above infrastructure investments are 
widely recognized and advocated for by EPA in its Drinking Water and Wastewater Resilience 
programming15 and Effective Utility Management (EUM) Initiative.16 
 
13 Lauren A. Patterson, Sophia A. Bryson, Martin W. Doyle, "Affordability of Household Water Services Across the 
United States," PLOS Water (May 10, 2023). DOI: 10.1371/journal.pwat.0000123. 
14 EPA, Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment, 7th Report to Congress (2023).  
15 EPA. Undated (website accessed 1/11/2024). Drinking Water and Wastewater Resilience.  
https://www.epa.gov/waterresilience. 
16 EPA. Undated. (website accessed 1/11/2024). Effective Utility Management Practices. 
https://www.epa.gov/sustainable-water-infrastructure/effective-water-utility-management-
practices#euminitiative. 

 
10 
 
Proposed LCRI is One of Several Concurrent Regulatory Burdens -- There are multiple environmental 
regulations that will require infrastructure investments and increase operating costs. First, at $3.0 – 4.8 
billion EPA underestimates the annualized cost of the proposed LCRI borne by water systems.  Second, 
even if those figures were accurate, standing alone they would be infeasibly high.  Third, these costs 
would come at a time when water systems are also facing similar regulatory costs as a result of other 
EPA rulemakings, which in the aggregate make these costs particularly infeasible.  For instance, EPA is 
currently: 
1. Finalizing a national drinking water standard for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances – 
EPA’s proposed primary drinking water standard for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFAS) is anticipated to entail more than $3 billion in annual expenses just for installation 
and operation of required drinking water treatment facilities.17 
2. Finalizing a rulemaking that will place water systems at risk of liability for PFAS in wastes 
they have previously released to the environment – the cost implications of designating 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) as Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) Hazardous 
Substances. EPA did not estimate the cost of CERCLA liability for water systems.  An 
analysis by Hazen and Sawyer estimates the potential impact from shifting waste 
management practices for drinking water treatment residuals could exceed $3 billion 
annually.18 
3. Preparing to propose a regulation that will require PWSs relying on surface water to 
achieve greater levels of total organic carbon removal—he soon to be proposed Stage 3 
Microbial and Disinfection Byproducts rulemakings—which will also be significant.19 
EPA has a duty to ensure that the entirety of its regulatory program is sustainable for regulated entities 
like CWSs.  While under some statutes, a regulation that leads to the insolvency of a regulated entity 
may be tolerable, EPA cannot impose a cumulative regulatory burden on communities that is not 
economically sustainable or leads to inadequate resources for other key public health protections. 
EPA’s Analysis Under E.O. 12898 -- EPA is required to by E.O. 1289820 to evaluate environmental justice 
implications of its regulatory actions.  EPA’s current environmental justice analysis21 does not consider 
the implications of the Proposed Rule on the affordability of water services or associated disparate 
water rate impacts on Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIOPOC) households.  EPA must consider 
not just potential differential effects of specific rule provisions within the proposed LCRI, but also the (1) 
consequences of increases in household water rates on disadvantaged households, (2) opportunity costs 
impacting BIOPOC households, and (3) negative secondary effects that those requirements will have on 
households, especially disadvantaged households. 
 
17 88 Fed. Reg. at 18,638. 
18 AWWA, Comment submitted by American Water Works Association on Addressing PFAS in the Environment 
(July 5, 2023), EPA-HQ-OLEM-2022-0922-0079. 
19 National Drinking Water Advisory Council, Letter to the Administrator on Potential Revisions to Microbial and 
Disinfection Byproducts Rules (Dec. 14, 2023).  
20 59 Fed. Reg. at 7,629. 
21 EPA, Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (2023), EPA 815-R-
23-004. 

 
11 
 
2.5 
Opportunities for Greater Clarity 
The proposed LCRI is the second major revision of 40 CFR §141 Subpart I and related portions of 
subparts A, C, O, and Q in less than five years. Over the course of that timeframe the policy discourse 
around managing lead in water has focused on multiple facets of the LCR, and there has been significant 
confusion both in the regulated community and amongst the primacy states as to what the new 
regulations require.  As a consequence, the proposed LCRI has multiple opportunities for EPA to provide 
greater clarity in finalizing the LCRI.  The need for clarity is particularly acute given the confusion to-date 
in this rulemaking and the anticipated implementation timelines and tasks. Such confusion harms public 
health by detracting limited resources away from the most meaningful compliance efforts as systems 
instead spend time debating the meaning of vague provisions or taking unnecessary actions in an 
abundance of caution.  Aspects of the Proposed Rule for EPA to state more clearly in the final rule text 
and preamble include: 
 
1. Completing the outreach efforts described in §141.84(d)(3)(i) for LSLs or GRRSLs: if the 
final rule retains requirements related to replacing service lines on private property 
(which it should not), then the final rule should clearly state that four attempts at contact 
via at least two communication methods is adequate when evaluating service line 
replacement program success.22  The compliance metric should recognize that a CWS has 
taken required action while acknowledging that continued efforts will be needed over 
time to fully replace the service line (e.g., at the end of replacement period a system may 
report outstanding refusals and still meet the treatment technique requirements). 
2. The rule should clearly state that water systems that have made good faith efforts to 
understand optimized CCT options available to them under the LCRR and now the 
proposed LCRI, including appropriately constructed pipe rig studies may use those studies 
to inform LCRI compliance, including if those studies were conducted prior to the LCRI’s 
effective date. Such studies should not have to be repeated after the LCRI effective date. 
3. The rule should clarify that the requirement related to the delivery of information about 
and / or filters that remove lead from drinking water is specifically an instruction to supply 
information about and / or filters that are certified to meet NSF/ANSI Standard 53 for total 
lead removal and NSF/ANSI Standard 42 for fine particulates (Class I).  The type and 
number of replacement cartridges provided will be based on average household use, the 
performance characteristics of a particular vendor’s replacement cartridge, and the 
duration specified in the Proposed Rule.  After providing information about filter use and 
in some instances filters, CWSs do not have further obligations related to filter use. 
4. Proposed § 141.80(c)(3)(ii) addresses how to calculate whether a system has exceeded the 
lead action level.  This provision reads,  
“For water systems with lead service lines with sites identified as Tier 1 or 2 under 
§141.86(a) with enough Tier 1 or 2 sites to meet the minimum number of sites listed in 
§141.86(c) or (d) as applicable: … Lead or copper sample results from Tier 3, 4, or 5 
sites cannot be included in this calculation.”   
 
22 See Proposed § 141.84(d)(3)(i). 

 
12 
 
EPA must clarify that it does not intend to preclude water systems from including Tier 3, 4, 
or 5 sample sites in compliance datasets when systems have otherwise exhausted 
necessary efforts to otherwise achieve sampling at Tier 1 and 2 sample sites shown in the 
monitoring plans submitted to the state prior to compliance monitoring per § 141.90(a)(i).  
Where systems have attempted but were unable to successfully engage Tier 1 and 2 
customers to participate in compliance monitoring, Tier 3 – 5 sample sites should be 
acceptable in the compliance dataset, even if the service line inventory continues to 
reflect unsampled homes with LSLs.  This clarification will be increasingly important over 
time as CWSs successfully reduce the number of LSLs in their service area, and the 
remaining occupants with LSLs are either difficult to reach or uncooperative and where 
the remaining LSLs are associated with vacant properties.  The report required in 
§141.90(a)(i)(B) provides an opportunity to report the system’s best efforts to comply. 
5. The proposed LCRI describes “supplemental monitoring” for purposes of amending the 
compliance tap sample dataset as monitoring offered to customers in the wake of a lead 
action level exceedance.  The Proposed Rule text is consistent with the proposed LCRI 
preamble23 but can be easily misunderstood given the broader emphasis on monitoring in 
the Proposed Rule.  EPA should emphasize in the preamble of the final LCRI and 
subsequent guidance that supplemental monitoring is limited to customer-requested 
monitoring in response to required public education efforts following a lead action level 
exceedance. 
6. The requirement for CWSs to engage schools and child care facilities regarding lead 
includes provisions to (1) notify elementary schools, high schools, and child care facilities 
regarding the opportunity for sampling requires a good faith effort to notify per Proposed 
Rule § 141.92(c)(2)), (2) document refusal or nonresponse by these facilities to participate 
as demonstration of a good faith effort by the CWS to involve the facility,24 provide 
sampling results and information to facilities.25 These individual tasks are described in 
terms of interaction with individual facilities because there are independently operated 
schools and child care facilities.  EPA should acknowledge clearly in the final rule preamble 
and subsequent guidance, that CWSs are not being required to overstep the 
administrative chain of command in school systems and child care facilities under a single 
management.  Under these provisions engaging the central offices of school systems and 
child care facilities under a single management is sufficient to comply with these 
requirements.  
7. EPA proposes to include lead connectors in the inventory required by the proposed LCRI.  
While AWWA recommends EPA not take this step, EPA wisely distinguished lead 
connectors from service line materials with respect to many facets of the Proposed Rule, 
notably the LSL / GRRSL replacement rate, mandate to replace all LSL and GRRSL within 10 
years, mandate to characterize all LSUSL materials, and the service line validation study.  
This distinction is apparent in the Proposed Rule text. EPA should retain this distinction in 
 
23 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,950. 
24 Proposed Rule § 141.92(d)(1)(i)), 141.92(d)(3). 
25 Proposed Rule § 141.92(g)(1).   

 
13 
 
the final LCRI regulatory text and communicate this distinction clearly in the final rule 
preamble, associated rule guidance, and technical support to states and systems. 
There are also facets of the Proposed Rule that require substantial restructuring simply to assure reliable 
and consistent interpretation, and thus compliance.  In particular see Sections 2.7, 2.8, 3.2 and 3.3 of 
these comments.   
2.6 
Guidance to Support Rulemaking 
In recent SDWA rulemakings, EPA has waited until after the LCRI is final to craft guidance.  The lack of 
guidance for how EPA envisions implementing the provisions of the proposed LCRI makes understanding 
the import of the Proposed Rule requirements very difficult.  In a Proposed Rule as complex as the LCRI, 
it is impossible to fully quantify either the cost or the benefits of the Proposal without a clear 
interpretation of the regulatory text.  Neither the Proposed Rule preamble nor the associated docket 
fully describe what CWSs will be required to do to comply with the LCRI if finalized as proposed. Clear 
explanation in the final rule and preamble itself is essential to ensure that PWSs properly implement the 
rule and do not waste years of time and resources based on misunderstandings of the requirements.  
As EPA prioritizes SDWA program activities following this proposal, it is essential for EPA to turn rapidly 
to developing associated guidance and to engage stakeholders, particularly, the community of 
associations that support CWSs in that development process.   
While guidance is important, as EPA is aware the agency cannot engage in regulation through guidance.  
There are already instances where the preamble to the proposed LCRI diverge from the Proposed 
regulatory text.  A number of those instances are described in the balance of these comments.  Similarly, 
EPA’s enforcement program cannot re-interpret regulatory text to fit a future change in policy 
perspective or the exigencies of a specific situations.  As EPA prepares guidance and training materials 
those materials must conform to the regulatory text because is it contrary to law for EPA to establish 
regulatory expectations through guidance federally.  There are also states that adopt federal guidance 
as though it is in fact binding regulation when it is not.   
2.7 
Public Education – Required Communication 
While AWWA requests more rapid guidance and collaborative development of guidance, the more likely 
scenario is that EPA will require months, if not years to prepare final guidance following promulgation of 
the LCRI.  As a matter of sound regulatory practice and for the above reasons, EPA should take this 
opportunity in finalizing the LCRI to craft clear LCRI public education requirements. 
Inconsistent and Multiple Names for Targeted Recipients – The proposed LCRI is the latest in a series of 
rulemakings that have introduced new words and phrases into the LCR that reflect concepts particular 
to the moment in time when the rule was promulgated.  Now the LCRR and proposed LCRI have 
introduced completely new requirements and the proposed regulatory text that do not clearly identify 
who CWSs are tasked with contacting, what CWSs are charged with conveying, and how the CWS is 
expected to communicate.  For example, in the course of conveying communication responsibilities in 
the proposed LCRI, the regulatory text employs at least the 16 words and phrases in the following table.  
Words and phrases are used in combinations that are inconsistent but in plain English are not clearly 
distinguishable. 

 
14 
 
Word / Phrase 
Appears in 
Regulatory Text 
Uses with respect to 
Communication Tasks 
Customer 
62 
28 
“receiving a bill” 
1 
1 
Consumer 
42 
34 
Resident 
24 
3 
“Residential unit” 
4 
4 
“Residential customer” 
1 
1 
“Non-residential customer” 
1 
1 
“Non-residential occupant” or “occupants” 
10 
3 
“Non-residential unit” 
5 
5 
“Residence” 
4 
1 
Person served 
4 
2 
“persons served by the water system at the 
tap that was sampled” 
1 
1 
“Persons served by the water system at the 
sites that were sampled” 
8 
6 
“Persons served by the water system at the 
specific sites that were sampled” 
2 
2 
Service connection 
11 
6 
“other service connections” 
1 
1 
“Persons served by the water system at the 
service connection” 
5 
5 
Owner of the affected service line 
2 
2 
Owner’s authorized agent 
2 
2 
Non-owner occupant(s) 
1 
1 
Household(s) 
8 
2 
 
EPA should simplify the regulatory text using a select set of phrases that convey consistent intent 
appropriate to the Proposed Rule requirement.  The following table illustrates such a simplification of 
the current regulatory text. 
Context 
Target audience 
Task / Information Delivered 
Lead service line 
inventory 
“service line owners”  
• Annual service line material 
notification 
• Notification of planned 
construction 
• Notification that construction has 
occurred 
Construction activity 
health protective 
measures 
“building unit(s)” 
• LSL, GRRSL, LSUSL, and lead 
connector replacement 
notifications 
• Notifications of disturbances 
• Provision of filter instructions, 
pitcher filters and replacement 
cartridges (as appropriate) 

 
15 
 
Context 
Target audience 
Task / Information Delivered 
Lead action level 
exceedance 
“bill paying customers” 
• Mailed post-exceedance public 
education materials 
Observed lead and / 
or copper 
concentrations from 
sampling 
“persons served by 
sampled tap” 
• Results from compliance samples 
• Results from requested samples 
 
EPA’s Environmental Justice Analysis of the proposed LCRI26 points out the role of public education in 
preventing disparities in outcomes under the proposed LCRI.  Including clear regulatory text in the final 
LCRI is important to achieve this outcome as well as prevent assertions in the future that compliant 
CWSs had in some way not taken environmental justice considerations into account in their public 
education efforts. 
2.8 
Corrections to Avoid Misinterpretation  
There are instances where there are currently misinterpretations among drinking water regulators, 
technical assistance providers, consultants, and advocacy organizations regarding the substance of 
current and anticipated LCRI requirements. 
1. Because the proposed LCRI is being crafted as a replacement for the LCRR, it is important 
that EPA correct current ongoing misreading of guidance regarding the scope of CWSs’ 
responsibilities under the LCRR and LCRI.  Current misunderstandings and guidance 
incorrectly lead CWSs to believe they are obligated to include pipes in their inventory that 
are not in fact a service lines connected to the CWS’s distribution system.  This error will 
have subsequent implications for compliance with lead service line replacement 
requirements and other facets of the current rulemaking.   
Currently EPA guidance emphasizes the broad nature of 40 CFR 141.84(a), which reads “All 
water systems must develop an inventory to identify the materials of service lines connected to 
the public water distribution system.”  Because the inventory is inclusive of “service lines” that 
are on both public and private property, some states and technical assistance providers are mis-
interpreting this wording to mean that water systems have a duty to: 
a. Incorporate water mains internal to private property as a “service line” (e.g., 
mains within a campus of buildings) 
b. Incorporate service connections to mains operated by another entity 
SDWA defines a public water system.27  Just as CWSs are not responsible for characterizing and 
replacing the service lines associated with a consecutive CWS, CWSs are not responsible for 
characterizing campuses and subdivisions that are served by a single metered connection to a 
CWS. Correction of this misinterpretation in as timely a manner as possible would facilitate both 
preparation of initial inventories and implementation of the final LCRI.  If additional clarity can 
 
26 EPA, Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 3-4 (2023). EPA-HQ-
OW-2022-0801-0641. 
27 42 U.S.C. § 300f(4), 42 U.S.C. § 300g. 

 
16 
 
be most efficiently resolved through revising regulatory text, a straight-forward modification of 
the definition of service line is proposed in Section 3.16 of these comments in response to the 
agency’s request for comments regarding definitions. 
2. The clear intent of the definition of GRRSLs is service lines where the prior segment of the 
service line before the galvanized portion of the service line is or may have been a lead 
service line at one time.28, 29  That is the history and described basis as well as the plain-
English reading of the proposed LCRI definition.  Unfortunately, the frequent framing of 
“galvanized downstream of lead” has resulted in some regulatory agency staff, including 
EPA staff, to instead frame GRRSLs in terms of any and all potential lead construction 
materials in mains.  When the GRRSL definition includes potential historical lead, this 
misinterpretation can lead to significant expansion of the scope of service lines classified 
as GRRSLs.  The final LCRI text should retain the current clear definition of GRRSLs and the 
final rule preamble and subsequent guidance should re-affirm that definition. 
2.9 
Opportunity for Future Improvement 
There are important opportunities to learn from this rulemaking going forward. In particular, the failure 
to provide sufficient time for meaningful public comment and engagement undermines the rulemaking 
process and does not comply with the letter or spirit of the APA.  
1. The Proposed Rule does not provide sufficient time for data collection and technical 
analysis. Specifically, the Proposed Rule solicits data and technical analysis including 
modelling while affording the public less than 9 weeks (44 working days) over a series of 
nationally recognized religious and secular holidays to prepare and file a response to the 
agency’s notice.  By contrast, EPA had 485 workdays to prepare the notice requesting this 
data.  In instances where EPA has an interest in technical input, the agency should engage 
the expert community (e.g., AWWA, Water Research Foundation, etc.) with information 
needs early in a rulemaking process.  Adequate time is necessary to provide cogent 
analyses and there are limited aspects of this rulemaking about which EPA has been 
transparent regarding its intent.  The requests for comment in the proposed LCRI 
preamble pertain to facets of the Proposed Rule EPA has not highlighted publicly prior to 
releasing the Proposed Rule.  EPA is held to a high standard by Executive Orders with 
respect to the data and analysis it includes to support a rulemaking.  Preparation of 
analyses that meet that standard require adequate time to prepare, provide quality 
assurance, and conduct adequate review, prior to their submittal to the agency.  
The proposed LCRI docket (1) does not describe a technical premise for the Proposed Rule 
requirements and (2) presents an analysis of costs and benefits in a fashion that is not 
sufficiently transparent for stakeholders to replicate and test the agency’s approach in the 
time available to them. 
2. EPA’s expectations for what PWSs must do in order to comply with specific rule provisions 
cannot be discerned from the regulatory text, preamble, and economic analysis.  In 
particular the activities costed in the economic analysis are often very confined aspects of 
 
28 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(a)(4)(ii). 
29 Proposed LCRI § 141.2 - Galvanized Requiring Replacement Service Lines. 

 
17 
 
wide-reaching regulatory text, and the regulatory text and preamble may or may not be 
well-aligned.  As a consequence, water systems cannot review the docket and discern 
either what constitutes a violation or what is expected to avoid a violation.  EPA could 
resolve this challenge through incorporating draft guidance documents in the docket for 
proposed rules.  EPA did this in the Stage 1 Microbial / Disinfection Byproduct 
rulemakings.  One of those guidance documents should be the state implementation 
guidance.  The state implementation guidance has historically provided a concise 
enumeration of what constitutes a violation and the associated violation codes. 
When EPA takes a year and one-half or more to craft a proposed rule and provides the 
public a docket with hundreds of documents many of which are hundreds of pages in 
length with 60 days or less to prepare comments, EPA owes the public a clear technical 
explanation of expectations under the rule. Its failure to do so has prevented the public 
from meaningfully commenting on the Proposed Rule in violation of the APA.  
3 
REQUESTED COMMENTS 
The LCRI Proposal included a number of requests by the agency for comment to which AWWA responds 
here. 
3.1 
General Matters  
Request for Comment 1: “Whether the proposed revisions to the LCRR treatment technique are effective 
to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible in accordance with the 
SDWA.” 
As EPA is aware, the SDWA requires that all national primary drinking water regulations (NPDWRs) be 
feasible “taking cost into consideration.”30  Here, EPA has not demonstrated that the proposed 
treatment technique as a whole is feasible, either on its own or when viewed in light of all of the 
additional regulatory burdens EPA is proposing to simultaneously place on PWSs, and as a result it does 
not comply with SDWA. The proposed LCRI, while providing a more orderly organization of actions than 
the LCRR it will replace, creates a financial and resource burden on many water systems that endangers 
sound CWS operations.   
Proving Technical Feasibility -- EPA has not described with any rigor in the Proposed Rule or provided 
analysis in the associated docket that demonstrates that the proposed treatment technique’s optimized 
CCT element is technically feasible.  As a result, the proposed requirements if finalized in their current 
form would violate both the SDWA and the APA. 
The treatment technique as proposed in the LCRI includes: a lower lead action level, a new sampling 
protocol for homes with lead service lines, a revised sample pool that includes homes with galvanized 
piping in the home, and retains high-dose orthophosphate addition as the anticipated optimal corrosion 
treatment.   
1. Prior experience under the LCR, including data collected under the State of Michigan 2018 
LCR,31 does not provide EPA with data to demonstrate that the systems with water 
 
30 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(4)(D). 
31 Michigan Administrative Code. Supplying Water to the Public. Section R 325.10710a 

 
18 
 
characteristics targeted by the Proposed Rule (e.g., those that were reliably compliant 
under a lead action level of 15 µg/L but not reliably below a lead action level of 10 µg/L 
based on the compliance dataset required in the Proposed Rule) can indeed make that 
transition within the constraints described in the Proposal.   
2. The LCR with its action level and sampling construct primarily required controlling soluble 
lead which is the emphasis of CCT methods outlined in the LCR and now proposed LCRI.  
Lowering the action level while incorporating lead observations from a fifth liter sample in 
compliance tap samples makes control of particulate lead control more critical. EPA has 
not provided analysis demonstrating that known CCT methods including orthophosphate 
can control particulate lead sufficiently for CWSs to reliably achieve required lead 
concentrations.  
3. Prior to this rulemaking EPA focused the LCR on controlling the solubility of lead and 
copper. The LCRI rulemaking, for the first time, adds control of iron release to the 
regulatory corrosion control paradigm, as the stability of iron scales will underpin 
compliance for those systems sampling from Tier 3 structures. (See additional request for 
comment responses in Section 3.8 of these comments for additional explanation.) 
The proposal also requires many water systems to apply limited local funds, borrowing capacity, field 
personnel time, and community good will to fulfill the construction and administrative burdens of the 
proposed LCRI which will not have corresponding benefits to public health, and are therefore arbitrary.  
Actions that will require re-allocation of resources from other needed investments in infrastructure 
renewal, assuring an adequate water supply, and improvements to reliably comply with other state and 
federal regulatory requirements. The Administrator has a duty to take cost into account with 
establishing a treatment technique, and the Proposed Rule does not adequately consider the cost of the 
proposed treatment technique requirements.  For example, the Proposed Rule requires CWSs to: 
1. Replace LSLs and GRRSLs at a rate substantially higher than the nominal 10% per year. 
(See additional request for comment responses in Section 3.4 in these comments for 
additional explanation.)  
2. Accomplish required service line characterization and replacement in 10-years in the 
midst of price escalation and logistical difficulties that will result from the nationwide 
mandate to replace all LSLs and GRRSLs with a 10-year timeframe, such that all water 
systems across the United States will be competing for the same construction resources 
(e.g., personnel, equipment, materials, etc.). EPA has not created a record to demonstrate 
such resources are available and affordable to water systems. 
3. Bear the increased cost of main repair and replacement that the rapid pace of service line 
replacement will require as service line replacement disturbs very old cast iron mains. EPA 
must account for these increased costs in assessing the feasibility of the Proposed Rule. 
Exemplars Do Not Represent Typical Systems -- EPA provided several examples of systems that 
undertook lead service line replacements on timelines that it asserts demonstrate the feasibility of the 
proposed timeline in the LCRI. However, these examples do not demonstrate the feasibility of its 
proposal for several reasons.  First, the examples of systems achieving expedited LSL replacement did 
so, only with the advantage of significant external financial subsidies that will not be available to all 

 
19 
 
CWSs, likely few CWSs.  This is because the examples used by EPA were instances where the system or 
city exceeded the lead action level or were in the midst of much larger crises.  As such, these systems 
had access to state and federal resources that will not be available to CWSs seeking to comply with the 
proposed LCRI. 
With few exceptions EPA also cited examples of CWSs that had taken steps prior to the 10-year 
construction window for replacing all LSLs that facilitated faster replacement programs.  At least one 
cited example likely exceeded its authority to enter private property under state law, but was not 
challenged legally.  Also, the cited programs did not have to comply with the administrative burden and 
associated rigidity of the proposed LCRI framework, where the proposal would establish extensive 
administrative requirements that are subject to state oversight and enforcement. As a result, EPA has 
not met its burden to create a record to demonstrate that the Proposed Rule is feasible. 
EPA Did Not Consider Opportunity Costs --   To adequately assess whether a rule effectively reduces 
public health risk, the agency must also consider the opportunity costs associated with regulatory 
requirements.  EPA did not engage in such an analysis and the scope and scale of the proposed LCRI do 
have the unintended effect of imposing significant opportunity costs in the form of reduced opportunity 
to address other pressing health risk reduction needs at individual CWSs and the households those 
CWSs serve.  See subsequent more detailed comments on EPA’s Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis in 
Section 5.2 of these comments. 
Anticipated Benefit is Overstated -- See Appendix A regarding the Proposed Rule “prevent known or 
anticipated adverse health effects” for a more detailed response to this question.  In short, the benefits 
analysis falls short of demonstrating the degree to which the Proposed Rule requirements will prevent 
either recognized or potential adverse health effects.   EPA’s analysis of benefits associated with avoided 
IQ decrement is flawed, in that it does not focus on the benefit accrued in the portions of the IQ spectra 
where the anticipated effect is meaningful (e.g., <3% of children in the U.S.).   
Further Expansion of the Treatment Technique is Unsupported – As described above and in subsequent 
Sections within these comments, the proposed LCRI tests and for many systems will exceed the bounds 
of what is technically and economically feasible.  EPA has heard public comment encouraging additional 
measures above and beyond what the agency has already proposed (e.g., lowering the lead action level 
below 10 µg/L, requiring distribution of pitcher filters under additional rule provisions, expanding 
monitoring of lead at schools, etc.).  These comments include information on the state of the supporting 
science, cost, logistical constraints, and legal considerations that are relevant to such proposals as well 
as responding to the agencies requests for comment.  
3.2 
Reduce Burden 
Request for Comment 2: “Whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the 
regulatory approach used to address lead in drinking water consistent with the statutory standard for a 
treatment technique rule in section 1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. Specifically, EPA requests comment on ways 
that the proposed LCRI could be simplified and ways that burden, including paperwork burden, could be 
reduced without affecting the ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects.” 
There are a number of steps EPA could take that would significantly reduce the burden of the final LCRI 
by reducing paperwork.  These changes would (1) not reduce state capacity to provide appropriate 
oversight, (2) would not affect the ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse health 

 
20 
 
effects, and (3) do not impact the substance of the requirements.  If EPA truly wants to achieve full LSL 
and GRRSL removal on the most expedited timeline that is feasible, it cannot layer on additional burdens 
that will force water systems and states alike to redirect resources towards undertaking paperwork and 
administrative oriented tasks that serve little, if any, public health purpose.  As noted elsewhere in these 
comments, paperwork burdens add towards making sustained compliance with the Proposed Rule 
infeasible for many, if not all, CWSs.    
1. Initial inventory and subsequent annual updates are extensive, requiring submission 
requirements well beyond what is needed for regulatory oversight and representing both 
a data transfer and data storage challenge for states.32  The final rule should require 
annual submission of summary information, as otherwise required annual updating of 
public-facing inventories, reporting on-line links to inventories to the state when such 
posting is required, and the maintenance of records to document inventory development 
for auditing by the state. 
2. Recurring submission of documentation following each monitoring period when public 
education materials are distributed are not necessary and should be removed.  As 
currently drafted the regulatory text requires documentation of all requirements of 
Proposed § 141.85 which include public education following a lead action exceedance but 
also notification following service line and lead connector disturbances as well as 
notification of lead and copper monitoring sample results.33  Reporting to the state of 
individual activities required by the final LCRI should not be required.  Rather an annual 
summary report and certification of adherence to required protocols with the retention of 
records to document required processes for auditing by the state, should be sufficient. 
3. The public education requirements contained in Proposed § 141.85 could include 
preparation and submittal of a single public education plan rather than EPA’s current 
public education reporting requirements.  That single plan would be subject to state 
review and approval prior to the first compliance date with the proposed provisions of 
Proposed § 141.85.  The operator in responsible charge would certify annually that that 
system had complied with the plan as approved.  In the event of a change in circumstance 
(e.g., a system completes replacing all LSLs and GRRSLs) the plan would be updated with 
the relevant revisions approved by the state. 
This approach assures a cohesive set of communication tools, activities, and internal 
documentation measures by the CWS that can be reviewed by the state during sanitary surveys 
and in the event a system is being evaluated for a compliance failure.  It dramatically reduces 
the volume of paperwork exchanged with the state at the end of each monitoring period and 
with that reduction the opportunity for inadvertent monitoring and reporting violations. 
4. The annual submittal of the inventory to the state as described in Proposed § 141.90(e)(8) 
should be reduced to only those requirements in Proposed § 141.90(e)(8)(i)(A – D).  The 
balance of the Proposed § 141.90(e)(8) paragraphs should be reduced to those needed to 
calculate the annual service line replacement rate if that requirement is retained in the 
 
32 Proposed LCRI § 141.90(e)(8)(i) and § 142.14(d)(9). 
33 Proposed LCRI § 141.90(f). 

 
21 
 
final rule.  The additional data proposed to be submitted, particularly the provision of data 
about service line material on an address-specific basis should be maintained by the CWS.  
Other requirements in the Proposed Rule assure that the inventory data will be available 
to the state as public access to address-specific information is required.  Moreover, as 
CWSs are providing this data to the public via the internet and often in geographic 
information system (GIS) formats, the data available to the state via this alternative 
approach will be more useful to the state at a significantly lower cost in state information 
management expenses.   
5. As currently drafted, Proposed Rule § 141.84(g)(3) requires notification in the form of 
“written notice” which must be provided to “the owner of the affected service line, or the 
owner’s authorized agent … as soon as possible but no longer than 24 hours following 
completion of the replacement” following a full LSL or GRRSL replacement.  This 
requirement does not include a standard of care for delivery to the owner and delivery to 
the owner is necessary even when the required information is adequately conveyed to the 
actual occupants of the affected structure.  As EPA is aware, LSLs and GRRSLs can be 
associated with rental properties with absentee landlords who are difficult to reach.  
Unlike other Proposed Rule requirements, this provision does not address acceptable 
strategies under such circumstances.  Absentee landlords can be difficult to reach and 
may even be overseas, making written notification in this time period both infeasible and 
not useful to reaching the actual occupant with concerns.  As the proposed LCRI 
framework does not rely on non-resident owners to notify their tenants, EPA could reduce 
the burden associated with this provision without reducing the anticipated public health 
benefit, by eliminating the requirement for this expedited risk communication notification 
to reach owners and owner’s authorized agents following a replacement.  
In addition to the paperwork-specific changes noted above there are changes to the Proposed Rule that 
are necessary to assure the final LCRI can be implemented and when necessary, enforced in a just and 
fair way that incentivizes achieving the objectives of the rulemaking.  These changes impact the 
paperwork burden associated with the Proposed Rule but they also change the substance of the 
proposed requirements.  These substantive changes would not affect the ability of the final rule to 
prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects: 
1. The tracking of lead connectors should be an element of the system’s materials evaluation 
(i.e., Proposed § 141.42(d) as referenced in Proposed § 141.86(a)(i)) rather than an 
element of the inventory as described in the Proposed Rule at § 141.84. 
2. Inventory and service line replacement requirements should be revised to: 
a. Eliminate the need to include fire service and other service lines used for non-
potable applications from the inventory and replacement requirements where 
there are plumbing codes, terms of service, or other permitting mechanisms to 
assure that such lines are not re-purposed for potable uses without proper 
characterization, and if necessary, replacement.  Revising this requirement 
reduces burden without affecting the risk reduction associated with the Proposed 
Rule.  Even if this change in the Final LCRI did not impact the initial inventory 
submitted in October 2024, the implementation of other aspects of the Proposed 

 
22 
 
Rule would be simplified.  This change would be beneficial in combination with 
other proposed changes to proposed requirements included in AWWA’s 
comments (e.g., inventory updates, calculation of replacement pool, calculation of 
replacement percentile, occupant notification, etc.). 
b. Eliminate the need to include service lines for abandoned properties or as yet 
undeveloped properties, where there is an adequate administrative barrier to use 
of the service without material characterization and, if necessary, replacement.  
As with the prior recommendation, this recommendation does not diminish the 
benefits associated with the rulemaking but facilitates efficient final LCRI 
implementation and prioritizes risk reduction opportunities.  Such prioritization is 
consistent with EPA’s emphasis on timely risk reduction to challenged households, 
achieving such goals requires finding opportunities for efficiency in the Proposed 
Rule framework.   
3. A requirement to communicate all required monitoring sample results to occupants of 
buildings where samples were taken by mail that is postmarked within three calendar 
days after learning of results is not feasible for CWSs (Section 3.10 of these comments).  
Timely delivery could be assured, and paperwork burden reduced through: 
a. Lengthening the period post-receipt to 5 business days 
b. Limiting the duty to deliver sample results via this expedited schedule to 
observations above the lead action level (10 µg/L) 
c. Allowing delivery via electronic means (i.e., email, text, data portal access) where 
the timing of communication with the customer can be logged for subsequent 
audit 
4. If water service lines for nonpotable uses are retained in the service line inventory, then 
eliminate the requirement to provide pitcher filters / point-of-use devices and public 
education materials per Proposed § 141.84(h)(1)(i-iv), (2), and (3) when replacing these 
lines and eliminate similar provisions in Proposed § 141.85(g) for when these lines are 
disturbed. 
5. Revise Proposed § 141.86(d)(2)(ii), which sets conditions for small and medium systems to 
transition to triennial monitoring, to include large systems with optimized corrosion 
control treatment (OCCT).  At present the current regulatory text does not provide a clear 
path for large systems with OCCT and reliably below the action levels to obtain monitoring 
relief unless they maintain 90th percentile lead levels below 5 µg/L.34  
6. Revise the Proposed Rule regulatory text such that it is clear that all water systems that 
make a good faith effort to comply with monitoring site Tiers are eligible for reduced 
monitoring under Proposed § 141.86(d).    
7. Revise Proposed § 141.92(h)(5) to remove requirement that alternative state approved 
monitoring in schools and child care facilities must occur after January 1, 2021.  Some 
states and systems have moved forward more expeditiously than EPA to conduct 
 
34 Proposed § 141.86(d)(2)(iii). 

 
23 
 
awareness building lead monitoring at these facilities before and subsequent to the 
proposal of the LCRR.35 EPA should recognize these more proactive programmatic efforts 
subject to the other aspects of conformity with the required monitoring program under 
Proposed Rule § 141.92. 
8. Significantly reduce the record retention expectations for states under Proposed 
§142.14(d)(9) as they are well beyond what is necessary for oversight and represents a 
significant information management burden for states.  Moreover, this requirement 
eliminates the potential to include incentives for CWSs of all sizes by placing required 
materials on-line.  Lastly, EPA is pursuing an annual submittal to EPA of all compliance 
records submitted to states.36  EPA is incapable of receiving all of the information 
generated through this proposed LCRI requirement and managing it in a reliable, quality 
assured information system that affords meaningful use of the collected data.  EPA will 
not have the capacity to respond to Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests for LCRI-
related data in a responsible manner within the timescale of primary milestones in the 
proposed LCRI implementation schedule. 
9. There are significant administrative burdens associated with Proposed § 141.81(a)(2)(i), 
EPA’s proposal to require regulatory reporting of water quality parameters for all water 
systems utilizing corrosion control serving between 10,000 and 50,000 persons regardless 
of (1) having exceeded the lead or copper action level or (2) instituted OCCT per the LCR 
(i.e., systems that do not comport with paragraph “2” of Proposed Rule § 141.2 “System 
without corrosion control treatment.”  The number of systems in this subset of systems is 
large and agency efforts to-date have not prepared either states or these systems for this 
development.  As currently drafted the requirement creates a regulatory data stream 
without a useful context.  Two alternatives include: 
a. Delaying the extension of WQP monitoring and reporting (e.g., six years after 
initial compliance deadlines in the proposed LCRI). During the intervening period 
post-initial compliance, medium systems could be tasked with maintaining an 
internal log of WQP (conceptually a parallel construct to the disinfection profiling 
and benchmarking in § 141.172 in the Interim Enhanced Surface Water Treatment 
Rule (IESWTR) and LT2SWTR), documenting training hours specific to CCT and 
OCCT, and developing a report for submittal to the state outlining current CCT 
practice and proposing WQP monitoring locations.  
b. Structure a similar delay in implementation of this provision that integrates a 
delay of “x” years (e.g., six years) following a rolling transition to the proposed 
LCRI sample pool / sample protocol based on system size categories. 
3.3 
Prompt, Fair, and Equitable Enforcement 
Regulatory clarity, in the actual regulatory text rather than later guidance, is the best way to promote 
compliance without the need for an enforcement action.  Because of this, AWWA encourages EPA to 
 
35 See Proposed § 141.92(d).  
36 88 Fed. Reg. at 20,092, Consumer Confidence Report Rule Revisions, Proposed § 142.15(b)(3). 

 
24 
 
implement the recommendations it has provided throughout these comments to clarity the LCRI.  
Simply put, a water system cannot comply if it does not understand the requirement.  
The other significant way to reduce non-compliance is to ensure that the final LCRI is actually feasible 
and possible for CWSs to implement. Even though EPA has traditionally focused on large municipal and 
regional water systems when assessing feasibility, the agency should recognize that when the 
requirements are not feasible within the meaning of the SDWA for smaller or rural systems, then EPA is 
essentially ensuring noncompliance by those systems. Such non-compliance will detract state and 
federal enforcement resources from more critical public health concerns.  Approximately 91% of the 
systems that would be regulated under the Proposed Rule are small systems. Successful implementation 
and compliance with the final LCRI, therefore necessitates crafting the requirements with this in mind 
rather than setting the bar in a place only a handful of systems can likely reach.  
Request for Comment 3: “Whether the proposed requirements of the rule are enforceable and promote 
compliance without the need for State or Federal enforcement action. EPA also solicits comment on ways 
the rule could be modified to better promote compliance.”  
There are also opportunities for EPA to facilitate prompt, fair, and equitable enforcement.  These 
recommendations also assist EPA by avoiding a rule for which enforcement would be deemed arbitrary 
and capricious.  These opportunities include: 
1. With the inclusion of the non-lead validation study, clearly communicate to state and EPA 
oversight and enforcement staff (through the final rule provisions and preamble) that a 
records-based service line material determination can reflect relevant documented 
practice associated with service line construction in a community, and not simply records 
specific to an individual service line.  This is consistent with Chapter 4 of EPA’s “Guidance 
for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory,” which is cited in the proposed 
LCRI docket.37  Currently, there is substantial state-to-state variability in implementation 
of this requirement primarily due to concern that EPA will continue over time to modify its 
view of what is an adequate demonstration of the materials of construction. 
2. The proposed LCRI does not provide a regulatory framework for the instance when 
random sample sites(s) in a non-lead validation study conducted per Proposed 
§ 141.84(b)(5) contain a LSL or GRRSL.  When the CWS submits its study per Proposed 
§ 141.84(b)(5)(v) the system 
“…must submit a list of the locations of any non-lead service lines identified to be a lead or 
galvanized requiring replacement service line as well as the method(s) used to categorize the 
service lines, if available …” 38 
There is not a clear outcome from this submittal and it is possible that some may read the 
proposed special primacy provisions (Proposed § 142.16) to require a renewed service line 
characterization and replacement program effort.  A more appropriate response would be 
to clarify per Proposed § 141.84(b)(5)(v)(ii) “Table 1 To Paragraph (b)(5)(ii)” to include a 
third column.  That third column would reflect the number of additional random samples 
 
37 EPA, Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory (2022),EPA 816-B-22-001. 
38 Proposed § 141.90(e)(9). 

 
25 
 
to be drawn in order to reassess the 95% confidence interval for every LSL or GRRSL 
discovered in the initial validation sample set.  This structure is in keeping with the 
validation study concept, initiates additional evaluation in keeping with the scope of the 
prior effort’s potential mischaracterization, and allows the CWS to continue focusing on 
removal of known LSLs and GRRSLs rather than divert resources to a new discovery effort. 
3. Specify clear criteria a state must use under Proposed § 141.84 (d)(5)(iv) to assign a 
shorter deadline (and if provision is retained, an associated replacement rate).  While a 
state may set a different schedule for replacement under state law, if the requirement is 
to be based in federal law it must be specified in a manner that can be consistently 
applied. 
4. The proposed LCRI CCT requirements39 encourage states to require large systems (> 
50,000 person served), both with CCT and those without, and detectable (i.e., > practical 
quantitation limit) lead levels that are below the lead action level (10 µg/L) to re-evaluate 
optimized corrosion control.  Given the revised lead action level and the mandatory 
replacement of LSLs and GRRSLs this provision no longer serves a clear purpose in the 
proposed LCRI.  The provision should be deleted, unless EPA can articulate specific criteria 
under which the federal regulation should lead to water systems being instructed to 
outperform the treatment technique that EPA has deemed feasible.  States will retain the 
authority to seek additional action by water systems under state law regardless of EPA’s 
inclusion of the provision in the final LCRI. 
5. With the proposed changes to the LCRI there are systems that meet the definition of 
optimized corrosion control40 that are not employing corrosion control strategies 
recognized in Proposed § 141.82(c).  Many of these systems will not exceed the lead 
action level so will not be triggered by the federal rule to revisit their OCCT using the new 
list of CCT strategies.41  As these systems are reliably achieving desired OCCT performance 
and subject to the balance of the Proposed Rule’s risk reduction measures, these systems 
should not be required to revisit their CCT strategy.  Revising OCCT carries with it the risks 
of missteps and lead release, moreover, corrosion control is best achieved through 
maintaining consistent conditions – an arbitrary instruction to change OCCT misdirects 
limited resources and creates the opportunity for increased risk. EPA did not attempt to 
quantify how many systems would be impacted by this facet of the LCRR/LCRI nor the 
associated cost implications.42,43 EPA can address this issue in rule text, preamble text, and 
guidance as it finalizes the LCRI. 
6. As described in more detail elsewhere (see Section 3.4 of these comments) the Proposed 
Rule is not clear as to what constitutes fulfilling the requirement to replace all LSLs and 
GRRSL within 10 years.  To be fair and just, the final rule framework must recognize best 
efforts to achieve full replacement when determining compliance. 
 
39 Proposed § 141.81(a)(1)(C)(ii - iii). 
40 Proposed I § 141.2 - Optimal corrosion control treatment. 
41 Proposed § 141.81. 
42 EPA, Final LCRR Economic Analysis Appendices, Exhibit B-5 (2023).  
43 EPA, Appendices to LCRI Economic Analysis, Exhibit B-9 at B-23 (2023). 

 
26 
 
7. As described in more detail elsewhere (see Section 3.4 of these comments) the current 
annual replacement rate metric is not a fair or just enforcement metric.  This performance 
metric must be removed from the final LCRI entirely or replaced with a fair approach. 
3.4 
Service Line Replacement 
Request for Comment 4: “All aspects of the proposed scope of the replacement requirements, including 
the criteria used to define a full service line replacement (e.g., cutting the pipe at abandoned properties, 
replacing the entire service line) and which lead sources are subject to replacement under the mandatory 
program.  
Addressing abandoned properties -- The expectation that a written policy for not using existing buried 
service lines that are not removed should only be relevant to service lines going forward from the 
compliance date in the final LCRI.  The use of buried pipes that are discovered unused and neither 
connected to the source of supply or the customer is not a field practice either water system staff or 
plumbers would engage in, but there may not be an existing written policy. 
The current LCR requirement in Proposed § 141.84(d)(6)(iii)(C) is unnecessarily burdensome as it 
requires water systems to expend limited resources to locate, identify the materials of construction, and 
either replace or disconnect LSLs and GRRSLs to abandoned properties.  The same effect could be 
achieved through administrative measures.  For example, there could be a requirement that service not 
be renewed at the property without replacement of the LSL or GRRSL.  So long as the service has been 
terminated at the location, then systems should not be required to consider the service line for 
purposes of the 10-year service line replacement requirements.  Use of such an administrative 
procedure would both reduce the immediate costs to the water system in the 10-year compliance 
window for replacement and inform setting the replacement rate for those service lines where removal 
in a more timely manner would be beneficial. 
The alternative to physically disconnecting abandoned properties in the Proposed Rule is to replace the 
service line in anticipation that a similar structure with a similar potable water and fire service demand 
would eventually replace the prior abandoned structure.  While local land use practices will determine 
changes in land use over time, with urban renewal there are often significant increases in housing 
density and greater mixed use development.  Such changes in land use can significantly change future 
water demand when a site is eventually re-developed.  Moreover, urban renewal is seldom a steady 
planned process but one reliant on opportunistic investment of public and / or private capital.  
Installation of a replacement service prior to understanding the actual demands of future use(s) of 
abandoned properties will lead to wasted financial resources.  As a result, administrative measures to 
ensure there is no water service until a replacement will more effectively address EPA’s concern and the 
realities of property development. 
The cost of service line replacement must be sound -- For the agency to develop a feasible treatment 
technique it must fairly represent the costs of service line characterization and replacement.  As 
described in Section 3.4 of these comments, the Proposed Rule’s economic analysis does not reflect the: 
1. Typical cost of service line replacement,  
2. Anticipated ancillary costs associated with service line replacement, 

 
27 
 
3. Recent and readily anticipated inflationary pressure on service line replacement program 
costs, or 
4. Uncertainty in its cost estimate in keeping with accepted engineering practice. 
Request for Comment 5: “EPA is seeking comment on whether to prohibit reconnection of any 
disconnected LSL or GRR service line.” 
EPA’s request for comment is broadly framed and must be broken into practical scenarios to evaluate 
soundly.  The first scenario is an instance where a property is vacant (e.g., unimproved, a structure exists 
but has been abandoned, a structure had existed but fell into disrepair and was demolished).  In such an 
instance, when the property is improved for a future use, water service will be required.  At that time 
conditions of service would apply and the service will have to meet standards of construction including 
adequate potable water and fire service for the development that is occurring.  In such a scenario, 
replacement of an existing LSL, GRRSL, or a service line of uncertain condition would be an appropriate 
element of developing the property.  This scenario would not be limited to service lines that have been 
physically disconnected from the main but would be equally applicable to service lines where access to 
water service was managed administratively.   
The second scenario is the disconnection of LSLs and GRRSLs in the course of infrastructure renewal, 
service line replacement programs, and emergency repairs.  The proposed LCRI acknowledges that LSLs 
and GRRSLs may be partially replaced and then returned to service in the cases of planned infrastructure 
work or emergency repairs.44  Such construction will entail “disconnecting” the service line and then 
returning it to service after the LSL or GRRSL has been partially replaced if the property owner of an 
inhabited / usable structure (property may be residential or commercial under proposed LCRI) does not 
cooperate to accomplish a full replacement.  A prohibition on reconnecting disconnected LSLs and 
GRRSLs in this case would lead to discontinuation of service to existing inhabited structures with non-
cooperating property owners.   
Discontinuation of service to inhabited residential and commercial structures is viewed as a public safety 
and public health hazard.  CWS practice, as well as local and state policies are in place to limit the 
number of instances when service is discontinued.  CWSs are concerned that discontinuation of water 
service practice could result in environmental justice concerns.  EPA should be careful to craft the final 
LCRI to work within the framework of current law while avoiding a new environmental justice concern.      
Request for Comment 6: “EPA is requesting comment on whether the Agency should include lead 
connectors or galvanized service lines that are or were downstream of a lead connector as part of 
mandatory replacement.” 
EPA should not include lead connectors or galvanized service lines that are or were downstream of a 
lead connector as part of mandatory replacement.  EPA has not demonstrated that removing GRRSLs as 
currently defined present a meaningful opportunity to reduce lead exposure.  To expand the scope of 
the final LCRI to include all galvanized service lines with a definition akin to GRRSLs that includes lead 
connectors would further expand the scope of the replacement task even more with a less certain 
demonstrable benefit.  As AWWA has repeatedly noted, there are already significant concerns with the 
 
44 Proposed § 141.84(g). 

 
28 
 
feasibility of the LCRI as proposed.  This additional requirement would amplify the costs and burdens 
associated with the rule and would not be achievable for water systems. 
Adding such a requirement also provides very little health benefit as both the LCRR and the proposed 
LCRI require the replacement of lead connectors under the control of the water system when 
encountered.45  Consequently, lead connectors will be replaced in the course of LSL and GRRSL 
replacement as currently required by the Proposed Rule whether that replacement is occurring during 
routine infrastructure work, a dedicated service line replacement program, a customer-initiated 
replacement or an emergency repair or replacement.  The incremental burden associated with 
expanding the definition would be large, in that it would:  
1. Re-open the validity of prior service line characterizations 
2. Require restructuring ongoing service line material verification practice 
3. Change the design of service line material validation studies required by the Proposed 
Rule 
All of these burdens are without a demonstrable additional benefit in lead risk reduction given other 
Proposed Rule requirements. 
Request for Comment 7: “Whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent should be more 
than four times (e.g., five, six, or seven times).” 
The specific regulatory provision in the proposal reads: 
“A ‘‘reasonable effort’’ must include at least four attempts to engage the property owner using 
at least two different methods of communication (e.g., in-person conversation, phone call, text 
message, email, written letter, postcard, or information left at the door such as a door hanger) 
before the applicable deadline of mandatory service line replacement as described in 
paragraph (d)(4) of this section. The State may require systems to conduct additional attempts 
and may require specific outreach methods to be used.”46  
The request for comment must be considered in the context of the entire requirement.  Systems are 
being required to contact hundreds or thousands of property owners to undertake replacement, and to 
do so within the span of no more than 10 years.  Property owners are not under a legal obligation to 
reply to the CWS’s outreach and are indeed unlikely to, based on the experience of our members. The 
proposed regulatory text provides a reasonable list of communication strategies that can be attempted.  
Four attempts already place a significant resource burden on water systems and should be sufficient to 
meet regulatory compliance obligations.  Individual CWSs would then be free to take additional 
measures appropriate to their community and the replacement scenario at hand without fear of failing 
to meet their regulatory obligations. 
EPA should either specify clear criteria a state must use to require additional attempts or require specific 
outreach methods under the federal rule or eliminate this element of the provision.  While a state may 
 
45 Full Lead Service Line Replacement Guidance, Water Research Foundation 4713 at 66-67. (see Appendix B) 
46 Proposed § 141.84(d)(3)(i). 

 
29 
 
set different expectations for CWSs under state law, if the requirement is to be based in federal law it 
must be specified in a manner that can be consistently applied nationwide. 
Request for Comment 8: “Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets “control” for the purposes 
of the mandatory replacement provision (i.e., require systems to conduct full service line replacement in 
situations where the system has access to conduct the full replacement).” 
EPA cannot define “control” as “access.”  Such a definition of control is flawed and problematic from a 
practical perspective, and not in keeping with the intended meaning of “control” in SDWA. See Section 
4.7 of these comments. 
The Proposed Rule states that EPA is “not proposing to delineate the prerequisites or elements of 
“access”” 47, 48 but then goes on to delimit constraints on access to four specific legal barriers in the 
proposed regulatory text and the preamble.49, 50, 51, 52, 53  Those legal barriers are limited to state 
constitutional requirements, state law, local law, and tariff agreements.  The Proposed Rule regulatory 
text has the effect of delineating the prerequisites and elements of access where the preamble states 
that the agency is not.54, 55, 56  
Proposed Rule cannot require systems to endanger staff or contractors --  As public facing entities, water 
systems are routinely in contact with the public.  As such, there are established training and protocols 
for managing interactions with the public who are uncooperative or hostile.  There are also protocols to 
assure personnel safety.  Such protocols reduce the number of instances where hostile confrontations 
endanger CWS personnel and contractors.  Creating a situation where CWS personnel and contractors 
are directed to force their way onto private property and into private homes will result in hostile 
confrontations, and create situations where personnel are on private property without immediate 
access to aid.  Such situations pose a risk to CWS personnel and contractors that is arbitrary and 
unwarranted.  
Proposed Rule does not address limited access in inventory requirements -- EPA recognizes the need to 
physically access private property with respect to service line replacement and the required validation 
study57 but does not address the issue of access with respect to characterizing service line materials in 
the inventory requirements in Proposed § 141.84.  EPA does not take access into account when 
establishing the deadlines for characterization of all LSUSLs, calculation of annual replacement rate or 
the economic analysis for the Proposed Rule.   
 
47 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920. 
48 Proposed § 141.84(d)(2)(i). 
49 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,884. 
50 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,916. 
51 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920. 
52 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920. 
53 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,923. 
54 Proposed § 141.84(c)(1((viii). 
55 Proposed § 141.84(d)(2) and (3); (e)(i). 
56 Proposed § 142.16(d)(8). 
57 Proposed § 141.84(b)(5)(iii). 

 
30 
 
Request for Comment 9: “The proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement deadlines. EPA is 
seeking comment on whether it is feasible for systems across the nation to complete service line 
replacement in a shorter timeframe than ten years, such as in six, seven, or eight years.” 
Based on the experience of AWWA’s members and the record before EPA in this rulemaking, a 10-year 
replacement period is not feasible, and a shorter timeframe would certainly not be feasible, particularly 
in light of the other expansive requirements in the Proposed Rule.  The final LCRI should provide 
mechanisms for water systems to undertake LSL replacement on a longer time frame than 10 years.  The 
current 10-year timeframe will delay needed infrastructure improvements, negatively impact the 
borrowing capacity of CWSs, and in some communities result in significant disruption of neighborhoods.  
EPA has not offered a clear rationale for the proposed 10-year replacement window other than there 
were several specific examples where systems undertook LSL replacement programs similar to what EPA 
is contemplating in the proposed LCRI within 10 years.   
None of the programs cited in the Proposed Rule preamble complied with the LCRI provisions as 
described in the proposal.  None of the programs cited accomplished the replacement program in 10 
years (or anticipated achieving program goals in 10 years) without substantial outside subsidies when 
the system had an appreciable number of service lines requiring replacement.  In other words, the 
anticipated replacement rate and timeframe is not feasible within the fiscal, managerial, and technical 
capacity of even large systems.  This is particularly true where “large” system is defined as systems that 
serve more than 10,000 persons served.  This population cutoff is the system size that EPA uses for its 
analysis of “small” system impacts under SBREFA and is also the breakpoint used in SDWA for small 
systems.58   EPA also has not taken into account the fact that there is likely to be a shortage of skilled 
labor to perform these replacements when all systems are mandated to replace them on the same 
timeline.  A few examples of systems able to complete the work within a 10-year timeframe when they 
did not have to similarly compete for such labor does not provide a record supporting the feasibility of 
this timeframe. 
Request for Comment 10:  “EPA is seeking comment on the rate construct approach, including how to 
calculate compliance with a given service line replacement deadline and average annual rate calculated 
across a rolling three-year period.” 
The proposed LCRI contains a regulatory requirement for all service line materials to be characterized 
and replaced within 10 years.  It also includes provisions for annual reporting of progress toward that 
objective.  Given the regulatory requirement and data accrued by the state for oversight of progress, it is 
not clear why EPA included a 10% per year replacement rate in the proposed LCRI.  Exhibit 1 in the 
proposed LCRI Technical Support document illustrates that referenceable service line replacement 
program rates seldom achieve 10% annual rates when substantial numbers of service lines are being 
replaced.  The analysis does not consider the variability in replacement over time in the systems 
evaluated – such an analysis would be critical to the setting of a regulatory expectation, whether an 
annual rate or a rolling annual average.   
 
58 See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. § 300g–1 (b)(15).   

 
31 
 
Given that many CWSs are public or quasi-public entities, they will need to seek budget approval 
through legislative bodies before undertaking LSL and GRRSL removal work.  Even investor-owned 
entities will have to plan their budgets,  
1. Accounting for other EPA regulations being simultaneously introduced and consider how 
to adjust water rates so that they do not rise at too rapid a pace for their customers 
2. CWSs will also need to seek subsidized infrastructure funding like the Drinking Water State 
Revolving Loan Fund (DWSRF) program.  DWSRF and other more limited subsidized 
funding programs employ administrative processes that are protracted, requiring months 
to complete.  Even sound proposals for DWSRF funding may not be selected in certain 
years given multiple competing proposals or the lack of funding.   
Longstanding challenges of DWSRFs being oversubscribed has become more difficult.  The 
Council of Infrastructure Financing Authorities (CIFA) estimates that over the last two 
years, congressionally directed funding has diverted more than $2.3 billion in annual 
federal funding for the SRFs to pay for specific projects.  Those funds are not available for 
CWSs that are in the DWSRF queue for project funding. 
3. CWSs must also consider the timeline for other critical infrastructure investments.   
There may be shortages of skilled workers at any given time, particularly in light of a nationwide 
mandate to perform all of this work during the same 10-year time period.  These budgeting complexities 
collectively mean that systems may need to undertake a higher percentage of removals during a 
particular year or may attempt to coordinate removals alongside other projects to gain efficiencies, 
while they may have to perform fewer removals in other fiscal years.  
EPA offers a single reason for this provision, 
“EPA is proposing that systems calculate compliance with service line replacement on a 
three-year rolling average. This can provide systems with additional time that may be 
needed to replace service lines at prioritized sites, such as schools and child care facilities 
throughout the service area or areas with higher lead exposure, as opposed to focusing only 
on areas with a high LSL density, where replacement may be more efficient.”59 
EPA is incorrect.  The three-year rolling average does not afford an increased opportunity to prioritize 
service lines that diverge from the goal-based program.  In proposing a rule (1) including an inordinately 
short timeframe for replacement, (2) including an annual 10% replacement metric and (3) requiring 
replacement rates be calculated using a formula that mischaracterizes programmatic success, EPA is 
forcing systems to replace service lines at a rate higher than the nominal 10% annual rate it its 
describing.  CWSs in this situation will consider where there are overlapping concerns between 
environmental justice and service line replacement as required by the LCRR and now the proposed 
LCRI.60  EPA will discourage systems from “one-off” material characterization and line replacement at 
facilities where (1) the service line is unlikely to actually be a lead service (e.g., a large school building) or 
(2) unlikely to contribute meaningfully to lead exposure (e.g., a large school building).  Moreover, 
licensed childcare facilities are responsible for the children in their care.  Such facilities should already 
 
59 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,928.  
60 Proposed § 141.84(c)(1)(v). 

 
32 
 
be taking steps to understand and address lead in drinking water for the children in their care.  Where 
such businesses and nonprofit organizations pursue service line replacement, there are mechanisms in 
current CWS practice, the LCRR, and the proposed LCRI to assure collaboration in service line 
replacement.61  If EPA sought to provide an incentive for preferentially replacing service lines at schools 
and child care facilities, it should: 
1. Pursue application of federal funding to schools and child care facilities through the 
Department of Education and other federal departments to support replacing these lines 
fully 
2. Engage state child care licensing programs to require such facilities both regularly monitor 
for lead in drinking water (and other routes of exposure) and review the materials of 
construction in their facility and service line as a condition of licensure 
Simply put, this requirement unnecessarily complicates the proposed LCRI, does not allow systems 
flexibility to plan their LSL removal programs and budgets, and lacks support or justification in the 
rulemaking record.  
Request for Comment 11:  “EPA also seeks comment on the complexity of the rate construct.” 
As noted above, AWWA strongly recommends that EPA remove the proposed rolling, 3-year average 
replacement rate of 10% from the final rule. The current calculation is fundamentally unfair and must be 
revised to avoid creating a rule that is arbitrary and capricious.  The proposed LCRI description of the 
service lines that warrant evaluation is artificially inflated through the definition of GRRSLs, the inclusion 
of LSUSLs, and the criteria for determining a service line is non-lead.  The replacement rate calculation 
includes in the denominator: known LSLs, known GRRSLs, and all LSLUSLs.  Subsequent calculation of the 
replacement rate is not an accurate reflection of program progress as it only credits the system for full 
replacements of LSLs and GRRSLs.  The calculation should take into account progress in reducing the 
number of LSLs and GRRSLs, progress reducing LSUSLs, and service lines for which the system has 
completed its good faith effort to engage the property owner in replacement.  Lastly, while EPA’s use of 
a three-year rolling average was an attempt to recognize the year-to-year variability in replacement 
rates over the program timeframe, unfortunately, that variability cannot be adequately managed by the 
proposed metric without in some scenarios, the water system having to replace substantially higher 
percentages than the average rate with which EPA characterizes the Proposed Rule. 
Below illustrates reasonably expected implementation scenarios and the resulting impact on system’s 
capacity to reliably comply with a 10% replacement rate.  A simple spreadsheet was developed to 
illustrate achieving an annual 10% replacement per year criteria.  The output does not reflect a three-
year rolling average, but a similar pattern would emerge. Most CWSs would prioritize replacement of 
known LSLs both to save on funds for digging up non-lead lines as well as to maximize the known health 
benefit. The effect of that logical action is straight forward when there are few or no LSUSLs.  EPA did 
not make this assumption, rather EPA assumed that all systems would characterize LSUSLs at a steady 
10% per year beginning year one.62 
 
61 Proposed § 141.84(f). 
62 EPA, Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis at 4-182 (2023). 

 
33 
 
Scenario 1 -- The table below shows a CWS with primarily known LSLs (or GRRSLs) (2,000 LSLs and 200 
LSUSLs.  In this example the CWS will need to characterize LSUSLs at a rate of 6% per year to meet a 10% 
annual replacement rate and address all LSUSLs in the initial inventory. 
Scenario 2 – This table illustrates the dilemma for a CWS that has many LSUSLs that are believed to be 
nonlead. In this example there are 2000 lead lines and 4000 LSUSLs.  The CWS will need to begin by 
replacing all of its 2,000 known lead lines in the first three years to satisfy the 10% replacement rate 
while also identifying 7% of the unknowns per year. In year four the CWS would not meet the 10% 
replacement rate unless by that time it had characterized all LSUSLs.  
In order to reliably achieve the 10% annual replacement rate the CWS would need to characterize 20% 
of the LSUSLs per year in addition to removing the required lead lines.  All lead lines and unknowns 
would need to be removed from the pool by the end of year four. The effect of the replacement rate 
calculation described in the proposed LCRI is to require a much faster replacement period than 10 years. 
To further illustrate the unfair nature of the proposed calculation, if the CWS only identified 10% of the 
original LSUSLs per year so all are identified in 10 years by the beginning of year four there would be no 
known lead lines left to remove but the required calculation would define the replacement pool as still 
having 2,800 LSUSLs plus the original 2,000 lead lines requiring replacement of 480 lead lines when 
there are no known lead lines left.  To meet the requirements of the calculation all the 2,800 unknowns 
would need to be characterized and removed in a single year.  
If the final LCRI were to include an annual replacement rate calculation, then EPA should use a different 
approach that is both fair and easily calculated.  One such option is the following: 
1. An approach based on two parallel metrics, (1) a cumulative percentage of LSLs and 
GRRSLs replaced and (2) a cumulative percentage of LSUSLs that are characterized 
2. The numerator in the cumulative percentage of LSLs and GRRSLs replaced would be the 
total number of lines replaced and the denominator would be the sum of LSLs and GRRSLs 
in the initial inventory plus those discovered in prior years. 
3. The final rule could include cumulative percentages like the following: 
Metric 
Years After Compliance Date 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
% of LSLs and 
GRRSLs replaced 
-- 
-- 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
% of LSUSLs 
characterized 
-- 
-- 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
 

 
34 
 
Scenario 1 - Simple Inventory Simulation for a CWS (Not Deferred, few LSUSLs, 7% of LSUSLs characterized per year) 
Year (i) 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030 
2031 
2032 
2033 
2034 
2035 
2036 
2037 
Initial Inventory 
  
Lead  
2,000 
Lead Status Unknown 
200 
Non-Lead 
  
Total 
2,200 
Updates (BOY) – Characterizing 7% of initial LSUSL pool each year 
Initial Number of LSUSLs 
200 
186 
172 
158 
144 
130 
116 
102 
88 
74 
Number Eliminated 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
Remaining Unknowns 
186 
172 
158 
144 
130 
116 
102 
88 
74 
60 
Required Replacements 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Replacement Pool (BOY) 
2,200 
2,186 
2,172 
2,158 
2,144 
2,130 
2,116 
2,102 
2,088 
2,074   
Percent Replacement 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10%   
Lead Lines Left from Previous Year 
  
1,780 
1,561 
1,344 
1,128 
914 
701 
489 
279 
70 
0 
Pipes to Replace 
220 
219 
217 
216 
214 
213 
212 
210 
209 
207   
Status of Compliance Calculation 
  
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
Calc. OK 
  
Available Pipes in Replacement 
Pool (End of Year) 
1,980 
1,952 
1,719 
1,488 
1,258 
1,030 
803 
381 
158 
60   
Lead Lines Left (EOY) 
1,780 
1,561 
1,344 
1,128 
914 
701 
489 
279 
70 
0   
 
 
 
 

 
35 
 
Scenario 2 - Simple Inventory Simulation for a CWS (Not Deferred, Many LSUSLs, 7% of LSUSLs characterized per year) 
Year (i) 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030 
2031 
2032 
2033 
2034 
2035 
2036 
2037 
Initial Inventory 
  
Lead  
2,000 
Lead Status Unknown 
4,000 
Non-Lead 
  
Total 
6,000 
Updates (BOY) – Characterizing 7% of initial LSUSL pool each year 
Initial Number of LSUSLs 
4,000 3,720 3,440 
3,160 
2,880 
2,600 
2,320 
2,040 
1,760 
1,480 
Number Eliminated 
280 
280 
280 
280 
280 
280 
280 
280 
280 
280 
Remaining Unknowns 
3,720 3,440 3,160 
2,880 
2,600 
2,320 
2,040 
1,760 
1,480 
1,200 
Required Replacements 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Replacement Pool (BOY) 
6,000 5,720 5,440 
5,160 
4,880 
4,600 
4,320 
4,040 
3,760 
3,480   
Percent Replacement 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10%   
Lead Lines Left from Previous Year 
  
1,400 
828 
284 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Pipes to Replace 
600 
572 
544 
516 
488 
460 
432 
404 
376 
348   
Status of Compliance Calculation 
  
Calc. 
OK 
Calc. 
OK 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
  
Available Pipes in Replacement Pool 
(EOY) 
5,400 4,840 3,988 
3,164 
2,600 
2,320 
2,040 
1,760 
1,480 
1,200   
Lead Lines Left (EOY) 
1,400 
828 
284 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0   
 
 
 

 
36 
 
Scenario 3 - Simple Inventory Simulation for a CWS (Not Deferred, Many LSUSLs, 10% of LSUSLs characterized per year) 
Year (i) 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030 
2031 
2032 
2033 
2034 
2035 
2036 
2037 
Initial Inventory 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lead  
2,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lead Status Unknown  
4,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Lead 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
6,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Updates (BOY) – Characterizing 10% of initial LSUSL pool each year 
Initial Number of LSUSLs 
4,000 3,600 3,200 
2,800 
2,400 
2,000 
1,600 
1,200 
800 
400 
 
Number Eliminated 
400 
400 
400 
400 
400 
400 
400 
400 
400 
400 
 
Remaining Unknowns 
3,600 3,200 2,800 
2,400 
2,000 
1,600 
1,200 
800 
400 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Required Replacements 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Replacement Pool (BOY) 
6,000 5,600 5,200 
4,800 
4,400 
4,000 
3,600 
3,200 
2,800 2,400   
Percent Replacement 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10%   
Lead Lines Left from Previous Year 
  
1,400 
840 
320 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Pipes to Replace 
600 
560 
520 
480 
440 
400 
360 
320 
280 
240   
Status of Compliance Calculation 
  
Calc. 
OK 
Calc. 
OK 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
Does 
not 
work 
Calc. 
OK 
  
Available Pipes in Replacement Pool 
(EOY) 
5,400 4,600 3,640 
2,720 
2,000 
1,600 
1,200 
800 
400 
0   
Lead Lines Left (EOY) 
1,400 
840 
320 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0   
 
 
 

 
37 
 
Request for Comment 12: “EPA also seeks comment on whether systems should be required to meet a 
minimum replacement rate in the first three years after the compliance date to give States an 
opportunity to enforce replacement rate progress sooner than three years after the compliance date.” 
Systems should not be required to meet a minimum replacement rate in the first three years after the 
compliance date. Neither of these provisions are necessary as states have the authority under state law 
to establish additional performance criteria for water systems.  If such provisions were to be included in 
the final federal rule, EPA would have to articulate criteria when more rapid initial replacement rates 
were warranted and a basis for enforcing replacement rate progress sooner.  EPA would have to justify 
those criteria in keeping with the provisions of 42 U.S.C. § 300g–1(b)(3), a task that is not supported by 
the current agency arguments for the proposed treatment technique or the record before the agency. 
As a practical matter, the characterization and replacement of LSLs and GRRSLs in the targeted 10-year 
timeframe will require substantial local and state policy actions by elected and administrative bodies as 
well as federal funding appropriations.  This is particularly true given the goal of full service line 
replacement.  EPA does not have a basis at this time to determine either (1) what shorter timelines are 
indeed possible or (2) under what circumstances state action to hold an individual CWS accountable 
such shorter timelines is appropriate. 
And as noted previously in these comments, specific minimum replacement rates within the timeframe 
for full replacement will cause additional and unnecessarily burdens on water systems as they attempt 
to balance budgeting challenges and other regulatory requirements that EPA is simultaneously imposing 
under other forthcoming and recently finalized regulations.  Minimum replacement rates within the 
allowable timeframe for replacement are not feasible.  If EPA truly wants to achieve full LSL removal on 
the most expedited timeline that is feasible, it cannot layer on additional burdens in the process that will 
force water systems and states alike to redirect resources towards meeting interim goals and 
undertaking paperwork and administrative tasks.  
Request for Comment 13: “EPA is taking comment on whether States, as a condition of primacy, or EPA 
when it is directly implementing the program, should be required to set initial shortened deadlines by a 
certain timeframe, such as no later than 60 days after the compliance date.” 
Neither states or EPA should be required to set initial shortened deadlines by a certain timeframe 
because neither states nor EPA have objective criteria that could be reasonably applied to all CWSs that 
must comply with the proposed LCRI such that an alternative timeframe could be set by EPA or the 
State.  The rulemaking docket does not include information about the practical steps CWSs must 
undertake to implement a program such that EPA would have a factual basis for finalizing an approach 
to setting interim milestones for CWS lead service line characterization, validation, and replacement 
activities.  Moreover, as EPA has acknowledged there are numerous variables specific to each CWS that 
will determine how it will pursue program implementation and which elements will be prioritized over 
another in a particular CWS’s program timeline.  Variations include CWSs that: 
1. Face severe financial hardship will need to focus on financing more so than systems that 
have available funds or a smaller number of service lines subject to the Proposed Rule 
provisions 

 
38 
2. Have a significant percentage of their service lines that are LSUSL due to a lack of 
information about customer-owned service line materials 
3. Are attempting to overcome barriers to program implementation that require changes in 
local or state law 
4. Are part of a community which faces competing infrastructure investment demands (e.g., 
Clean Water Act (CWA) consent orders, school construction, bridge replacement, 
economic development, etc.) that are simultaneously vying for available borrowing 
capacity 
If EPA were to direct or allow states to set abbreviated schedules or impose specific milestones, EPA 
would have to: 
1. Require states to respond to CWS submittals of their replacement plans within 60 days of 
receipt with an alternative schedule and a system-specific basis for the alternative 
schedule.   
2. Require states to make provision for the alternative schedule to be subject to appeal to an 
appropriately qualified panel of drinking water professionals with relevant expertise 
within 60 days of an appeal from the CWS.   
3. Include provisions for state primacy packages to include specific criteria that would trigger 
such an alternative schedule and safeguards that the state can meet the timelines above.   
4. Include the above process safeguards in early implementation agreements for the final 
LCRI. 
Request for Comment 14: “The overall approach and basis to offer deferred service line replacement to 
systems with a high proportion of LSLs and GRR service lines in their distribution system relative to their 
total number of households served. EPA is requesting comment on its proposed threshold of 0.039 
average annual number of replacements per household served, which is used to calculate the number of 
years that systems can defer.”  
It is appropriate to include a mechanism for water systems to seek an extended LSL replacement 
program.  For all the reasons described elsewhere in these comments many systems will find replacing 
all LSLs and GRRSLs within 10 years infeasible.   
Underlying Premise is Not a Sustainable or Feasible Rate -- EPA explains that it estimates that water 
systems are capable of replacing 10,000 service lines per year.  To achieve this rate EPA assumes CWSs 
are capable of replacing 100 service lines per day in 100 working days each year. This rate is not 
consistent with sustainable water infrastructure construction practice, drastically overestimates what is 
possible based on AWWA’s members’ experience, and EPA does not provide support in the current 
rulemaking record for its estimate.  The following figure is a graph of the data EPA presents in the 
Economic Analysis for the Proposed Rule to support service line replacement rates as a function of the 
size of the pool of service lines to be replaced and service area population.  Observed removal rates 
rarely approach 10,000 and seldom break 1,000 service lines per year.  The pace of replacement is more 
a reflection of the challenge before the system than the population / service area of the system.  Said 
another way, the LSL replacement is a slow, cumbersome process that requires extensive coordination 
and the collaboration of multiple parties; it simply takes time.   

 
39 
 
Considering the data that EPA curated for the Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis the 90th percentile 
annual average replacement tally in the dataset was 1,316 and there is considerable scatter in the 
number of service lines replaced annually at the upper end of LSL/GRRSL pool size.  EPA’s dataset 
suggests that a sustainable replacement program is much lower than 10,000 or even 8,000 service lines 
per year.  Moreover, EPA should consider that the overwhelming majority of water systems that will be 
characterizing and replacing significant numbers of LSLs and GRRSLs serve fewer than 10,000 persons 
and the next largest group of systems serve less than 100,000 persons. 
Even a Practical Replacement Rate Requires More Than Available Resources --   Systems with practical 
experience note that on average a single field crew can replace three service lines per workday.  
Construction would not occur during early morning or during evening hours in order to minimize 
disruption to neighborhoods.  Given winter moratoriums limiting in-street construction, there are 167 
weekdays (244 calendar days) available for construction without accounting for: 
1. Gaps in successful replacement program preparation (e.g., permits, easements, required 
notifications, subcontractor scheduling, etc.) 
2. Community holidays 
3. Inclement and increasingly unpredictable weather 
4. Logistical challenges (e.g., equipment, personnel, material shortages, coordination with 
other utilities) 
5. No-cut pavement restrictions 
6. Conflicting local public works projects 
7. Major traffic constraints 
8. Diversion of crews to emergency work 
9. Mis-communication with property owners or inability to effectively communicate with 
occupants regarding access 
1
10
100
1000
10000
1
100
10,000
Service Lines Replaced
Total Services in LSL+GRR Pool
Average Replaced per Year
Average Replaced per Year
1
10
100
1000
10000
1
100
10,000
1,000,000
Service Lines Replaced
System Size (population) 
Average Replaced per Year
Average Replaced per Year
Source:  Prepared using data collected by EPA and reported in EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0053 

 
40 
10. Hazards to personnel / impediments to replacement within a structure (e.g., ability to 
physical access service line entry to building (location of water piping and plumbing, 
hording, etc.), illegal activities in the structure, etc.) 
11. Site-specific challenges (e.g., inadvertent breaks in other utilities, etc.)   
If productive workdays total 200 days per year per crew (assuming higher pay for weekend work) then 
one crew can replace 600 service lines per year.  So, a CWS with a total of 10,000 LSLs and GRRSLs to 
replace would require two full-time crews for 10 years, just for replacement.  Accelerating replacement 
by adding more crews also reaches a breaking point as for each crew all of the above daily challenges 
impact logistics even when there is an in-office support team providing engineering, permitting, 
logistical and management support prior to each replacement, compliance documentation and 
reporting, and customer interaction. There would also need to be crews for service line characterization, 
and validation study, which would be occurring in parallel with replacement.  These crews also require 
the above in-house support. 
Others have grappled with the conundrum of how to move forward at a reasonable pace of replacement 
while recognizing that CWSs with large numbers of service lines to replace will need to distribute that 
task over time.  One example is Illinois (see following Table).  Importantly, Illinois calculates a 
replacement rate without including LSUSLs in the denominator. 
Number of Service 
Lines to be 
Replaced 
Annual 
Replacement 
Rate 
Timeline for 
Completion 
Effective Maximum Required 
Number of Replacements Per 
Year (calculated) 
<1,200 
7% 
15 
84 
1,200 - 4,999 
6% 
17 
300 
5,000 - 9,999 
5% 
20 
500 
10,000 - 99,999 
3% 
34 
3,000 
>100,000 
2% 
50 
--  
 
Due to the complexity of the Proposed Rule and the infeasibility of the current replacement timeline for 
many, if not all, systems, EPA should provide a broader framework for deferral to ensure that systems 
that are using best efforts to replace lines are not unfairly penalized when their lack of resources means 
that they will need additional time to comply with the replacement requirements. This is particularly 
true when systems are relying on subsidized federal or state funding that may not be immediately 
available. 
Household Term in Deferred Deadline Calculation – The proposed LCRI preamble describes including the 
number of households served by a water system in the deferred deadline calculation as a proxy for rate-
paying customers.63  While states maintain descriptive data on CWSs  that they supervise, and the 
number of persons served is one of those fields, states take different strategies for assigning service 
populations and there is not nationwide consistency in the frequency with which this data field is 
managed.  Rather than rely on a surrogate measure, the final rule could specify bill-paying connections, 
 
63 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,913 

 
41 
or residential bill-paying connections.  CWSs pursuing a deferred deadline would have ready access to a 
count of their customers. 
Request for Comment 15: “Whether to require the State, as a condition of primacy, to approve the use of 
the deferred deadline provision where the water system qualifies for it and/or whether to require the 
State, as a condition of primacy, to assess whether it would be feasible for a system to meet the 10-year 
deadline or a shorter deadline even if the system meets the regulatory criteria for the deferred deadline.” 
AWWA supports the Proposed Rule recognizing the deferred deadline provision in regulatory language 
as opposed to a special primacy requirements for states.  Any water system that qualifies for the 
deferred provision should qualify by virtue of the LCRI and not require state approval or assessment 
beyond confirmation of the determination.  Allowing systems to qualify directly through the LCRI text 
will reduce burdens on both the systems and the states and avoid any real or perceived arbitrary 
application of state discretion.  AWWA does not support including, as a condition of primacy, a 
requirement to assess whether it would be feasible for a system to meet the 10-year deadline.  This 
places an unjustified burden on the states, and creates a great risk of being misapplied, resulting in 
enforcement risks for regulated systems.  As repeatedly noted in these comments, there are CWSs that 
will not be able to meet the 10-year replacement schedule EPA has proposed.  Moreover, as illustrated 
in these comments (see Section 3.4) the proposed LCRI requires characterization of LSUSLs and 
replacement of LSLs / GRRSLs at a faster rate than the nominal 10-year window suggests – an even more 
infeasible expectation.  
In order to effectively plan for and finance modifications to current replacement programs, CWSs need 
regulatory consistency.  A federal regulatory structure, like the proposed deferred deadline provision 
provides a measure of consistency.  EPA should hold states accountable to adhering to deferred 
deadline provision of the federal rule, as it is holding states accountable to implement other rule 
provisions.  If an individual state wishes to set an expedited replacement schedule, that state can do so 
under state law.  Several states have already done so, such an action would be separate from 
compliance with the federal regulation.   
Request for Comment 16: “Whether there are additional data on service line replacement rates achieved 
by systems in proactive programs (i.e., excluding programs that only replace service lines in coordination 
with main replacement or emergency repair).” 
AWWA supports providing additional flexibility to systems and for creating a rule that credits them for 
the measures they have already taken to address lead in drinking water.  EPA’s technical support 
document and Proposed Rule preamble illustrate the challenge EPA faces in applying data from ongoing 
programs to the likely costs of a future task occurring within the strictures of regulatory oversight.  CWSs 
implementing proactive replacement programs are undertaking programs that fit their local 
circumstances rather than adhering to EPA’s view of what a replacement program should entail.  This 
provides much needed flexibility as these systems can invest in different forms of customer interaction 
that best meet the needs of their system and customers but may not be compliant with the Proposed 
Rule or meet the proposed standards of documentation and reporting.   
Request for Comment 17: “The proposed use of a maximum threshold of 10,000 annual service line 
replacements for systems with atypically high numbers of LSLs and GRR service lines as well as seeking 

 
42 
comment on the alternate threshold of 8,000 annual service line replacements. EPA is also seeking 
feedback on other thresholds and supporting data.”  
See responses to requests for comment 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, and 16 above. 
Request for Comment 18: “EPA is also seeking feedback on if there’s data available that would inform if 
the maximum threshold for annual service line replacement could increase after ten years, such as if 
replacement rates could double.” 
There is not data to support the premise that the maximum threshold for annual service line 
replacement could increase after ten years, such that replacement rates could double. EPA should 
therefore avoid finalizing any such provision, as it will not be supportable based on the agency’s record.  
The premise for the deferred replacement schedule is that the scope of the replacement challenge is 
beyond the means of the system unless it is adhering to longer window of performance.  The extended 
schedule inherently assumes an average replacement rate over the duration of the calculated 
performance period.  EPA or the state de facto assuming that a more aggressive replacement rate is 
feasible for some portion of that period, is inconsistent with the logic used to derive the performance 
period. 
There is good reason to believe that service line replacement will not peak at the end of the 
performance period.  Each replacement program will go through and initial organizational phase, 
followed by a period of efficient replacement, followed by a period where the system is addressing more 
challenging replacements (for example, due to a lack of property owner cooperation, lack of 
collaborative funding options, etc.).   
Neither EPA or states can forecast the availability of funding, speed with which necessary local and state 
policy changes will be made, or the degree of property owner collaboration systems will face initially or 
over the course of the performance period.  These circumstances will all be fact-specific to individual 
water systems.  Without a means of assessing such constraints EPA would be ill advised to set an 
arbitrary replacement rate step function in the treatment technique or suggest / authorize states to do 
so. 
Request for Comment 19: “Whether systems conducting deferred service line replacement should be 
subject to any additional requirements beyond those for systems that are not replacing service lines in 
accordance with a deferred deadline.” 
Systems conducting deferred service line replacement should not be subject to any additional 
requirements beyond those for systems that are not replacing service lines in accordance with a 
deferred deadline.  Systems facing a mandated infrastructure replacement task that is already beyond 
their means (or they would not be on a deferred schedule) are under sufficient fiscal, managerial, and 
operational stress without additional regulatory burdens.  The administrative and education 
requirements of the LCRI proposal are already extensive, and any additional burdens would not be 
feasible for the reasons repeatedly noted throughout this comment letter.  The imposition of additional 
measures beyond those already included in the Proposed Rule could only viewed as punitive rather than 
tasks that would meaningfully contribute to successfully achieving the targeted replacements. 
Request for Comment 20:  “The requirement for systems to install a dielectric coupling when conducting 
a partial replacement of an LSL or GRR to separate the remaining LSL or GRR service line and the 

 
43 
replaced service line unless the replaced service line is made of plastic and other recommended risk 
mitigation activities.” 
While the use of a dielectric coupling as described in the Proposed Rule is good practice and is 
consistent with established field practice, per ANSI/AWWA C810 - Replacement and Flushing of Lead 
Service Lines, EPA should ensure the use of dielectric coupling through reference rather than through 
specific inclusion in the Proposed Rule.   
SDWA regulations do not and should not specify specific design and construction standards because 
identifying specific technologies forecloses improvements in technology.  EPA should be wary of taking 
the step of incorporating specific design and construction standards into federal drinking water 
standards given the rigidity of SDWA’s regulatory framework and the infrequent nature of individual rule 
revision.  EPA is for example unlikely to revise a rule for a minor technical change due to the expense of 
the rulemaking for the agency itself.  EPA could and should instead as per the National Technology 
Transfer and Advancement Act, cite and encourage service line replacement in accordance with the 
ANSI/AWWA C810 standard. 
Request for Comment 21: “The proposed requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line 
replacement unless it is conducted in accordance with emergency or planned infrastructure work 
(excluding planned infrastructure work solely for the purposes of replacing lead and GRR service lines as 
part of a service line replacement program).” 
For purposes of responding to this request for comment, AWWA notes that it reads the Proposed Rule 
to not consider a replacement a “partial replacement” any time the property owner has denied access 
to its portion of a line.  However, AWWA is concerned that there is a lack of clarity in how the Proposed 
Rule is currently drafted, which could lead systems and states to believe that EPA is prohibiting the 
systems from making any replacement when they have been denied access to the private portion of a 
line.  And for the reasons explained elsewhere in this comment letter, even when a system is granted 
access to a private portion of a line, AWWA continues to maintain that EPA lacks the legal authority 
under the SDWA to require a system to remove the private potion of the line or to otherwise count the 
private potion of the line as part of its LSL or GRRSL replacement obligation. 
EPA should not finalize a requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line replacement unless it is 
conducted in accordance with emergency or planned infrastructure work.  As explained further below, 
such a ban would violate the APA because it relies on outdated information about the potential negative 
consequences of partial replacements, and ignores the considerable downsides to imposing such a ban.  
AWWA supports EPA’s goal in each instance is to achieve a complete replacement.  Full replacement 
requires successful collaboration with property owners, which is not always possible.  The LCRI proposal 
provides important latitude to CWSs and allows necessary water main infrastructure renewal and 
rehabilitation to occur even when there are property owners that are unable or unwilling to participate 
in a full LSL replacement.  Inclusion of this flexibility to proceed with partial replacement is essential for 
ongoing water system infrastructure maintenance and should be retained in the final LCRI. 
The decision to ban partial replacements in the instance of LSL/GRRSL replacement programs more 
broadly should be revisited.  Banning partial replacements as a part of replacement programs impedes a 

 
44 
CWS’s ability to make incremental improvement by reducing at least the portion of the service line to 
which it has access.   
Exposure Management Due to Partial Replacement -- There has been considerable advocacy calling for a 
ban on partial LSL replacement.  Unfortunately, EPA has not fostered a technical dialogue around the 
effect of such a ban in practice.  While in the past, partial replacement could introduce new risks, the 
water sector has evolved and introduced new practices.  The data EPA continues to use to underpin the 
proposed ban is outdated and not reflective of the current situation and therefore does not provide a 
sufficient basis for justifying the requirement.  At present the docket and record before the agency does 
not provide a sound basis for the proposed ban as it is relying on out-of-date information. For example, 
partial replacements today will include: 
1. Use of construction techniques to minimize lead release per the ANSI/AWWA C810 
standard 
2. Post-replacement flushing per the ANSI/AWWA C810 standard 
3. The opportunity to install plastic pipe and / or use a dielectric coupling to prevent galvanic 
corrosion of the remaining LSL. 
4. Provision of a filter to the occupants and six-months of replacement filters per the 
proposed LCRI 
5. Provision of public information material that includes instructions for ongoing measures to 
reduce lead release per and the proposed LCRI 
6. Post-replacement lead concentration data to illustrate if and degree to which lead may 
continue to be released under a stagnant water, first and fifth liter sample protocol (e.g., 
worst case sample conditions) 
Negative Consequences from Banning Partial Replacement – Not affording CWSs the opportunity to 
replace the portion of the service line in its control will have the following negative consequences: 
1. Forcing CWSs to disturb a LSL/GRRSL and thus potentially release lead to the occupants 
without any associated benefit 
2. Resulting in CWSs engaging in replacement activity multiple times in the same street 
leading to greater community disruption, loss of efficiency in the construction program, 
and additional cost inflation due to repeated road cuts and associated re-paving 
3. Leaving the length of lead pipe in the CWS’s control in contact with water the occupants 
consume 
4. Increasing the potential for a subsequent disturbance of the service line to occur as 
remaining GRRSLs are often fragile, and the initial construction could lead to the need for 
additional construction to repair the line after it is first disturbed 
Environmental Justice Concern – EPA posits that partial replacements have environmental justice 
consequences.64  Given the above safeguards and practical effects, the ban on partial replacements is as 
likely to have detrimental effects for this population of occupants as it is to offer risk reduction.  
 
64 EPA, Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  3-4 (2023). 

 
45 
Moreover, as previously noted compliance costs associated with rules like the LCRI are passed on to 
customers in the form of higher rates for their drinking water.  These environmental justice households 
are among those in the community that can least afford the cost consequences of unsubstantiated 
regulatory requirements.  
Participation Not Just a Function of Cost -- EPA cannot assume that property owners will engage in full-
service line replacement. Nor can EPA assume that the cost of coordinating in a service line replacement 
is the only social barrier to customer participation in service line replacement.  AWWA shares EPA’s 
appreciation for the value of long-term risk reduction measures like LSLR.  However, service line 
replacement is not every household’s priority concern.  CWS with ongoing programs that offer full 
replacement at the community’s expense still experience high refusal rates even when service line 
replacement does not impose any costs directly on the property owner.   
EPA Representation of Data is Flawed – EPA cites data from published papers to describe flushing as 
inadequate to reduce lead release following a partial replacement.  First, EPA’s summary of the available 
data described post replacement lead levels, including all tested flushing procedures rather than limiting 
its analysis to flushing procedures that are currently recommended like the protocol for whole-house 
high velocity flushing that is now part of the AWWA/ANSI C810 standard.  Second, the studies reported 
post-replacement lead concentration observations using typical sampling protocol rather than an 
exposure-based sampling strategy.  As EPA acknowledges in the Proposed Rule preamble, current 
monitoring sample strategies are not representative of exposure.   
While not addressed in the preamble discussion of partial replacement, EPA’s economic analysis 
includes a characterization of lead levels associated with partial service lines.  Ignoring the limitations in 
the dataset underpinning the agency analysis, the agency’s own analysis illustrates that partial 
replacements do not lead to elevated lead concentrations that initial research suggested might have 
been a more ubiquitous concern.65 
Request for Comment 22: “EPA is seeking comment on whether partial service line replacement should 
be prohibited during “planned infrastructure work” or with certain types of planned infrastructure work.” 
As noted above, while the goal in each instance is to achieve a complete replacement, full replacement 
requires successful collaboration with property owners, which does not always occur.  EPA should not 
reduce the scope of the exceptions on partial service line replacement, but rather it should expand the 
scope of those partial replacements as described in the above response to EPA’s prior request for 
comment.  Where possible, the final rule should allow for as much flexibility and efficiency in project 
planning as possible, given that the burdens of the replacement timeline will already make it infeasible 
for many water systems. 
Request for Comment 23: “The ability of the market to correct for potential shortages in workers and 
materials to conduct service line replacement, as well to provide sufficient quantities of filters to comply 
with the service line replacement and other relevant provisions in the proposal.” 
 
65 EPA, Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis. Exhibit 5-11 LSL and CCT Scenarios and Simulated Geometric Mean Tap 
Water Lead Concentrations and Standard Deviations at the Fifth Liter Drawn after Stagnation for Each Combination 
of LSL and CCT Status 5-18 (2023). 

 
46 
As noted previously in this letter, there are not sufficient workers and materials for EPA’s proposed 
requirements.  AWWA also notes that EPA has the burden of demonstrating through substantial 
evidence in the administrative record that the requirements are feasible.  EPA cannot shift the burden 
the agency faces in determining the feasibility of the Proposed Rule requirements, particularly the 
viability of the service line replacement element of the treatment technique on to the public.  Rather 
than ask the public to comment (during a short time period and over several national holidays) on the 
available labor supply for construction four to fourteen years into the future, EPA should have presented 
an analysis of this limitation in the Proposed Rule Economic Analysis and allow the public to comment 
on the analysis.  EPA has not done so.  EPA is aware that there is: 
1. A persistent labor shortage in the trained staff of CWSs across the U.S. 
2. An aging workforce in the water sector as well as other sectors, including the construction 
sector generally 
3. There is currently a well reported shortfall in available construction workers 
Cost of infrastructure construction are rising and construction workforce is not available to meet current 
infrastructure project needs. The Associated Builders and Contractors (ABC) tracks trends in the general 
construction sector.  Given current shortages in available workforce and other drivers, ABC reported a 
8.5 month backlog on projects as of December 2023.66  ABC’s construction backlog indicator is little 
changed over the last three years.67  CBRE summarized cost and capacity drivers in 2022 as follows, 
“…Finding skilled labor continues to remain a major challenge for all aspects of the industry 
inclusive of shipping and trucking, manufacturing and on-site construction. … 
The CBRE Construction Cost Index showed a decline in annual escalation from 2022 and is 
forecast at 6.5% (±2%) for the year. This is still higher than the 10-year average of 3-6% per 
year.”68 
Water services construction is a specialized area within the broader construction sector.  Consequently, 
trends in the broader construction sector are even more severe and pronounced in the water sector.  In 
December, Clark et al. reports that “water supply and sewer construction spending were up 15.3% and 
27.2%, respectively in October 2023 from a year ago”69 reflecting increased public sector infrastructure 
spending over the last two years (see following figure based on Bureau of Census data).70  The increased 
spending on public infrastructure is straining existing capacity.  
 
66 ABC, ABC’s Construction Backlog Indicator Inches up in November, Contractors Remain Confident (Dec 12,2023).  
67CBRE, U.S. Construction Cost Trends (2022).  
68 CBRE, United States Construction Market Trends (2023). 
69 Clark, Allison, M. Parkhurst, and S. Repucci,  “Federal Funds Ease US Water Utilities’ Capex Burden but Gap 
Remains.” Fitch Wire, FitchRatings (Dec. 12, 2023). 
70 U.S. Census Bureau, Total Public Construction Spending: Total Construction in the United States [TLPBLCONS], 
retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (Jan.13, 2024), 
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TLPBLCONS,. 

 
47 
 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Total Public Construction Spending: Total Construction in the United 
States 
Antidotal reports from CWSs soliciting bid packages for construction projects like those required by the 
proposed LCRI indicate that available, qualified construction firms are not submitting bids on new bid 
packages because they have already successfully scheduled sufficient work into the future that the risk 
of committing to additional projects was too high.  There is little reason to expect a rapid expansion in 
construction capacity.  The construction sector suffers from well recognized workforce challenges, such 
as an aging workforce and limited influx of appropriately trained workers.  
Access to labor pool is limited – In support of its argument that the 10-year period to remove all LSLs and 
GRRSLs is feasible, EPA is citing past and ongoing efforts by water systems to remove LSLs.  As previously 
noted, those systems did not procure contractor support in the midst of a nationwide sprint to remove 
all LSLs and GRRSLs and therefore do not prove or support the idea that sufficient resources exist for all 
regulated systems to remove these service lines on the proposed timeline.  Past and current efforts can 
tap regional and multi-state pools of construction companies.  As more CWSs enter service line 
replacement there is little reason for contractors that have ready access to projects close at hand to 
compete for work that requires and extensive mobilization effort for personnel and equipment.  When 
contractors bid for projects that are distant from their base of operations, they must add the cost of that 
mobilization including the housing of their workforce, leading to greater logistical complexity, higher 
costs, and potentially lower profit margins, and all of which are a disincentive to compete for more 
distant work. In addition, because many PWSs are public or quasi-public, they may have additional and 
more cumbersome contracting processes which can both deter contractors from bidding on the work 
and also make the process of obtaining skilled labor more time consuming and cumbersome.  These 
issues are discussed in further detail below.  
CWS must meet construction goals within federal, state and local government limits on staffing and 
contracting -- Complying with the proposed LCRI will require systems to (1) revise current infrastructure 
maintenance and investment priorities and (2) entail aligning personnel and equipment to meet rule 
timelines within federal, state, and local government requirements.  Balancing compliance with all 
required regulations and policies imposed on water systems constrains makes aligning resources to 
meet EPA’s proposed timelines unlikely at best.  For example, 
1. Federal funds require use of low-bid (or equivalent) contracted services. As a 
consequence, systems must choose between accessing federal funds for service line 

 
48 
replacement and funding existing in-house staffing of distribution systems maintenance 
and construction crews. 
2. State and local restrictions on water system personnel installing / modifying piping and 
appurtenances on private property.  In some parts of the U.S., policies are in place to 
assure local markets for particular tradecrafts, requiring, for example, the use of local 
plumbers.  This further limits the available labor pool for these PWSs. 
3. Procurement policies and practices to assure open competition for government funded 
projects, preferential contract award to businesses that are an established part of the 
local economy, preferential award of contracts to firms that are owned by disadvantaged 
groups (e.g., women-owned, minority-owned, etc.), and other requirements.  Such 
processes are a routine feature of federal, state, and local procurement practice and 
impact (1) slowing the speed of the procurement process, (2) increasing the cost of 
services procured, and (3) decreasing the flexibility systems have in accessing available 
contractors. 
Limitations on rate increases – Water systems can only respond to increases in project costs within the 
limits of their ability to fund those projects (through, for example, pay-go, municipal bonds, private 
equity, revolving loan funds, etc.).  This funding relies on rates and charges for either operating funds or 
repayment of debt, and such rate and charge increases must be undertaken with care.  These increases 
are also subject to oversight.  The most readily illustrated example is the case of investor-owned water 
systems that are subject to state corporation commission oversight.  While these commissions recognize 
the need to comply with regulatory mandates, they can and do constrain tariffs (rates and charges) 
regulated water systems may charge.  In doing so, they constrain the pace of investment to meet rule 
requirements by regulated water systems.  Similar constraints exist within local government budgeting 
processes. 
EPA’s Proposed Rule LCRI economic analysis does not take such limitations into account.  EPA is well 
aware that water systems must limit rate shock in the communities they serve.  The previously cited 
Raucher et al. (2019) report emphasized the necessity of thoughtfully planning rate impacts over time as 
a key strategy in managing local affordability challenges.  EPA incorporated this concept into its “Clean 
Water Act Financial Capability Assessment Guidance” saying 
“Cash flow forecasting is a useful tool that allows communities to determine … the revenue 
necessary to cover costs … and to meet debt covenants over the implementation period.  The 
community should plan and allow for uncertainty when deciding how to adjust water and 
sewer rate to finance its major capital improvements.   … In evaluating potential rate 
increases, communities should also balance revenue requirements against the likelihood that 
users will reduce usage or cease paying utility bills, causing the yield of the revenues from the 
rate increase to be less than expected or desired, potentially causing the community to 
experience “rate shock.”71 [emphasis added]  
Implications for LCRI Rulemaking -- Stakeholders are ill-equipped to predict the state of the future work 
force when authoritative organizations differ on the likely state of the nation’s economy over the next 
twelve months.  Given this uncertainty, EPA cannot finalize a regulation that does not have off-ramps in 
 
71EPA, Clean Water Act Financial Capability Assessment Guidance 16 (Feb. 2023).  

 
49 
instances when the underpinning assumptions for its projection of the rule’s feasible prove to be 
unsound.  Moreover, there has been ample discussion within the sector and infrastructure finance 
community that workforce scarcity / maxed out organizational capacity is already leading to (1) 
significant increases in bids on infrastructure project cost and (2) delays in construction schedules.  
There is little reason to believe that a regulatory requirement that drives all CWSs to (1) characterize 
service line materials and (2) replace service lines, and do so within a very compressed timeframe, that 
also parallels other construction required by federal standards will not have an inflationary effect on the 
cost of what workforce and organizational capacity exists. 
Request for Comment 24: “The extent to which property owner consent, if required by State or local law 
or water tariff agreement, might complicate full service line replacement and whether there are 
additional measures EPA can take to facilitate access through the LCRI.” 
Property Owner Consent -- As described in more detail in these comments regarding legal issues 
inherent to the Proposed Rule (See Section 4.7 of these comments), the Proposed Rule’s framing of 
“access” is contrary to law as it assumes that EPA can legally require systems to replace lines on private 
property so long as access is granted by the property owner.  This is not the case, and such lines are 
beyond the scope of what Congress intended to regulate under the SDWA.  As a result, regardless of 
what state or local laws or water tariff agreements may be in place, EPA cannot mandate that water 
systems remove these privately owned lines. 
Additional Measures to Facilitate -- As noted previously in Section 2.3 of these comments there are 
three significant steps to improve access that EPA can take that are policy actions beyond the specifics 
of the LCRI: 
1. Align expectations for service line replacement with appropriation of adequate federal 
funding from Congress to pay for LSL and GRRSL replacement, particularly LSL and GRRSLs 
on private property 
2. Obtain a finding from the IRS that the value of a lead service line replacement on private 
property is not taxable income 
3. Obtain a finding from the IRS that CWSs are not required to prepare a IRS 1099 for 
customers receiving a service line replacement on private property 
3.5 
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
Request for Comment 25: “Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of the proposed sites 
should be included in Tier 3, if additional sites should be included, or if some should be included in a 
different, lower priority tier, such as Tier 4. Specifically, comment on whether sites served by galvanized 
service lines or containing galvanized premise plumbing that are identified as ever being downstream of 
an LSL or lead connector should be included in the same tier as other sites with a current lead connector 
(e.g., copper service line downstream of a lead connector).” 
Addition of Galvanized Piping to Tiers -- The addition of galvanized piping to the tiering of the LCR 
sample pool is a new and significant change in the LCR construct.  While lead may be released from 
galvanized pipe scales, the associated mechanism of release is fundamentally based in iron corrosion 
scale stability.  The associated factors affecting lead release and consequently corrosion control are 
different from managing soluble lead from lead pipe and lead solder in contact with water, which 

 
50 
constitute EPA’s prior theoretical framework for the LCR and basis for determining that the treatment 
technique is feasible with the inclusion of a lead action level of 10 µg/L. 
EPA has not illustrated in the preamble or included analysis in the LCRI proposal docket demonstrating 
that CWSs that have compliance sample pool datasets composed solely of Tier 1 (lead service line/lead 
plumbing), Tier 2 (multi-family lead service line/lead plumbing), and Tier 3  sites (or just Tier 3) can keep 
their 90th percentile lead levels below the action level of 10 µg/L as required by the proposed LCRI.  
Maintaining lead levels below the lead action level as described in the proposed LCRI requires CWSs to 
do so while: 
1. Monitoring on a routine monitoring schedule (6-month sample period and greater 
number of samples per period than are drawn by many systems are currently on triennial 
monitoring) 
2. Incorporating the higher lead value from first and fifth liter sample volumes when there is 
LSL at the sample site 
3. Including higher values should they occur in customer requested sample data accrued 
from customers with an interest in lead concentrations in the building they occupy 
While data in hand from LCR compliance monitoring is reassuring with mean population-weighted lead 
concentrations in low single parts per billion, the revised sampling protocol, revised sample tiers and 
compliance metric (90th percentile) focuses on the most extreme upper bound concentrations water 
systems observe.  The proposed Tier 3, galvanized plumbing, further exaggerates observed lead by 
targeting a pipe scale that in some circumstances has been seen as prone to particulate release due to 
factors other than active corrosion control management practice described by the LCR (including LCRR 
and LCRI) (e.g., oxidation reduction potential).   
EPA should revisit whether it can demonstrate the feasibility of the new compliance paradigm and 
whether adding a sample tier where iron corrosion is the dominant mechanism of action is consistent 
with the balance of the LCRI construct. 
Ever Downstream of Lead Service Line – EPA has included the criteria of “ever downstream of a LSL” in 
the definition of GRRSLs as a precautionary approach with respect to service line replacement.  There is 
not a strong technical basis for this requirement, nor is there a credible technical basis articulated in 
either the LCRR or LCRI dockets, and the approach therefore violates the APA.  To extend this criterion 
to the tap sample tiers used to inform corrosion control decision-making would have perverse, 
unintended effects.  EPA can credibly assume that the majority of GRRSLs across the United States are 
not in fact known lead service pipe followed by known galvanized pipe.  Rather, the majority will be 
galvanized service lines for which records are inadequate to demonstrate a lead service never existed 
prior to the galvanized service line. Consequently, a sample tier that emphasizes use of GRRSLs would 
focus sampling on perhaps the most troubled and inconsistently characterized group of service lines in 
the inventory.   
Downstream of a Lead Connector -- The addition of lead connectors to the sample pool tiers would add 
even greater variability to certainty of proper material characterization than a focus on GRRSLs as 
previously discussed.   

 
51 
Moreover, given EPA’s focus on fully documenting compliance sample sites, EPA cannot direct systems 
to sample from a particular type of service line that it cannot verify.  In the instance of lead connectors, 
verification would require excavating the lead connector (often involving excavating in a street with 
associated paving repairs and traffic management considerations) and presumably disturbing the 
connector.  Then leaving that lead connector in place without replacing it.  
Request for Comment 26:  “Comment and available data, such as modeling or sampling data, that 
inform lead corrosion rates over time.” 
See responses to individual requests for comment and general comments above. 
Request for Comment 27:  “Comment on the applicability of alternate sampling protocols to assess CCT 
performance, increase customer participation, and other relevant factors.”  
Appropriate to Assess CCT Performance --  AWWA’s previous comments72 to EPA regarding the proposed 
LCRR remain sound and AWWA reattaches and incorporates them into its comments here (see Appendix 
C).  CWSs and states have an extensive history of evaluating corrosion control for lead and copper based 
on first-draw, stagnant water samples.  Data collected using this sampling protocol, from structures 
where lead is much more likely to be observed offers a consistent, conservative trigger for re-evaluating 
corrosion control.   
The LCRR introduced sampling of fifth liter samples as a means of (1) motivating CWSs and NTNCWSs to 
take additional steps to reduce lead concentrations and importantly (2) trigger removal of lead service 
lines as a risk reduction strategy.  Previously under the LCR, LSL replacement was an economic incentive 
for optimized corrosion control efforts.  The LCRI treatment technique creates a programmatic element 
that specifically requires LSL and GRRSL replacement by a fixed deadline and removes the triggered LSL 
replacement included in the LCR and LCRR.  The LCRI proposal returns the role of lead action level 
exceedances to its primary focus – optimizing corrosion control.  With that role in mind, the first-draw, 
stagnant-water sample remains the most reliable and appropriate trigger for revised corrosion control. 
As EPA is proposing a rule that requires all LSLs and GRRSLs to be removed in 10 years, it is not clear why 
EPA has retained the first and fifth liter samples from the LCRR.  In the LCRR, there was the presumption 
that only a small percentage of LSLs would be replaced and those would be replaced over more than 30 
years.  EPA contended that entering a multi-year process to determine a new corrosion control strategy 
and transitioning to that strategy was effective because lead services may be present for an extended 
period of time.  Retaining the first and fifth liter sample protocol for structures with LSLs results in (1) a 
substantial bolus of new monitoring plan approvals by states, (2) additional monitoring burden on CWSs, 
and (3) subsequent requirements for CWSs in the instance of exceedances. As proposed, the LCRI allows 
systems to postpone pursuing a change in corrosion control practice until LSL and GRRSL replacement 
has occurred (albeit at an accelerated rate), so EPA recognizes the conundrum in its regulatory 
framework, but does not describe a basis for not limiting the fifth liter compliance sample to systems 
where LSL and GRRSL replacement is expected to continue well beyond the 10-year replacement 
schedule.  One possible argument to the contrary might be the remaining homes that are unwilling to 
participate in full replacement of the LSL.  If there are property owners that are unwilling to participate 
 
72 AWWA, AWWA Comments on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, Docket No. EPA–HQ–OW-2017-
0300 (2020). 

 
52 
in replacement of the LSL it seems unlikely that the CWS will be very successful recruiting them to 
participate as a sample site for ongoing compliance monitoring. 
The LCRI proposal changes multiple variables relevant to the likelihood of a lead action level 
exceedance, the cumulative effect of which is not well understood.  That combination includes: (1) 
drawing a fifth liter sample from a LSL sample site as well as a first liter sample, (2) using the higher of 
the observed lead values from the first and fifth liter samples, (3) directing compliance monitoring to 
structures where lead is most likely to be high, (4) limiting calculation of the compliance metric to the 
highest observed lead values from both data, and (5) retaining a compliance metric based on the upper-
tail of the occurrence distribution (i.e., 90th percentile).  So, while EPA rightly assumes that 90th 
percentiles based on the higher value from a first and fifth sample from a LSL will shift the distribution of 
observed 90th percentiles upward when such sample sites exist, the agency has not described how the 
proposed metric is better at “assessing corrosion control.”  Assessing corrosion control requires a stable 
response.  In the European Union, corrosion control is assessed through the use of an average lead 
concentration based on random samples (e.g., without stagnation and without a tiered sample pool).  
The United Kingdom employs a similar approach to the EU.  Given the long-standing practice around the 
1st draw, stagnant water sample used in the U.S. and the difficulties encountered in the U.S. obtaining 
sufficient in-home samples, the LCR 1st draw, stagnant water sample provides stable point-of-departure 
for triggering corrosion control review in the U.S.  
EPA acknowledges in the proposed LCRI preamble that actual lead occurrence is significantly impacted 
by other factors, in particular the amount and timing of ongoing water use in a structure.  Neither the 
first or fifth liter lead observations are representative of actual exposure.73  So, use of a first liter only 
protocol that does not introduce the additional site-to-site variability associated with fifth liter samples 
would be preferrable.  It also affords the economy of being a single sample for both lead and copper 
compliance data. 
Customer Participation -- Since the initial LCR’s promulgation, roughly three decades ago, CWSs have 
worked with customers to obtain tap samples for purposes of LCR compliance monitoring.  EPA is aware 
that over the duration of the LCR’s implementation, locating occupants willing to draw samples as 
specified in the LCR has been an ongoing challenge, as has obtaining compliant samples.  This 
implementation challenge will be much more severe under the proposed LCRI: 
1. Many CWSs currently on triennial monitoring will return to routine monitoring 
necessitating twice as many samples being acquired each monitoring cycle and six times 
more sampling cycles.  For a system serving a population of 10,001, the Proposed Rule 
increases the minimum number of compliance samples over three years from 30 to 360.  
2. Most CWSs will be requesting collaboration in sampling from occupants that are in a small 
fraction of the homes in their service area. While Tier 3 sample sites represent an 
expansion of the LCR/LCRR sample site pool, structures with demonstrable LSL / lead 
plumbing or galvanized service lines / plumbing are a limited subset of homes to 
repeatedly target for compliance monitoring.  Moreover, the LCRI emphasizes sampling at 
 
73 Riblet, Cécile, E Deshommes, L Laroche, M Prévost. True exposure to lead at the tap: Insights from proportional 
sampling, regulated sampling and water use monitoring. Water Res. 2019 Jun 1:156:327-336. doi: 
10.1016/j.watres.2019.03.005. 

 
53 
the same home or replacing it with a similar home if the continued collaboration cannot 
be sustained.  Extending the above example of a system serving 10,001 persons, such a 
system would have on the order of 4,000 services.  If 10% of all service lines were LSLs, the 
system would have a target pool of 400 homes, of which every six months it must find 60 
homes to sample. 
3. CWSs and occupants are being encouraged by every other facet of this Proposed Rule to 
remove LSLs and GRRSLs.  This has two effects.  It encourages some customers that are 
concerned about lead to replace the service line, such that it is no longer available for the 
compliance monitoring pool.  And, it encourages other customers to be adverse to 
participating in monitoring as knowledge of observed lead would trigger a real or 
perceived duty to disclose observed lead concentrations (e.g., a future real estate 
transaction, use of a structure as a child care facility, use of a structure as rental housing, 
etc.).  Consequently, the monitoring pool must be expanded and maintained against the 
effect of the balance of the Proposed Rule requirements. 
3. The elevated attention to adequately documenting sample site adherence to the LCR 
sample tiers leads to yet another behavioral barrier to compliance monitoring.  Systems 
must now document more carefully than under prior LCR implementation.  Such 
documentation is intrusive and requires coordination with the household, likely involving 
a site visit by CWS staff prior to any sample events to document the site.  
4. CWS regularly report that participation by customers under the current LCR requires 
financial renumeration of the household taking a single one liter first-draw, stagnant 
sample.  CWSs routinely provide credits toward customer water bills, gift coupons, and 
cash payments to encourage participation in the sampling program.  The amount offered 
varies with urban examples reaching $100 per sample event.  Even when renumeration is 
offered, follow-through by households that agree to take samples and receive sample kits 
is typically no more than 80%. EPA has not sufficiently considered these costs and the 
associated burdens of running such monitoring programs when assessing the feasibility of 
the Proposed Rule.  
5. EPA proposes to expand the Tier 1 and 2 sample pools by including actual lead plumbing 
and creating Tier 3, which includes galvanized plumbing as well as galvanized services.  
Including lead plumbing and galvanized plumbing in the tiering structure will substantively 
expand the pool of documentable homes for LCRI compliance monitoring.  Lead and 
galvanized piping within structures has been replaced over time both due to failure, 
inadequate flow, and other changes associated with renovating older buildings.  Finished 
home interiors conceal pipe materials behind walls and in ceilings, such that a paper 
record review is not adequate to meet EPA’s current expectations for demonstration of 
adherence to sample pool Tiers.  The portions of plumbing that are most accessible (e.g., 
piping under kitchen faucet or in bathrooms) are also components of household plumbing 
most likely to have been subject to renovation and changes in plumbing materials.   
Other Relevant Factors --  Experience to-date at multiple CWSs indicate that obtaining reliably first and 
fifth liter data will be challenging. 

 
54 
1. Systems have limited latitude under the LCR, at present, or under the proposed LCRI to 
invalidate samples due to sampler error, but experience with obtaining first liter samples 
illustrates that further complication of a first and fifth liter sample will be problematic. 
a. Current CWS quality control of LCR compliance samples received from customer 
collected samples include incomplete sample collection / sample loss due to 
inadequate sample sealing in transit, collection of samples from taps that are not 
kitchen faucets (or designated alternative sample taps), samples being drawn 
after prolonged stagnation especially when a monetary reward is provided for 
sampling, and inadvertent use of water during stagnation period.   
b. Experience of systems that currently collect first and fifth liter samples find that 
they must take additional steps beyond the protocol described in Proposed 
§ 141.86(b)(1)(ii) to facilitate successful customer sampling.  Steps include using 
sample bottles that are clearly different in size, shape and / or color from the first 
and fifth liter samples for collecting the second through fourth samples.  
2. The current Tier 2 sample sites are favored most when Tier 1 sample sites are not 
available.  The sampling protocol requires a sample from a building where (1) the sample 
represents a period of six hours or more of stagnation and (2) a fifth liter that is intended 
to be representative of the service line to the building.  Obtaining samples that meet 
either the required condition and /or meet the intent of the fifth liter sample in an 
occupied multi-family structure is challenging.  And, from a CWS’s compliance perspective, 
it is very difficult to demonstrate this to the satisfaction of the state. 
Request for Comment 28: “Comment on the proposed updated definition of wide-mouth bottles that is 
“bottles that are one liter in volume with a mouth, whose outer diameter measures at least 55 mm 
wide,” and specifically on the availability of qualifying bottles.” 
The proposed definition of a “wide-mouth bottle” is an improvement over the LCRR text.74  The change 
is responsive to the numerous complaints received following promulgation of the LCRR which specified a 
bottle that did not exist as the text implied an interior diameter of the mouth of the bottle to be greater 
than 55 mm.   
The reworded criteria remain difficult to source from available laboratory supply vendors, and thus not 
resolving the infeasibility of the requirement.  Given the purpose of the requirement is to prevent the 
use of “small mouthed” bottles that is so narrow as to force the sampler to throttle the flow of water 
from the faucet during sample collection, a less exact definition would: 
1. Reduce the potential for shortages of supply 
2. Improve access to bottles made of appropriate plastics that have been manufactured to 
support low-level metals chemical analysis 
3. Allow the purchase of bottles that are both 1 liter in capacity and meet the definition of 
“wide-mouthed” 
 
74 40 C.F.R. 141.2 -- Wide-mouth bottles. 

 
55 
4. Allow the purchase of bottles that are visually different (e.g., color, material, etc.) so that 
samplers distinguish first and fifth liter samples from interim collected sample 
AWWA therefore recommends the definition be revised as shown below: 
“Wide-mouth bottles, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means bottles one liter in 
volume that have a mouth with an inside outer diameter that measures at least 4055 mm 
wide.” 
There are bottle options available with mouths that meet this criterion.  For comparison, “small-
mouthed” bottles have inside diameters less than 30 mm and can be much narrower.  Inside diameter is 
suggested because it can be more reliably measured.  Also, laboratory supply catalogs may reflect the 
exterior width inclusive of the closure threads in order to allow the ordering of bottle caps / closures.  
This may not be readily apparent during ordering from some laboratory supply houses.  It also 
misrepresents the actual diameter of the bottle’s mouth orifice by several millimeters.  
Request for Comment 29: “Comment and any relevant data on the number and tiering of samples used 
to calculate the 90th percentile lead and/or copper levels for systems with LSLs for purposes of assessing 
CCT efficacy. Specifically, whether samples from non-LSL sites that have higher lead concentrations than 
samples from LSL sites should be included and whether these higher values should replace lower values 
from LSL sites in the 90th percentile calculation.” 
Supplemental monitoring from customer-requested samples following an exceedance serves a much 
different purpose than the compliance dataset, namely (1) engaging the interested public and (2) 
providing timely information to occupants.  The proposed LCRI describes supplemental monitoring in 
Proposed § 141.85 as tap samples from any customer and any person served by a LSLs, GRRSLs, or 
LSUSLs who requests a sample.  The Proposed Rule then goes on to describe eligibility in Proposed 
§ 141.85(c) as all customers and it specifics that those customers served by LSLs, GRRSLs, or LSUSLs 
should have receive “samples that capture both water in contact with premise plumbing and water in 
contact with the service line (e.g., first- and fifth-liter samples)”.  In the Proposed Rule § 141.86(e) is 
revised to explicitly require inclusion of relevant data collected under § 141.85(c) data in the compliance 
dataset for calculating action exceedances.   
In Proposed § 141.82(j)(2) EPA recognized that including samples collected from site assessments would 
inappropriately bias the dataset being used to evaluate the need to evaluate or re-evaluate corrosion 
control.  This same argument applies with respect to including supplemental monitoring data.  In the 
proposed LCRI EPA appears to be promoting more supplemental monitoring.  CWSs want to use the best 
available data to guide such substantial decisions as changes in corrosion control and increasingly, EPA’s 
emphasis on documentation of compliance monitoring suggests a similar emphasis.  
Consequently, sample sites 
1. Will be less well described 
2. May, like site assessment sampling, reflect multiple samples from the same structure 
3. May compound existing geographic narrowing created by the sample pool tiers 
EPA was also deliberate in recognizing that post-exceedance supplemental monitoring may, for a variety 
of reasons, not utilize the monitoring protocols specified in the LCRI for compliance monitoring data. 

 
56 
In finalizing the LCRI EPA will need to provide additional clarity beyond what seems to be implied by the 
current requirement, including: 
1. Data collected under § 141.85(c) that does not have sufficient data to assure reliable Tier 
1 or 2 placement will be excluded from the compliance calculation algorithm 
2. Data from sampling protocols other than the specific protocols described § 141.86 will be 
excluded from the compliance calculation algorithm 
In finalizing the LCRI, EPA should not expand this provision to include either samples associated with 
service line replacement, lead connector replacement, service line disturbances, or general customer 
requested samples with the defined compliance data set.  Proposed Rule provisions beyond § 141.85(c) 
specify offering sampling with specific instructions, but for a different purpose than OCCT, including 
after a partial LSL or GRRSL replacement.75  Other instances in Proposed § 141.84 include distribution of 
education materials that promote sampling. 
Request for Comment 30: “Comment on whether State authority to specify sampling locations when a 
system is conducting reduced monitoring should apply regardless of the number of taps meeting sample 
site criteria.” 
CWSs and NTCWSs are submitting monitoring plans to the state for review prior to the initiating of 
monitoring.  Implicit in that review is an opportunity for the state to identify LCRI siting criteria that the 
system has not complied with and directing the system to correct those deficiencies prior to sampling.   
States should not be tasked with “specifying sampling locations” either when a system is conducting 
monitoring on a reduced frequency or under routine monitoring.  States have significantly less 
familiarity than individual CWSs with the distribution systems of the water systems they manage (even 
in comparison to other water system facilities states oversee, like water treatment plants), states lack an 
ongoing familiarity with the progress of each system’s lead service line replacement program (most 
systems are on routine monitoring schedules with two sample sets per year), the feasibility of placing 
new water quality parameter monitoring locations as required by § 141.85(i)(1), and other practical 
considerations the water system must consider in developing the monitoring plan.  
3.6 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
Request for Comment 31: “EPA is proposing a threshold of systems serving greater than 50,000 persons 
to host the inventory and plan online, which is the required threshold under the LCRR. EPA is seeking 
comment on the size threshold at which systems must host their publicly accessible inventory, inventory 
summary data, replacement summary data, and service line replacement plan online, and whether it 
should be lowered relative to the LCRR requirements.” 
EPA should not re-visit the system size threshold for placing these required documents on-line from the 
perspective of what minimum system size to set a requirement.  Rather, the final LCRI should incentivize 
on-line posting of these items by eliminating detailed data submittals to the state for all systems, 
regardless of size, that (1) post this information on-line, (2) update the postings with new information as 
required by the rule, and (3) provide the website link to these documents to the state.  
 
75 Proposed § 141.84(h)(1)(iv) and (3)(iv) 

 
57 
Request for Comment 32: “EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of non-
lead service lines in their inventory that were categorized using methods other than records review or 
visual inspection of at least two points along the line.”  
EPA correctly describes records review and visual inspection of at least two points along the service line 
as a sound and adequate basis for service line characterization for purposes of the LCRR and LCRI.  
Because EPA cannot delay CWS efforts and state oversight of ongoing inventory programs further, 
neither CWSs or states can wait for additional guidance on two-point visual inspection.  EPA should  
1. Immediately amend the existing LCRR guidance76 to clearly describe two-point visual 
inspection as captured in the proposal and  
2. Draft the LCRI final rule preamble and/or regulatory text to clearly describe two-point 
visual inspection.   
The Proposed Rule preamble and regulatory text provide a good description in that the current proposal 
is: 
1. Inclusive of customer assisted visual inspection of interior exposure of the service line 
2. Inclusion of combinations of customer provided inspections and CWS inspections of a 
service line 
3. Characterizes two-point visual inspection of a service line for purposes of validation as an 
external inspection 
4. Visual inspection of both the CWS and customer-owned service line where there is shared 
ownership 
5. Visual inspection can be accomplished through a single excavation where there is an 
opportunity to view the service line materials for both the CWS and customer-owned 
service line 
The sector continues to search for and test alternative techniques to characterize service line materials.  
The inclusion of a validation study should provide states with a greater openness to CWSs attempting to 
speed and improve characterization through new techniques.  It is not necessary, given the task at hand, 
to require more than two-point visual inspection as described in the proposal for validation.  Nor is it 
necessary to include service lines characterized based on records as approved by the state primacy 
agency.  The goal of the treatment technique is to take deliberate steps that reduce lead exposure and 
that is best achieved by focusing on addressing known lead sources in a timely fashion. 
The current regulatory text describing the pool of service lines subject to the validation study should be 
reworded to be clearer.  AWWA encourages EPA to adopt the following proposed edit to Proposed 
§ 141.84(b)(5)(i) to align the regulatory text with the description of the agency’s intent in the LCRI 
preamble:77 
“(i) The water system must identify a validation pool, consisting of all service lines categorized 
as ‘‘non-lead’’ excluding non-lead service lines identified by records described in paragraphs 
 
76 EPA, Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory (2022) EPA 816-B-22-001. 
77 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,935. 

 
58 
(b)(2)(i) through (iii) of this section, visual inspection of the pipe exterior at a minimum of two 
points (e.g., excavation, visual inspection in the meter pit or stop box, or visual inspection 
inside the home), or previously replaced lead or galvanized requiring replacement service lines 
from the validation pool. If a water system has no existing record on which to base service line 
characterization or documentation of a two-point visual inspection that indicates how an 
individual non-lead service line was categorized, that service line must be included in the 
validation pool.”78  
Request for Comment 33: “EPA is requesting comment on the number of validations required, the 
proposed 95 percent confidence level approach used to develop the number of validations required, the 
criteria for which methods used to categorize non-lead service lines should be included in the validation 
pool (including whether non-lead lines categorized based on records should be subject to validation), and 
the seven-year timeline for systems on a 10-year replacement deadline to complete the validation 
requirements.” 
95 Percent Confidence Level --  The table included in Proposed § 141.84(b)(5)(v)(ii) (Table 1 To Paragraph 
(b)(5)(ii)) correctly represents the sample size required to test the validity of a system’s assignment of 
service lines to “nonlead” with 95% confidence that the assignment is correct.  The use of a 95% 
confidence interval is ubiquitously used in scientific research as a demarcation of adequate confidence 
that a finding is worthy (e.g., there is an actual effect, correlation, etc.).   
A 95% confidence interval is adequate to the task of validating successful assignment of nonlead 
characterization to service lines as: 
1. EPA and state requirements and guidance have set a high bar for identifying service lines 
as non-lead  
2. In the limited number of instances when a service line is mischaracterized, there are 
multiple back-stops to reduce lead exposure (e.g., optimized corrosion control where 
needed, public education, triggered action in the case of subsequent LSL or GRRSL 
discovery) 
3. Either a service line verification performance standard or validation performance standard 
that relies on physical inspection of all or virtually all service lines lacking clear records 
misallocates limited resources that could be better focused on replacing actual LSLs or 
GRRSLs or meeting other local infrastructure needs. 
4. Physical inspection of service lines like service line replacement and main renewal involves 
disrupting neighborhoods, introducing heavy equipment into neighborhoods, altering 
traffic and pedestrian movement, excavating near other utilities (e.g., cable, gas, electric, 
etc.).  While the water sector has an outstanding safety record, such construction activity 
is not without risk of accident.  Unnecessary construction activity simply creates additional 
potential for unintended consequences without the prospect of providing meaningful 
improvement in available data. 
A practical validation study mechanism is important to CWSs facing two significant data gaps (1) access 
to service lines on private property and (2) distribution systems that have no known use of lead service 
 
78 Proposed § 141.84(b)(5)(i) with proposed edit. 

 
59 
lines but inadequate historical records for demonstration per the LCRR / LCRI.  In the first case, the 
default is to assume like material where there is knowledge of lead under the control of the CWS, so 
inferred material characterization on the customer side is inherently biased toward LSL / GRRSL 
characterization rather than non-lead.  In the latter case, validation affords the opportunity to avoid the 
wasted use of scarce community resources to prove a negative to meet an administrative requirement. 
Inclusion of Records Based Characterizations in Validation Pool --  The standard of care for records-based 
validations is sufficiently high and followed by field verification methods as outlined in EPA’s “Guidance 
for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory,” that the service lines in LCRR / LCRI 
inventories characterized based on qualified records will be sound.79   
The validation requirement will apply to post-LCRR inventories that have been supplemented with an 
additional three years of pre-LCRI compliance service line material verification and replacement 
program activity.  There are communities where the apparent number of LSLs has been reported to 
increase over initial estimates.  These instances do not justify a different validation approach than 
proposed, as such reports are a reflection of communities: 
1. Responding to the evolving definition of service lines of interest, including the addition of 
characterization of customer-side material characterization 
2. Expanding inventories to include GRRSLs as defined in the LCRR and LCRI 
3. Improvements in records-based characterizations following due diligence described in the 
LCRR and EPA’s “Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory”80 
The LCRR and now the proposed LCRI are intended to advance LSL and GRRSL replacement.  The Final 
LCRI should not expand the scope of the validation study to re-examining materials characterizations 
based on existing records.  Continued emphasis on re-examining service lines that are unlikely to 
represent a potential source of lead misdirects resources away from the objective of replacing known 
LSLs and GRRSLs. 
Seven-year Timeframe for Validation – EPA is correct in setting a schedule for validation studies prior to 
the targeted deadline for replacement of all LSLs and GRRSLs.  Seven years allows a three-year period for 
the CWS to adjust its replacement program if the validation study discovers a significant error in the 
CWS’s service line characterization practice.  The final LCRI including state primacy provisions in § 142 
and early implementation agreements with states should provide for state: 
1. Acceptance of validation studies prior to the required submittal in seven years and  
2. Review and response to CWSs as to satisfactory demonstration of service line material 
characterization within 120 days of receipt of a validation study 
Implementation of the LCRR, including the development of initial inventories, was significantly delayed 
because CWSs in many states lacked a regulatory partner at EPA or with individual states willing to make 
policy decisions in a timely manner.  For the LCRI to be successfully implemented, measures like the two 
proposed above will be needed to (1) incentivize systems that should be able to move through the 
compliance process smoothly to do so off-schedule, so that the volume of deadline driven submittals for 
 
79 EPA, Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory. EPA 816-B-22-001 (2022). 
80 Id. 

 
60 
state review is reduced, (2) systems that are relying more heavily on inferences from available 
information to characterize service line materials are incentive to assess their approach earlier in the 
available compliance timeframe, and (3) systems that do discover a need to improve their initial 
characterizations have more time to make adjustments in both their inventory verification program and 
their service line replacement program. 
Request for Comment 34:  “Comment on establishing a deadline for systems to identify all unknown 
service lines prior to their service line replacement deadlines.” 
EPA should not establish another compliance requirement within the treatment technique.  As AWWA 
has repeatedly noted throughout these comments, the Proposed Rule already contains provisions that 
are infeasible for many, if not all, CWSs.  Adding additional requirements, particularly when they are 
administrative or counting exercises, as well as new deadlines, will only distract systems from focusing 
their resources on replacing LSLs and GRRSLs are rapidly as is feasible.  
Furthermore, a one-size-fits-all solution is not appropriate here.  While each system will have to address 
service lines with inadequately characterized materials, the solution will be system-specific.  For some 
systems characterizing LSUSLs will be the most important aspect of meeting the LCRI requirements (e.g., 
systems that do not have LSLs or GRRSLs but cannot meet LCRR documentation requirements). Other 
systems have sufficient available records that a program to replace LSLs and GRRSLs that captures the 
remaining service lines of uncertain materials of construction as an incidental aspect of the replacement 
program.  Consequently, there is not a particular point in this proposed requirement where complete 
elimination of all LSUSLs is needed. 
EPA does not need to add a requirement that further constrains CWS’s approach to inventory and 
replacement program design.  To the degree that states are uncertain whether CWSs are making 
adequate progress addressing service line characterization, there are already multiple touch points in 
the Proposed Rule, including (1) initial inventory per LCRI and subsequent inventory per LCRR, (2) LCRI 
service line replacement plan, (3) nonlead characterization validation study, (4) annual updates on 
progress of the service line replacement program, and (5) annual updates of the service line inventories.  
As the LCRR/LCRI rulemaking proceeds implementation will occur during a period when there will be at 
least five sanitary survey cycles for CWSs subject to the LCR.81 
If EPA were to set a performance criterion for completing characterization of service line materials the 
agency will need to explicitly recognize how service lines where the property owner is not collaborating 
to allow full characterization of the service line will be addressed in the compliance metric.  The 
accounting of characterized unknowns should recognize effort by the CWS to engage the property 
owner as adequate. 
Request for Comment 35: “Comment on a requirement for systems to update their service line 
replacement plans if there are any changes, such as changes to laws and policies applicable to full service 
line replacement.” 
The proposed LCRI lays out a 10-year implementation window, which is preceded by a three-year period 
for preparation.  State and federal statutory and regulatory changes that occur during the initial 
preparatory window will be reflected in the initial plan submission. Similarly, federal and state 
 
81 40 CFR 142.16(o)(2)(i) 

 
61 
infrastructure funding program changes during that preparatory window would be considered in the 
initial submittal.  Subsequent revision of the plan should be limited to policy changes that would in the 
judgement of the CWS operator in responsible charge markedly accelerate or curtail service line 
material identification and replacement.  Submittal and posting on-line an addendum to or revision of 
the initial replacement plan should not be due any sooner than the next annual inventory update or in 
12 months, whichever is longer. 
3.7 
Lead Action and Trigger Levels 
Request for Comment 36: “EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of 0.010 mg/L, as 
well as comment and supporting data on alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, with regards to 
generally effective corrosion control treatment and identifying systems most at risk of elevated levels of 
lead in drinking water.” 
Revising the action level downward is a blunt technique to drive more systems to review corrosion 
control.  It is neither selective for those that are most at risk due to the high degree of variability in the 
lead occurrence data and the choice of the 90th percentile decision metric, nor is it selective for those 
systems that can actually modify their water chemistry effectively to further lower lead levels. As 
detailed further below, EPA’s emphasis on an action level is therefore misplaced and impractical and 
infeasible for systems. 
Proposed Lead Action Level -- As described previously in these comments, EPA has not illustrated in the 
preamble or included analysis in the LCRI proposal docket demonstrating that CWSs that have 
compliance sample pool datasets composed solely of Tier 1 (lead service line/lead plumbing), Tier 2 
(multi-family lead service line/lead plumbing), and Tier 3 sites (or just Tier 3) can keep their 90th 
percentile lead levels below the action level of 10 µg/L as required by the proposed LCRI.  Maintaining 
lead levels below the lead action level as described in the proposed LCRI requires CWSs to do so while: 
1. Monitoring on a routine monitoring schedule (6-month sample period and greater 
number of samples per period than are drawn by many systems are currently on triennial 
monitoring) 
2. Incorporating the higher lead value from first and fifth liter sample volumes when there is 
LSL at the sample site 
3. Including higher values should they occur in customer requested sample data accrued 
from customers with an interest in lead concentrations in the building they occupy 
Collectively, these requirements are not feasible for water systems to meet. While data in hand from 
LCR compliance monitoring is reassuring with mean population-weighted lead concentrations in low 
single parts per billion, the revised sampling protocol, revised sample tiers and compliance metric (90th 
percentile) focuses on the most extreme upper bound concentrations water systems observe.  The 
proposed Tier 3, galvanized plumbing, further exaggerates observed lead by targeting a pipe scale that 
in some circumstances has been seen as prone to particulate release as a result of factors other than 
active corrosion control management practice described by the LCR (as well as LCRR and LCRI) (e.g., 
oxidation reduction potential).   
The LCR with its action level and sampling construct primarily required controlling soluble lead which is 
the emphasis of CCT methods outlined in the LCR and now LCRI.  Lowering the action level while 

 
62 
incorporating lead observations from a fifth liter sample in compliance tap samples makes control of 
particulate lead control more critical. EPA has not provided analysis demonstrating that known CCT 
methods including orthophosphate can control particulate lead sufficiently for CWSs to reliably comply 
with the lead concentrations required by the proposed LCRI. EPA should revisit whether the agency can 
demonstrate the feasibility of the new compliance paradigm and whether adding a sample tier where 
iron corrosion is the dominant mechanism of action is consistent with the balance of the proposed LCRI 
construct.  As currently proposed and based on the current record, these requirements are not feasible.  
Alternative Action Level – 5 µg/L or Other Alternative -- EPA’s analysis of compliance data to support the 
lead action level of 10 µg/L does not support the proposed action level for the reasons described above, 
nor would that or similar analyses justify a lower level.  Recommendations that draw on a lower 
concentration citing examples from Europe would similarly be unconvincing as that compliance data is 
based on random, day-time samples rather than a highly biased sample as used in the LCR (and LCRR 
and LCRI).  The treatment technique that EPA establishes in the final LCRI must be achievable, not just in 
some systems, but reliably across the range of likely water qualities that exist in the United States.  EPA 
has not demonstrated that this is possible for an action level of 10 µg/L and therefore there is not a 
convincing weight-of-evidence that a lower action level of 5 µg/L would be reliably achievable while 
simultaneously assuring compliance with the Stage 1 Disinfection Byproducts Rule (e.g., disinfection 
byproduct formation), Surface Water Treatment Rule (e.g., maintenance of a secondary disinfectant 
residual), or Revised Total Coliform Rule (e.g., incidence of coliform bacteria with loss of secondary 
residual), or, simultaneously managing water system infrastructure longevity against corrosion. Or, 
management of secondary drinking water standards in the water reaching customer’s taps (e.g., iron, 
etc.).  These concerns regarding managing multiple facets of water quality are important not only under 
final equilibrium conditions once a system revises corrosion control, but also during the transition from 
one corrosion control equilibrium to another.  EPA is aware from instances like in Flint, Michigan where 
once water quality becomes unbalanced, correcting the situation can be technically challenging and 
difficult for the community that the CWS serves. 
Alternative Action Level Statistic -- The lead action level is made up of a concentration and a percentile 
occurrence (the 90th percentile).  Burlingame and Sandvig demonstrated that a central tendency 
estimate would provide a better metric for improving existing corrosion control practice.82  After more 
than 30 years of LCR implementation, the action level should be viewed most often in the context of 
improving on current CCT.   
EPA incorporated the 90th percentile into the treatment technique as a more conservative metric and 
retained that metric in the proposed LCRI while also expanding other elements of the treatment 
technique.  EPA provided both a technical and policy basis for its use of the 90th percentile in crafting the 
LCR reflecting the agency’s own analysis and the advice of the EPA Science Advisory Board.83, 84  Now, 
the proposed treatment technique would include additional risk reduction measures, including LSL 
replacement requirements applicable to all CWSs and NTNCWSs.  The proposed treatment technique 
 
82 Burlingame, G., A. Sandvig. How to Mine Your Lead and Copper Data. Opflow. Vol. 30. Issue 6. (2004). 
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1551-8701.2004.tb01760.x. 
83 EPA. Memorandum, Jeff Cohen, Chief Lead Task Force, Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water to Record, 
Subject: Sampling Requirements. May 3, 1991. 
84 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,479. 

 
63 
would also include public education both in the instance of individual observed lead values and broader 
community wide lead education (e.g., lead inventories, CCR, public education after an exceedance, 
customer notifications of service line disturbances, etc.).  Utilization of a more conservative percentile 
metric (e.g., 95th, 99th, or maximum) would further exacerbate the existing conservatism in the 
compliance metric, which would be even less related to effective CCT and lack a clear public health 
benefit. 
Identifying Systems Most at Risk of Elevated Lead Levels -- The lead action level is one component of a 
treatment technique.  Its purpose is not to identify the systems most at risk of elevated levels of lead.  
Rather, it’s role in the treatment technique is to (1) discern when corrosion control where absent can be 
introduced and thus moderate lead levels and (2) identify when existing corrosion control should be re-
evaluated.  The action level is based on a level of control that is “feasible” to reliably achieve in practice.  
Importantly, the action level value is part of a provision with many other facets including a monitoring 
framework (i.e., a defined sample pool from high-risk homes, number of samples per an approved 
sampling plan, defined sampling protocol) and a compliance calculation (e.g., 90th percentile metric, use 
of higher of two values from first and fifth liter at homes with LSLs, use of highest observed values 
including data from supplemental monitoring).  The sensitivity of this entire provision determines which 
systems are most likely to be identified for additional corrosion control.  In structuring the LCR, LCRR, 
and LCRI, EPA has increasingly focused on a relatively small subset of homes with actual lead pipe and 
now in the LCRI a subset of homes with galvanized pipe. This specificity is driving corrosion control for 
control of lead release well beyond what is warranted for the majority of the structures served by most 
CWSs.  To-date, EPA has not stepped back and evaluated whether this emphasis “identifies the systems 
most at risk of elevated lead levels.”  Recent history in communities like Flint, Pittsburg, Newark, and 
others illustrate that greater attention to ongoing system operations by system and state staff would 
have been much more sensitive to identifying systems at great risk than revision of the lead action level 
from 15 µg/L to 10 µg/L or 5 µg/L.    
Request for Comment 37: “EPA is also seeking comment on the use of the action level to determine when 
additional public education is required, and the use of the same action level for public education as for 
the CCT provisions.” 
Logical consistency within rulemaking -- In stating its intentions for revising the LCR in this rulemaking, 
EPA indicated that it intended to simplify rule implementation.85  One of the facets of the LCRR that EPA 
states that it is simplifying in response to public comment is eliminating the LCRR trigger level due to the 
confusion it created.86  Now in lowering the lead action level, a lead exceedance under the LCRI at 10 
µg/L will both trigger (1) Tier 1 public notice and (2) public education.  The LCRR set a lower threshold 
for technical evaluation of corrosion control to draw attention to corrosion control before determined 
efforts to communicate with the public about personal risk reduction measures was required.  If the 
public and state regulators found the LCRR construct difficult to understand, then there is little reason to 
believe that setting a higher or lower threshold for public education distinct from the corrosion control 
criterion will be understandable.   
 
85 88 Fed. Reg. at 84878. 
86 88 Fed. Reg. at 84899. 

 
64 
Non-exceedance public education greatly expanded -- With the LCRR, and now the proposed LCRI, EPA 
has significantly expanded the public education components of the LCR.  Many of the public education 
components are not triggered by the corrosion control criterion.  Examples include information to be 
conveyed to occupants of structures when a sample is analyzed for lead, materials to be delivered prior 
to returning service lines to service following partial or full replacement, and monitoring for lead in 
elementary schools and childcare facilities.  In effect the majority of the public education requirements 
of the Proposed Rule are now divorced from the lead action level.  Given the sustained public education 
elements anticipated for the foreseeable future, there is not an articulatable need to use an alternative 
action level trigger for public education. And as AWWA has repeatedly noted throughout these 
comments, adding additional burdens on system will only detract resources away from their ability to 
remove LSLs as efficiently as is feasible. 
More flexibility is needed for crafting public education materials -- Under the LCRR and now proposed 
LCRI, the requirements87 for the public education brochures and pamphlets does not facilitate effective 
communication. The proposed required specifies that certain information must be presented in a 
specific, exact order and exactly as presented in the regulatory text. The “order” a brochure or pamphlet 
that likely entails a multi-column format and hopefully includes graphics requires organizing so that the 
reader is drawn to read the information provided. 
Moreover, the current regulatory text does not reflect the flexibility that is needed for effective 
communication via electronic communications media, should EPA elect, facilitate use of a broader array 
of communication tools. 
Request for Comment 38: “EPA is seeking public comment, data, and information on the anticipated 
benefits and tradeoffs, including for public health and administrative burden on systems and States, if 
more small and medium systems are required to conduct a detailed OCCT demonstration and take other 
actions if they exceed the proposed action level of 0.010 mg/L or other lower values, while water systems 
are simultaneously required to mandatory conduct full service line replacement.” 
SDWA Requires Analysis -- EPA is required by SDWA (42 U.S. Code § 300g–1(b)(4)(E)(2)) to develop a 
“List of technologies for small systems … that achieves compliance with the maximum contaminant level 
or treatment technique” as a part of each rulemaking for a primary drinking water standard.  As 
described in the LCRI preamble, EPA did not conduct the requisite analysis, rather it relied on prior 
analyses developed to support an earlier LCR treatment technique.  That earlier analysis of the viability 
of corrosion control for small systems did not consider the management of lead release as required by 
the LCRI proposal.  EPA has a responsibility under SDWA to conduct the appropriate analysis to 
demonstrate the feasibility of corrosion control necessitated by this proposal for systems serving 10,000 
persons or less.  EPA appears to have only considered alternative technology solutions for systems 
serving 3,300 persons or less.  The feasibility of corrosion control given the distribution of water quality 
characteristics of small systems and states’ prior experience with oversight of small system compliance 
with the less challenging performance criteria of the LCR warrants more through consideration.  Given 
EPA’s historical reluctance to set a different small system technology standard, this analysis has 
implications for the viability of the proposed action level / monitoring framework/exceedance 
calculation proposed in the LCRI.   
 
87 Proposed § 141.85. 

 
65 
3.8 
Corrosion Control 
Request for Comment 39: “The proposed determination that the CTT treatment technique is feasible and 
prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible.” 
EPA has not described with any rigor in the Proposed Rule Federal Register notice or provided analysis in 
the associated docket that demonstrates that the proposed treatment technique’s optimized corrosion 
control treatment element is technically feasible.  In this rulemaking that element of the treatment 
technique includes: a lower lead action level, applies a new sampling protocol for homes with lead 
service lines, changes the sample pool to include homes with galvanized piping in the home, and retains 
high-dose orthophosphate addition as the anticipated optimal corrosion treatment.   
1. Prior experience under the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) does not provide EPA with data to 
demonstrate that the systems with water characteristics targeted by the Proposed Rule 
(e.g., those that were reliably compliant under a lead action level of 15 µg/L but not 
reliably below a lead action level of 10 µg/L can indeed make that transition within the 
constraints described in the Proposed Rule). 
2. Prior to this rulemaking EPA has focused the LCR on controlling the solubility of lead and 
copper. The LCRI rulemaking, for the first time, adds control of iron release to the 
regulatory corrosion control paradigm, as the stability of iron scales will underpin 
compliance for those systems sampling from Tier 3 structures.  
3. CCT methods reflected in the proposed LCRI and existing EPA corrosion control guidance 
are designed to address soluble lead through the formation of less soluble lead 
compounds such as forming hydrocerussite at higher pH or lead phosphate compounds. 
These CCT strategies do not control particulate lead or iron corrosion. Research by Zhao et 
al. show that orthophosphate addition can instead increase lead particulate release in 
lead service lines.88  
Also see response to Request for Comment 38 above regarding the lack of demonstration that small 
systems can effectively use corrosion control to comply with the Proposed Rule.   
The degree that the revised action level, monitoring protocol, monitoring tiers, and action level 
exceedance calculation will provide improved public health protection is not clear when (1) the 
proposed LCRI will require the replacement of all LSLs and GRRSLs and (2) the time required for 
evaluating and transitioning from one corrosion control treatment approach to another, when LSLs and 
GRRSLs are present, approaches the timeframe EPA proposes for replacing all such service lines.  In 
particular triggering change to a new CCT based on a fifth liter sample drawn from a LSL which will be 
removed within 10 years offers a limited period for public health benefit to accrue while requiring a 
substantial commitment of organizational focus and resources. 
To be clear, the available data also do not substantiate the feasibility of an action level lower than 10 
µg/L.  As EPA is aware there are primary drinking water standards for lead in other countries at lower 
concentrations (e.g., 5 µg/L) however, those regulatory frameworks do not employ comparable 
 
88 Juntao Zhao, Daniel E. Giammar, Jill D. Pasteris, Chong Dai, Yeunook Bae, and Yandi Hu. 2018. Formation and 
Aggregation of Lead Phosphate Particles: Implications for Lead Immobilization in Water Supply Systems.  
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2018, 52, 21, 12612–12623. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02788. 

 
66 
conservatism in the combination of required sampling protocol, sample site tiers, and exceedance 
calculation to make regulatory determinations.    
Request for Comment 40: “Comment on whether it would be more appropriate to require water systems 
to re-optimize again following an action level exceedance regardless of meeting their optimal water 
quality parameters and to provide the State with the authority to waive this requirement.”  
As described, the provision to not require re-optimization in the Proposed Rule is in the singular case of 
a system having already re-optimized and (2) the system is meeting required optimal WQPs (i.e., 
§141.81(a)(1)(A – C), (2)(A – C), and (3)(A-C)).  The proposed approach has merit in that re-optimization 
can involve a protracted process of analysis, preparation of the distribution system for a new or 
modified CCT strategy, implementation, and then transition to the new CCT strategy.   
Moreover, as the trigger for additional action (e.g., the lead action level, targeted sample pool, sampling 
protocol, exceedance calculation, and monitoring frequency) becomes more sensitive, the challenge of 
further adjustments to CCT practice becomes more challenging.  This is especially true when systems are 
facing simultaneous compliance challenges (e.g., DBP control), managing corrosion of multiple materials 
(e.g., lead and iron corrosion control), and consecutive systems (e.g., managing water(s) that others are 
stabilizing).  The emphasis on Tier 1, 2, and 3 sample sites in combination with a decision criterion set at 
the 90th percentile occurrence create a data stream where a few outliers in the exceedance calculation 
can significantly effect whether a CWS exceeds the action level of 10 µg/L.  This variability stems from 
factors beyond the CWS’s control.  With implementation of the LCRI sampling protocols will further 
exacerbate this variability.  
Request for Comment 41: “The proposed option for a water system to delay OCCT until after the system 
has replaced all of its LSLs and GRR service lines, while the system achieves at least 20 percent removal 
per year and must have no LSLs, GRR service lines, or lead status unknown service lines remaining at the 
end of the five-year period.”  
Recognizing that CWSs should not be attempting to optimize or re-optimize CCT in the midst of a 
significant transition in the materials of construction at issue, is an important improvement in the rule.  
Providing CWSs with the opportunity to remove LSLs and GRRSLs prior to optimization and re-
optimization should be included in the final LCRI.   
As a practical matter, the standard for receiving this relief as drafted (§ 141.81(f)(1)(ii)) will be too 
challenging for systems with any appreciable number of LSLs or GRRSLs to achieve, in that: 
1. All LSLs and GRRSLs must be fully replaced 
2. All LSUSLs must be characterized (and replaced if LSLs or GRRSLs) 
3. Every year of the five-year period the CWS must maintain a replacement rate of at least 
20%  
Consequently,  
1. A single uncooperative property owner would be sufficient to prevent a system from 
obtaining this relief (e.g., unwilling to participate in material identification or unwilling to 
participate in full service line replacement)   

 
67 
2. CWSs that face legal barriers to full replacement will be unable to utilize this provision 
3. CWSs that exceed the action level prior to their replacement program being fully mature 
will not be able to meet the annual replacement target (e.g., systems that exceed in the 
initial monitoring rounds under the new LCRI sampling pool and sampling protocol) 
Beyond the logistical impediments to using the provision as drafted, the cost of accelerated service line 
discovery and replacement would be significant.  For CWSs with even moderate numbers of LSLs, 
GRRSLs, and SLUSLs the long-term water quality benefits of delaying optimization cannot be realized 
due to the cost and logistics of meeting the Proposed Rule requirements.  The final LCRI provision 
providing this relief should be achievable both from a CWS and state oversight perspective, as both the 
CWS and state will have to (1) agree at the onset that the system can meet the conditions of the delay 
and (2) manage the situation in the event that the system does not actually meet the conditions. 
Prior comments regarding inventory, identification, and replacement would be relevant to improving 
the feasibility of this provision as well, including: 
1. Remove service lines for fire service and other non-potable purposes from the inventory – 
removing vacant properties from the inventory, identification, and replacement counts 
2. Allow administrative measures to prevent the use of a currently unused service line until 
such time as the service line is fully characterized and, if necessary, replaced – removing 
vacant properties from the inventory, identification, and replacement counts 
3. Recognizing that multiple attempts to engage a property owner in achieving either 
material characterization and service line replacement is adequate to consider the CWS’s 
duty as fulfilled 
The feasibility of the provision would also be enhanced by: 
1. Removing the annual replacement target 
2. Extending the identification and replacement window to 7 years in keeping with the 
schedule for a validation study under Proposed Rule § 141.84(b)(5)(i) 
Request for Comment 42: “The treatment recommendation and CCT study process can take multiple 
years to complete. For systems with existing corrosion control, the system may be able to alter the 
existing treatment (e.g., increase pH and/or orthophosphate dose) without a new CCT study on a much 
faster timeframe rather than waiting for study results that may recommend that same change. EPA is 
requesting comment on whether there are situations and/or conditions where existing treatment 
modifications may achieve similar lead reductions rather than delaying new treatment for two-and-a-
half years while a study is underway.”  
Corrosion Control Studies that are Fit-for-Purpose -- EPA is correct, there are instances when corrosion 
control can, and should, be modified without the delay associated with a pipe rig study.  That is not to 
say that there is a simple list of situations where there is a single no-regrets corrosion control solution, 
and high dose orthophosphate addition is not a panacea.  Rather corrosion control should be assessed 
through a thoughtful analysis that documents current conditions and evaluates corrosion control 
options, taking into account other likely changes underway.  In some instances, this analysis can be 
accomplished in days or weeks, and in others it will require supplemental data collection and perhaps 

 
68 
laboratory studies that require weeks or months to accomplish.  In the LCRI proposal § 141.82(c) 
describes corrosion control studies broadly.  It is possible to triage analysis and data collection more 
efficiently than is reflected in the Proposed Rule text.  Ideally corrosion control modifications do not 
involve major changes in corrosion control strategy which necessitate more extensive implementation 
timeframes. 
The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis assumes that only 33% of systems serving systems between 1,001 
and 50,000 with LSLs and no systems serving less than 1,000 will require any CCT study.  This is 
unrealistic given the attention to corrosion control by water systems and state regulators following the 
Flint, MI crisis (also see following comments in “The Sector Requires Additional Expertise”).89 
The Sector Requires Addition Expertise – In the LCRI preamble EPA accurately reflected that expertise to 
determine CCT in the sector is limited. That lack of expertise exists among consulting engineers, water 
system staff, and regulators.  EPA can look at the scarcity of relevant expertise in its own staff to 
recognize the ubiquity of the shortfall.  The answer to this challenge is not create a regulatory 
framework that encourages corrosion control changes and certainly not to create a rule that encourages 
such changes without a proper analysis.  
There are many instances where making a corrosion control change that seems logical can have 
unintended results. One such example is raising finished water pH assuming from theory that the scales 
that will form are hydrocerussite and that raising the pH will lower observed soluble lead. However, 
many pipes that are predicted by theory to have hydrocerussite actually have cerussite, In these 
situations at higher pH levels cerussite becomes more soluble and without the counter formation of 
hydrocerussite the lead release can get much worse. There is a similar situation that can occur with 
increasing orthophosphate addition. It is often assumed that higher orthophosphate will reduce lead 
release, or at worst, not have any observable effect. However, when iron is present on pipe scales an 
increase in orthophosphate can lead to the replacement of the amorphous anions associated with iron 
and that chemical change leads to the release of soluble lead—sometimes for an extended period of 
time.  Evaluating CCT does not always require conducting a two – three year harvested pipe study as 
described in AWWA training materials (see Appendix D) and WRF Project 5032 (see Appendix E).  There 
are many instances when a desktop study or a desktop study with ancillary benchtop studies or scale 
analysis may suffice.  But evaluation of CCT should not be skipped by either water systems or state 
regulatory agencies. 
AWWA has prepared an on-line training course outlining such an approach to adjusting corrosion 
control practice in collaboration with the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators (ASDWA) 
(See Appendix D).  WRF elaborated on this framework in WRF Project 5032 (see Appendix E) and Project 
5081 (See Appendix F).  AWWA strongly supports the recognition of a corrosion control study as an 
approach to winnow down the number of situations where corrosion control change is dependent on 
the pipe rack study described in Proposed Rule § 141.82(c)(3).  
AWWA identified the need for this more robust framework as EPA was preparing the LCRR.  More 
importantly, to implement the LCRI corrosion control provisions effectively, a robust training program is 
needed for state and federal regulators, consulting engineers, and water system operators.  AWWA 
 
89 Cornwell Engineering Group, Inc. Corrosion Control Study Pipe Loop Study Expanded Executive Summary, 
Prepared for City of Flint. Jan. 18, 2021. (see Appendix L) 

 
69 
prepared the course referenced above and is revising its Manual of Practice for Internal Corrosion 
Control M58 to support this need.  AWWA requests that EPA work with AWWA and other expert 
stakeholders to revise EPA’s current corrosion control guidance so that EPA’s guidance is aligned with 
the current state of the science and responsible practice in corrosion control optimization and 
implementation.  Integration of sector-developed guidance is not only the most rapid strategy EPA can 
pursue to update its dated corrosion control guidance, it is the only timely avenue to developing 
practical guidance.  Moreover, the utilization of robust consensus guides is consistent with the 
Technology Transfer and Advancement Act. 
3.9 
Compliance Alternatives for Lead Action Level Exceedance by a Small CWS or NTNCWS 
Request for Comment 43: “EPA is proposing that small system flexibilities be limited to CWSs serving 
3,300 persons and fewer and all NTNCWSs for the remaining compliance alternatives of point-of-use 
devices and plumbing replacement. EPA is seeking comment on whether the Agency should allow 
systems serving up to 10,000 persons (or another threshold) to be eligible to use the small system 
compliance flexibility provision.” 
Compliance alternatives should be equally available to CWSs -- The proposed LCRI small system 
flexibilities are markedly less than those included in the LCRR.  Small system flexibility does not eliminate 
(1) service line replacement or (2) public education requirements. The proposal’s flexibilities are limited 
to two alternatives to corrosion control, either (1) a permanent POU program or (2) removal of all lead-
bearing plumbing.  It is highly unlikely that either of these alternatives are feasible for systems that 
serve as many as 3,300 persons when the PWS is a village, town, city, or investor-owned water 
company.  Conversely, given the two alternative compliance mechanisms, why would EPA set an 
arbitrary limit based on service area population?  The feasibility of either of these strategies is a function 
of ownership arrangements and materials of construction, and EPA is aware that there are numerous 
examples of CWSs where the entire facility is under the control of a single entity.   EPA did not propose 
to limit the scope of alternatives available to NTNCWS based on system size; the agency should not 
place a size restriction on the applicability to CWSs.  
Request for Comment 44: “EPA is also seeking information, data, and analysis on whether point-of-use 
devices and plumbing replacement are as effective as OCCT at systems serving up to 10,000 persons (or 
another threshold).” 
EPA’s prior analysis of the viability of POU devices at larger system scales remain relevant.  This 
compliance option is limited to those CWS that are (1) an entity which has complete control of its 
plumbing (e.g., a housing complex with its own water supply) or (2) a CWS with a very small service area 
(e.g., tens of homes perhaps a bit larger).  Larger CWS serving individual customers (e.g., a town, city, 
county public service authority) might be able to distribute POU devices and obtain consent from most 
property owners to install a POU device in household kitchens.  But, the level of ongoing intrusive entry 
into every dwelling to provide ongoing maintenance and conduct required monitoring cannot be reliably 
sustained.  Even if such an effort could be sustained, the associated cost is prohibitive to conduct at 
scale on a permanent basis. 
Request for Comment 45: “EPA is requesting comment on the ability and practicality of point-of-use 
devices to address multiple contaminants.” 

 
70 
NSF International is the ANSI accredited organization in the United States setting standards to assure 
POU devices can be adequately tested to meet water quality claims.  NSF standards are publicly 
available to EPA, as are reports from the several organizations that test manufacturer’s devices against 
the NSF/ANSI standards.  The NSF/ANSI standards address removal of multiple contaminants by a single 
POU device.  EPA’s proposed drinking water standard for PFAS90, 91  illustrates how the current POU 
device testing standards, while robust, tend to trail drinking water standards.  In the PFAS rulemaking 
EPA is requiring PWSs to achieve effluent PFAS concentrations lower than required by the current 
NSF/ANSI standard and for a larger array of PFAS than the current NSF/ANSI standard includes.   
3.10 Public Education 
Request for Comment 46: “The proposed determination that the public education treatment technique is 
feasible and prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible.” 
The request for comment frames public education as a standalone treatment technique when it is in fact 
one component of the broader LCR treatment technique.  In total, the LCR treatment technique includes 
optimized corrosion control, lead service line replacement, and public education.  While the LCRI 
appropriately changes the trigger for service line replacement, separating it from OCCT, the three 
provisions within the treatment technique are deeply interwoven.  In order to assess whether the 
“treatment technique is feasible and prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent 
feasible” commenters must consider the entirety of the treatment technique not just the public 
education provisions in isolation. 
The public education provisions of the LCRI proposal contain elements that are not technically feasible 
as the Proposed Rule is currently drafted.  The Proposed Rule requires systems to contact individuals in 
timeframes that are unachievable in today’s property ownership, electronic communications-oriented 
economy due to restrictions imposed by the rule and practical constraints. 
Request for Comment 47: “Comment and supporting data on the capacity of water systems to conduct 
some or all of the required public education activities in 30 days, or another period of time that is less 
than 30 or 60 days, after the end of the tap sampling period in which a systemwide lead action level 
exceedance occurs.”   
The current expectation is that a public education program meet initial distribution requirements within 
60 days following the end of the monitoring period is already challenging.  Achieving compliance with 
the LCR public education requirements is already fraught within the current regulatory timeframe.  
1. The trigger for public education is actually the state decision that an exceedance has 
occurred.  This decision and notification of the system could occur weeks after the end of 
the tap sampling period.  
2. Provide the state adequate time to review and potentially modify educational materials 
prior to distribution to any of the targeted entities in the public education requirements.  
This review includes developing any required translated materials to the satisfaction of 
the state. 
 
90 88 Fed. Reg. at 18638. 
91 Docket Id. #: EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0114. 

 
71 
3. Procure printing and mailing services for required distribution while complying with 
applicable local, state, and federal procurement requirements including preferential use 
of minority and women-owned businesses. 
4. Meeting distribution requirements were first conceived when the local phone book 
reflected an accurate account of the entities listed in § 141.85(b)(2)(ii)(B) located within a 
system’s service area.  This is no longer the case further complicating distribution list 
development and updating.  
5. Distribute materials to entities identified by public health agencies (§ 141.85(b)(2)(ii)(A)) in 
an era of organizational databases with phone, email, and text contact information but 
not necessarily readily usable addresses for the LCR required delivery of written materials. 
The LCRI adds to an already challenging task, in that public education requirements must be met in the 
wake of a Tier 1 public notice, which for many medium and large CWSs will involve a community-wide 
notice via press release.   
The creation of additional arbitrary deadlines for facets of a public education campaign are unwarranted 
and unproductive.  Internal CWS milestones for public education are already compressed and additional 
regulatory milestones would further complicate reporting to the state and tracking of compliance by the 
state. 
Request for Comment 48: “Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water 
systems are capable of providing consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three 
calendar days of obtaining those results, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or copper 
action level, or if a longer time frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 
calendar days).” 
In the preamble EPA describes the proposal as requiring the delivery of sample results collected under 
§141.86 to the customer within three calendar days, with the option of providing the information 
electronically if there was a follow-up notification by mail within 30 days.  The preamble reads: 
“These are the same delivery options that the LCRR requires for water systems to deliver 
results that exceed the action level within three days; however, EPA is proposing that water 
systems that choose to deliver the notice by phone would be required to follow up with a 
written notice hand delivered or postmarked within 30 days of the water system learning of 
the results.” 92 
The actual proposed regulatory text does not match this description.  The proposed regulatory text 
reads: 
“Timing of notification. A water system must provide the consumer notice as soon as 
practicable but no later than three calendar days after the water system learns of the tap 
monitoring results. Notification by mail must be postmarked within three days of the system 
learning of the tap monitoring results.” (Proposed Rule § 141.85(d)(2)) 
 
92 88 Fed. Reg. at 84949. 

 
72 
… 
“Water systems must provide consumer notice to persons served at the tap that was 
sampled. The notice must be provided electronically (e.g., email or text message), by phone, 
hand delivery, by mail, or another method approved by the State. For example, upon approval 
by the State, a non-transient non-community water system could post the results in a 
conspicuous area, such as on a bulletin board, in the facility to allow users to review the 
information. Water systems that choose to deliver the notice to consumers electronically or 
by phone must follow up with a written notice to consumers hand delivered or postmarked 
within three days of the water system learning of the tap monitoring results.” (Proposed Rule 
§ 141.85(d)(4)) 
There are ample reasons to judge the Proposed Rule as infeasible, as reliably meeting the requirement 
for a postmarked envelope within three days of receipt of sample results is not feasible, including for 
the following reasons: 
1. The U.S. postal service is both closing post offices and curtailing office hours, making it 
infeasible for water systems to obtain the required postmarked envelope.  While this 
trend is particularly true in rural America, it also affects the ability of water systems 
located in urban / suburban areas, as the available remaining facilities in a metropolitan 
area may not be easily reached. In addition to being closed on Sundays and having limited 
hours on Saturdays, the postal service is closed on all 11 Federal holidays. Certain 
locations may be closed for other reasons including staffing shortages or natural disasters. 
Although it is possible to drop off mail into the postal system without visiting a postal 
location, a true postmark can only be obtained when a piece of mail enters the postal 
service’s care. It is unclear what the standard of care is for good-faith compliance.  Are the 
records required, a log of when notice was placed in the mail on a certain date or must 
the system retain proof of mailing by a certain date from the post office.  The latter 
typically requires a “certificate of mailing” (i.e., Postal Service Form 3817, 3665, 3877, 
3606, or 3606D) at additional expense and is not available with many classes of postal 
service.   
2. While neither the preamble or Proposed Rule text define “receipt of” sample results, 
virtually any practical description would include the opening of mail, an email, or 
notification of data being available in an electronic portal at a point in the day where once 
“received,” the CWS has a number of tasks for which appropriate staff must be present, 
including: 
a. Reviewing the laboratory’s work (quality assurance / quality control) 
b. Matching the sample result with the relevant occupant(s) contact information  
c. Putting the observed values into the template approved by the state for 
distribution with the education information required by the Proposed Rule 
d. Quality review of materials prior to distribution  
e. Transporting the result to the post office 
f. Documentation for required state tracking and reporting 

 
73 
EPA is proposing that this process be expedited within 3 calendar days (e.g., Monday, Tuesday, 
Wednesday, or equally, Friday, Saturday, Sunday).  In many, if not all, parts of the country this will not 
be achievable. 
With the above practical challenges in mind AWWA recommended alternative regulatory requirements 
in Sections 2.7 and 3.2 of these comments). 
Request for Comment 49: “Whether the proposed requirement for water systems to offer lead sampling 
to consumers with LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines in the notice of service line material is 
effective at reducing adverse health effects.” 
Proposed § 141.85 would require a system to “… offer to sample for lead in the tap water of any person 
served by a lead, galvanized requiring replacement, or lead status unknown service line who requests it 
…”. There is related language in § 141.85(c)(2).   
If EPA intends the CWS’s duty to be coordinating and dispatching staff or contractors to collect samples, 
this is very burdensome regulatory responsibility relative to the potential for actual risk reduction.  EPA 
should at a minimum clarify that the CWS is offering a sample kit with instructions to allow interested 
persons to sample their tap water.  EPA did not include the cost of “sampling” in the Proposed LCRI 
Economic Analysis, rather it assumed that CWSs would provide a sampling kit, collect that kit, and obtain 
laboratory analysis of the sample. 93  Because the sampling protocol required by the proposed LCRI is for 
a stagnant water sample, scheduling of “sampling” poses a considerable logistical burden well beyond 
what EPA is assuming in its presentation of the costs of the LCRI. 
Also, as this provision applies to structures with unknown service line materials there is the potential 
that such sampling would be requested by households in apartment buildings and other developments 
that are very unlikely to have a LSL or GRRSL and for that reason not prioritized for characterization early 
in the LCRI implementation window.  In this instance the burden associated with the requirement 
exceeds the likely risk reduction achieved through improved CWS access to customer property, the 
agency’s reason for the requirement.94   
In smaller structures that do have a LSL or GRRSL and have multiple housing units, the burden similarly 
exceeds the anticipated benefit as providing a single observation from one unit to a multi-unit dwelling 
would not suffice to meet this requirement. 
The burden of this provision is compounded by the associated proposed requirement that the CWS 
return the result within three calendar days of receipt and ongoing documentation the CWS’s 
performance of new responsibilities to the state.  CWSs engaged in customer requested sample 
programs routinely report that a substantial number of the customers that request sample kits do not 
actually follow through to collect and submit the sample. 
Request for Comment 50: “EPA is also requesting comment on the requirement for water systems to 
deliver consumer-initiated test results within three days of obtaining those results.” 
 
93EPA. “Oversee the customer-initiated lead sampling program (hrs_cust_request_oversee_op).” Proposed LCRI 
Economic Analysis. (2023). Page 4-37. 
94 88 Fed. Reg. at 84921. 

 
74 
EPA describes three-day delivery in the Proposed Rule in § 141.85(d)(2) as “postmarked within three 
days of the system learning of the tap monitoring results.”   There are multiple barriers to achieving this 
performance metric reliably, including:   
1. The U.S. postal service is both closing post offices and curtailing office hours, making it 
infeasible for water systems to obtain the required postmarked envelope.  While this 
trend is true of rural America.  It also affects the ability of water systems located in urban / 
suburban areas, as the available remaining facilities in a metropolitan area may not be 
easily reached. 
2. While neither the preamble or Proposed Rule text define “learning of the tap monitoring 
results” sample results, virtually any practical description would include the opening of 
mail, an email, or notification of data being available in an electronic portal at a point in 
day where once “received”, the CWS has a number of tasks for which appropriate staff 
must be present, including: 
a. Reviewing the laboratory’s work (quality assurance / quality control) 
b. Matching the sample result with the relevant occupant(s) contact information,  
c. Putting the observed values into the template approved by the state for 
distribution with the education information required by the Proposed Rule 
d. Quality review of materials prior to distribution including adequate 
documentation for required state tracking and reporting 
e. Transporting the result to the post office 
3. Delivering sample results within 3 calendar days would entail accessing the postal service 
not only on holidays (recognized federal holidays tend to create three-day weekends) but 
also during days of the week when postal office hours are very limited or post offices are 
closed (e.g., Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or equally, Friday, Saturday, Sunday).  
Although it is possible to drop off mail into the postal system without visiting a postal 
location, a true postmark can only be obtained when a piece of mail enters the postal 
service’s care. Furthermore, it is unclear if the requirement is asking that the water system 
retain records that it placed a notice in the mail on a certain date (which would address 
some of these issues) or if it is being asked to retain proof of mailing by a certain date 
from the post office. Proof of mailing typically requires a “certificate of mailing” at 
additional expense and not available with many classes of service (see 
https://faq.usps.com/s/article/Certificate-of-Mailing-The-Basics).  
This requirement has limited value as EPA describes the purpose of this task in the Proposed Rule to be 
improved CWS access to customer property.95  However, the burden of the requirement is substantial 
(e.g., the logistical challenges, cost, paperwork and public notice for states and systems that accrue 
violations for failing to meet the delivery timeframe).  The likely attributable benefit of this requirement 
is not warranted particularly when most observed values that are above the practical quantitation level 
(PQL) (i.e., reported as a numeric value rather than non-detect) are likely to be low microgram per liter 
 
95 88 Fed. Reg. at 84921. 

 
75 
concentrations that are as likely to reassure customers that there is not a problem as they are to 
heighten interest in collaborating with the CWS. 
With the above practical challenges in mind AWWA recommended alternative regulatory requirements 
in Sections 2.7 and 3.2 of these comments). 
Request for Comment 51: “Whether the types and timing of outreach activities proposed for systems 
failing to meet the mandatory service line replacement rate are appropriate and whether other activities 
should be considered.” 
The proposed outreach activities described in § 141.85(h) are appropriate to the situation and in 
keeping with outreach strategies that CWSs are able to implement at the frequency required (every six-
months). 
Request for Comment 52: “Whether EPA should require systems to annually notify consumers if they are 
served by a lead connector, in addition to notifications for sites with lead, GRR, or lead status unknown 
service lines.” 
Lead connectors do not warrant annual customer notification.  EPA was correct proposing the LCRI 
without including lead connectors in the definition of a LSL.  To require notification of customers about 
the presence (or potential presence) of lead connectors would similarly misdirect limited CWS resources 
and draw customer’s attention away from actionable risk reduction measures (Also see responses to 
Requests for Comment in Section 3.13).  Moreover, the combination of a responsibility to notify 
customers with lead connectors and customers with LSLs, GRRSLs, and LSUSLs would further complicate 
and potentially lead to duplicative notifications of the same customers. 
 Request for Comment 53: “Whether EPA should require additional public education requirements to 
further encourage swift service line replacement faster than the 10-year replacement deadline. For 
example, should water systems that have LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines five years 
after the compliance date for the LCRI be required to increase the frequency of the notification of service 
line materials from annual to once every six months?”  
Additional regulatory requirements for specific public education measures later in the service line 
replacement program would be detrimental to replacement program implementation.  First, where 
systems have significant numbers of service lines to characterize and or remove, program ramp up will 
take several years, and it is likely that there will be a significant number of LSLs and / or GRRSLs yet to be 
replaced.  Systems facing this challenge will need to maintain an organized and targeted 
communications effort.  The introduction of generic messaging like that described by Proposed § 141.85 
would distract from messaging being used to advance local programs, working within local constraints, 
and specific to local programmatic objectives.  In addition, the resources used to meet the distribution 
requirements of the public education provisions and document that effort per the regulation will be 
resources that are not otherwise available for needed community communications efforts and other 
replacement program needs. 
Request for Comment 54: “EPA is seeking information and data on when a system provides translated 
materials to consumers with limited English proficiency, what resources are used to translate materials 
(e.g., State resources, community organizations), and what barriers water systems may face in providing 
accurate translated materials.”  

 
76 
EPA has proposed requirements around translations and language assistance in its recent proposed 
updates to the Consumer Confidence Report Rule (EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0015), and AWWA provided 
detailed feedback about this issue, which it incorporates by reference here.96.  Although the 
requirements of notifications under LCRI are not identical to those of the CCR, many of the same issues 
apply.  Furthermore, because many of the requirements under LCRI are triggered by various events, the 
timeframe to complete and validate a translation will likely be shorter than the CCR. Key challenges 
include: 
1. Identifying when translations are necessary -- There appears to be no clear guideline for 
when translations are and are not necessary. Although there certainly will be instances 
where the need for translated materials is more self-apparent than others, there must be 
some threshold to guide action.  With hundreds of potential languages, translations are 
not possible for all communications for all languages (although it is closer to feasible with 
automated, on demand translation) and thus there must be clear and reasonable 
guidelines on when they are and are not needed. 
2. Leveraging federal resources for translation accuracy -- EPA required and recommended 
language tends to be complex and technical, making dialect and culturally-appropriate 
translations difficult.  Developing pre-approved translations of key materials (required 
language and templates, for example) in the most widely used non-English languages 
would reduce the burden and increase the likelihood of accurate translations, assuming 
the pre-approved translations are carefully vetted.  Absent this, there could be hundreds 
to thousands of different translations of roughly the same text, likely of varying accuracy 
and at much greater overall cost.  Even skilled translators will likely have different 
interpretations of the same words and phrases, meaning that a pre-approved translation 
is much more likely to be consistent.  
3. Understanding compliance of acceptable translations and accuracy -- What counts as an 
acceptable translation is an essential question. There are a variety of different approaches 
to translation, each with various advantages and limitations.  These include: 
a. Automated translation is an option, which typically allows for instant availability 
(and depending on the service, availability in nearly any language) and some 
studies show that automated translation rivals professional translation.97  The 
primary downside of automated translation is that it is typically not validated by a 
person and it may struggle with some technical concepts if the program has not 
previously seen them.  
b. Professional translation is another option. Although professional translation may 
be appealing from a regulatory and compliance standpoint, many highly skilled 
professional translators do not have technical backgrounds that would be 
required for accurate translation of complex technical materials.  Translation of 
many notices required under LCRI would likely require a specialized technical 
 
96 See EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0056. 
97 One example is Chatzikoumi, E. How to evaluate machine translation: A review of automated and human 
metrics. Natural Language Engineering, Vol 26, Issue 2. (2020 Mar.) Available at 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1351324919000469). 

 
77 
translator, for which it is unclear if there are enough to be able to meet demand, 
especially if the translations are needed quickly (a typical service timeline may be 
about a week, even when arrangements are made in advance).  
c. Translation by a utility employee or relative or outside entity is a third choice.  In 
systems with limited resources or who are otherwise not able to obtain a 
professional translation, it is possible a utility employee, a relative of a utility 
employee, or an outside entity (such as a community group) may be willing to 
assist with a translation.  Although this tends to require few resources, the 
accuracy of the translation can be questionable and difficult to validate.  The 
challenges with this approach lend themselves towards a combination of pre-
approved translations and automated translations (for text that cannot be pre-
written).  
Request for Comment 55: “Whether the Agency should require States, as a condition of primacy, to 
provide translation support to water systems that are unable to do so for public education materials to 
consumers with limited English proficiency.” 
In comments on the Consumer Confidence Report Revisions Rule, ASDWA described states as being 
opposed to being required to provide translation support to CWSs as a condition of primacy.98  ASDWA 
described that requirement as a conflict of interest with respect to the state’s oversight role.  ASDWA 
recommended that EPA develop resources to support translation of CCRs.  A review of the EPA website 
conducted in late December 2023, did not reveal any substantive resources to assist states or PWSs 
translate CCRs or other materials like the LCR-related public education materials and now in the LCRI 
public notice materials. 
In reviewing other available federal translation resources, the only substantive tool that seems designed 
for a similar task is the Federal Bureau of Investigations’ National Virtual Translation Center (NVTC).99 
While EPA, state drinking water programs, and PWSs do not have access to NVTC, EPA could contact the 
Bureau to discern the level of funding necessary to follow through on ASDWA’s recommendation for an 
EPA-provided translation resource. 
Request for Comment 56: “EPA is also requesting comment on additional ways to streamline public 
education and associated certification requirements (e.g., combine deadlines for systems to conduct 
public education or submit information to the State).” 
Electronic Delivery -- In revising § 141.85(b)(4) EPA provided the opportunity for NTNCWSs to 
communicate public education materials electronically, but Proposed § 141.85(b)(2) does not afford 
CWSs the same latitude.  Electronic delivery, when possible, facilitates greater integration of on-line 
resources into distributed materials.  Instructions to CWSs regarding delivery in § 141.85(b)(2) align 
distribution of public education with distribution of bills.  As customer billing is increasingly electronic, it 
is important that the public education requirements recognize this transition and allow CWSs to 
leverage the opportunities it creates. 
 
98 See EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0058, attachment_1. 
99 Available at https://www.fbi.gov/about/leadership-and-structure/intelligence/national-virtual-translation-
center.  

 
78 
Adherence to a Communications Plan – As EPA alludes to in the LCRI preamble and as a number of the 
AWWA documents referenced in the preamble convey, effective communications requires adequate 
planning and integration of required rule elements into a cohesive communication effort.  A mechanism 
to both streamline regulatory reporting, better organize required state review of public education 
materials, and achieve better integration of public education components is: 
1. Preparation of a public education plan during the period between the LCRI effective date 
and first compliance date three-years after promulgation with submittal to the state for 
review and approval.  That plan would include: 
a. Standard operating practices to log the execution of required public education 
tasks and to the degree necessary maintaining adequate documentation and 
records for audit purposes 
b. Templates that would be used to adhere to the required public education content 
c. Templates and practices that would be used to adhere to required efforts to assist 
individuals with limited English proficiency 
d. Approach to integrating available communication channels include electronic 
information delivery 
2. An annual certification by the operator in responsible charge that the system is adhering 
to the public education plan 
3. Regular review of adherence to the public education plan during sanitary surveys (e.g., 
every three years for CWSs) 
4. A mechanism for updating the public education plan on an ad hoc basis (e.g., a review and 
update of outreach plans in the event of a lead action level exceedance) 
Coordinated Distributions -- The implementation schedule for the LCRI will lead to systems (1) 
conducting regular annual outreach to customers with LSLs, GRRSLs, and LSUSLs and (2) exceeding the 
action level in years four and five post-rule promulgation.  There will be opportunities at these systems 
to combine mailings for some or all of their customers.  Taking advantage of opportunities to economize 
on distribution cost and better integrating messaging across these two parallel activities should be 
encouraged by the rule reporting and recordkeeping requirements.   
Reducing Reporting -- Even if the agency does not adopt the above recommendation for the 
development of a public education plan and annual certification to adherence to that plan in lieu of 
multiple individual filings and certifications, all of the public education requirements could be reduced 
to a single annual certification and a record retention requirement that allows the state to audit the 
certification if necessary and on a regular basis during sanitary survey reviews. 
3.11 Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances 
Request for Comment 57: “Whether water systems should be required to take additional actions when 
the system exceeds the lead action level multiple times and if so, what actions are appropriate and 
feasible, and when these additional actions should be required under the LCRI.”  
Focus Should be on CCT -- The LCRI should not require additional actions based on multiple action level 
exceedances.  Almost all of these systems are reliably maintaining lead levels below the current action 

 
79 
level of 15 µg/L.  Looking nationally, the 90th percentile population-weighted lead concentration is 2.97 
µg/L.  Still, available data indicate that under the LCRI regulatory framework on the order of 40% of 
systems with LSLs will exceed the lowered lead action level given the sampling protocol, sample pool, 
and exceedance calculation. Systems in this category will be required by the Proposed Rule to adhere to 
the routine monitoring schedule (i.e., new opportunities to exceed the action level every six months).  
The systems that find themselves in a single exceedance, will also face the increased potential for 
sample values from supplemental monitoring data being introduced into their exceedance calculation.  
This supplemental data is likely to be lower quality data, yet systems will be required to use the portion 
of this data the state believes is appropriate regardless of data quality concerns.  These systems cannot 
exit routine monitoring for at least two consecutive monitoring periods below the action level.  Systems 
that are allowed to move to reduced monitoring are then on annual monitoring with samples being 
drawn during June, July, or August, which are prone to higher lead levels.  In this monitoring regime, the 
number of systems that find themselves with multiple exceedances will be significant.   
The process of adjusting corrosion control can for multiple reasons be protracted, including (1) analysis 
to discern how to revise corrosion control, (2) testing one or more options in pipe rigs for an adequate 
period of time, (3) making adjustments in system operations to slowly transition to the new corrosion 
control strategy, (4) conducting preparatory steps like additional flushing of the distribution system, (5) 
implementing and verifying the revised CCT, and (6) when existing facilities are inadequate obtaining 
necessary financing and undertaking required construction.  EPA has not demonstrated that systems 
with challenging waters can reliably avoid exceedances at an action level of 10 µg/L, we should assume 
that many systems that exceed the action level and state regulators will be taking a careful approach to 
revising corrosion control electing to have an ongoing exceedance over multiple monitoring cycles 
rather than making an inappropriate change.  CWSs that are focused on assuring appropriate corrosion 
control and a smooth transition to that corrosion control strategy should not be penalized by the final 
LCRI framework.  
Requiring additional actions would distract from the Proposed Rule’s focus on optimizing corrosion 
control treatment.  As the purpose of the lower action level and related monitoring changes is to 
improve corrosion control rather than demonstrate compliance with a health-based concentration, 
there is not health basis for requirements that distract from the intended role of the action level trigger, 
including making filters available to consumers. 
Request for Comment 58: “Whether EPA should use three action level exceedances in a five-year period 
for identifying systems with multiple action level exceedances where additional action is warranted and, 
whether additional actions should be required sooner, or later, than the five-year period, or whether EPA 
should use a modified metric (number of consecutive action level exceedances in a set time period) or a 
different metric entirely (i.e., based on one or more factors other than the number of action level 
exceedances in a set time period).”  
EPA should not require additional actions or pursue an alternative metric to trigger additional action by 
systems that experience multiple exceedances.  See response to the prior Request for Comment 57 for 
the basis for this comment. 
Request for Comment 59: “The proposed public education activities after a system exceeds the lead 
action level multiple times. EPA is specifically seeking any information, data, or analysis on whether the 
proposed public education activities support preventing adverse health effects in this situation.”  

 
80 
As EPA has described in the preamble to the LCRI, the 10 µg/L lead action level is not a health-based 
value, it is a trigger for greater focus on corrosion control practice.  The LCR and now the LCRI contain 
public education measures that inform the public regularly about additional risk reduction steps they as 
individuals can take.  Because EPA is choosing to lower the action level, multiple exceedances, 
particularly in the initial implementation period simply reflects the sensitivity of the new trigger for that 
additional focus, not a health concern.  Recall that even using first liter, stagnant water compliance 
sample observations to represent occurrence, population-weighted lead levels under the current LCR 
are in the low single digit microgram per liter concentration range.  Additional public education 
measures is an administrative burden that neither (1) affords additional health risk reduction or (2) 
accelerates improving corrosion control practice.   
Request for Comment 60: “EPA is also requesting comment on whether systems should be required to 
conduct more than one (e.g., two or three) of the public education activities proposed.” 
EPA should not require additional public education activities by systems that experience multiple 
exceedances.  See responses to the prior Requests for Comment 57 and 59 for the basis for this 
comment. 
Request for comment 61: “Whether EPA should require water systems to make filters certified to reduce 
lead and replacement cartridges, along with instructions for use, available to all consumers within 60 
days of a system having multiple action level exceedances and whether there are any supporting or 
contrary data on whether the proposed filter requirement would be protective of public health.” 
EPA should not require water systems that exceed the lead action level multiple times to make filters 
available to all consumers. Nor should EPA require within the treatment technique the provision to 
consumers either filters or bottled water in (1) the event of an LCRI lead action level exceedance or (2) 
prophylactic until such time as LSLs or GRRSLs can be replaced.  There may be instances where 
conditions are such that one of these protective measures are warranted, but that decision should be 
made based on site-specific facts by the primacy agency in collaboration with the PWS.  AWWA has 
previously provided an analysis of the cost of providing filters and bottled water on a community-wide 
basis to EPA (See Appendix I).100  The costs of such a program are substantial, expending resources that 
could be better applied to control measures emphasized in the rule (e.g., service line replacement and 
corrosion control). 
Filters Not Beneficial to Most Consumers – EPA’s Proposal to require that CWSs make filters available to 
all consumers would force CWSs to expend resources when typical lead levels are much lower than lead 
levels observed in the highly biased compliance monitoring data set.  Exceeding the action level under 
the LCRI will occur based on stagnant water samples, from homes with LSLs / lead plumbing or 
galvanized service lines / galvanized plumbing, which is typically a limited portion of the total number of 
service lines in a community.  Data from systems with LSL that are likely to exceed the Proposed Rule 
lead action level illustrates that despite the high likelihood of an exceedance very few tap water samples 
from other service line / plumbing material configurations are likely to be elevated (see following table). 
 
100 Arcadis, Comparing the Cost of Bottled Water vs In-Home Filter Provision for a Lead Action Level Exceedance 
(2022).  

 
81 
CWS 
LCR Category 
(Population 
Served) 
EPA 
Region 
Sample Protocol 
90th Percentile 
Observed 
Lead (µg/L) 
1 
>50,000 
5 
>6 hr. stagnation, 1st L 
ND (< 5) *  
2 
>50,000 
3 
>6 hr. stagnation, 1st 
and 5th L 
< 5.6 * 
3 
>50,000 
1 
>6 hr. stagnation, 1st L 
< 3 * 
4a 
>50,000 
3 
>6 hr. stagnation, 1st L 
< 1 * 
4b 
>50,000 
3 
>6 hr. stagnation, 5th L 
< 5 
5 
>50,000 
2 
>6 hr. stagnation, 1st L 
< 3 * 
“*” indicates two or more years of data where every year the observed 90th percentile 
was less than x throughout that period 
Action Level Not Health-Based -- EPA stated clearly in the LCRI preamble that the lead action level is not 
a health-based value, exceeding that value functions solely as a trigger for action by the water system 
and state to establish or improve optimized corrosion control.  Provision of filters to an entire 
community does not contribute toward achieving the goal of the treatment technique. This proposed 
requirement does: 
1. Foreclose state and system efforts to inform the community about the challenge at hand 
and how the CWS is resolving that challenge.   
2. Contradict longstanding practice that decisions to require CWSs to provide consumers 
with additional health risk reduction information or measures (e.g., boil water notices, 
bottled water, filters) rest with the system and state, and that those decisions are fit-for-
purpose given the risk at hand, available options for risk mitigation, the scope of the 
challenge, and other situation specific variables. 
3. Conflict with the LCRI construct which is focused almost exclusively on better 
management of lead release associated with LSLs and GRRSLs.  The LCRI revises the 
sampling protocol, sample pool and compliance metric to emphasize homes where LSLs or 
GRRSLs are present – exceedance of the action level for lead is intrinsically linked in this 
rulemaking to those homes not all structures in a community. 
4. Fail to recognize ongoing public education measures which are reaching all customers 
through multiple distribution strategies that contain information about lead risk reduction 
measures that individual consumers can take based on their circumstances. 
5. Place additional stress on the supply of available water filters certified to ANSI/NSF which 
system are also required to deliver to occupants of structures where there is a LSLR or 
GRRSL replacement. 
6. Pose a substantial logistical challenge and distraction from the Proposed Rule’s priority 
risk reduction measures – removing LSLs / GRRSLs and improving corrosion control.  EPA 
has underestimated the number of systems that will be triggered into this provision by the 
Proposed Rule and underestimated the expense of implementation. 

 
82 
7. Present a practical implementation hurdle for very large CWSs or even CWSs of more 
moderate size, obtaining a supply of filters to make them available to consumers within 
the required timeframe would face the practical hurdle of inadequate supply and the 
administrative and financial hurdles of obtaining the supply while also complying with 
local, state, and potentially federal procurement policies.  Note, this is not a declared 
emergency where administrative requirements can be streamlined because there is a 
pressing public health risk.  This is now a routine aspect of rule implementation where the 
rule is requiring an additional prophylactic measure which in most instances will not 
provide actual health risk reduction benefits because typically few homes have sources of 
lead as severe as the targeted compliance sample pool. 
In estimating the cost of this provision EPA also makes several assumptions that should be revised to 
reflect the cost of the provision more accurately.  The current analysis severely underestimates the cost 
of such a program: 
1. EPA should assume that all systems that exceed the lead action level trigger this provision.  
With the requirement to return to routine monitoring (i.e., every six months), lower action 
level of 10 µg/L, revised sampling protocol, revised compliance algorithm, addition of 
highest lead observations from supplemental monitoring, and revised sample tiers not 
only will a significant number of systems exceed the action level, but they will do so for 
multiple monitoring periods soon after compliance with the final rule requirements 
begins. 
2. Once triggered into provision of filters the period of performance will represent both (1) 
the time required to complete the required corrosion control studies, including required 
pipe rig testing as specified, and (2) the criteria for ending the filter program.  
3. The EPA analysis draws on first and fifth liter occurrence data from Michigan’s compliance 
data, but it goes on to apply a multiplier based on the average incidence of exceedances.  
This approach is inappropriate for estimating the upper tail of the occurrence distribution.  
4. The analysis goes on to annualize the cost of the filter program over 35 years when the 
cost of the program will be borne by the systems under for a much shorter period. 
5. The agency analysis appears to discard large cities from its cost estimate when the 
analysis actually indicates that those systems would be triggered to make filters available.  
Request for comment 62: “The proposed requirements for systems to develop a filter plan and submit to 
the State after the system has multiple action level exceedances for the first time, and whether EPA 
should require systems to take additional actions to facilitate filter distribution.” 
EPA should not require water systems that exceed the lead action level multiple times to make filters 
available to all consumers.  If EPA finalizes the rule including such a requirement, it should make every 
effort to minimize the burden the requirement places on water systems. 
Request for Comment 63: “Alternative requirements for systems with multiple action level exceedances 
to provide filters to their consumers, such as requiring water systems to provide filters and replacement 
cartridges to consumers served by an LSL, GRR service line, or unknown service line or to all consumers, 

 
83 
or to require systems to consult with the State upon meeting the criteria for multiple action level 
exceedances, after which the State determines the appropriate action to reduce lead exposure.” 
EPA should not require water systems that exceed the lead action level multiple times to make filters 
available to all consumers.  If EPA finalizes the rule including such a requirement, it should make every 
effort to minimize the burden the multiple action level exceedances requirement places on water 
systems.  For example, most systems in this situation will be exceeding the action level based on a 
dataset drawn from a subset of buildings with service line / plumbing material characteristics that are 
not typical of the bulk of buildings in a CWS’s service area.  Consequently, if filters were to be made 
available there should be a focus on that subset of households rather than “all consumers.”  See 
responses to Requests for Comment 57, 59, and 61 for the basis for this comment.  
Request for Comment 64: “An additional provision providing discretion to States to allow systems with 
multiple action level exceedances to discontinue the proposed required actions sooner if the system takes 
actions (e.g., installs optimized or re-optimized CCT, completes mandatory service line replacement) and 
is at or below the lead action level for two consecutive monitoring periods.” 
If this provision (§ 141.85(j) and associated requirements) is retained in the final LCRI, EPA must specify 
clear criteria a state must use to “tailor” requirements.  If the authority is going be explicitly included in 
the federal rule it must have a clear basis that can be consistently applied.  The wiser alternative is to 
eliminate the multiple action level exceedances provision from the final federal rule.   
Request for Comment 65: “Whether, in addition to the proposed requirements, EPA should provide 
States discretion to determine appropriate action following a multiple action level exceedance that is 
tailored to meet specific system needs.” 
If this provision (§ 141.85(j) and associated requirements) is retained in the final LCRI, EPA must specify 
clear criteria a state must use to “tailor” requirements.  If the authority is going be explicitly included in 
the federal rule it must have a clear basis that can be consistently applied.  The wiser alternative is to 
eliminate the multiple action level exceedances provision from the final federal rule.   
3.12 Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities 
Request for Comment 66: “Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or to sample 
more frequently in schools and child care facilities.”  
EPA should not require CWSs to (1) collect more water samples for lead analysis from individual schools 
or child care facilities in any one round of monitoring, (2) collect samples from a broader group of 
schools or child care facilities, (3) collect the required samples in schools more quickly, or (4) participate 
in additional cycles of monitoring for lead in schools.  As discussed in Section 4 of these comments, the 
current requirements are beyond the intended scope of SDWA. 
Facility owners have a duty -- Schools and child care facilities have a responsibility to provide a healthy 
environment for the children in their care.  Most states already have regulatory regimes to assure 
educational and childcare facilities provide a safe environment for the children in their care.  EPA, the 
Department of Education, the Department of Health and Human Services, and many state agencies have 
extensive guidance on the management of all environmental hazardous at these facilities.  These 
materials guide facilities toward prioritizing and managing risks across multiple media with an emphasis 
on achieving remediation.  Lead in water is no different. 

 
84 
AWWA and EPA have been engaged in a “Memorandum of Understanding on Reducing Lead Levels in 
Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities.”101 This voluntary program is not geared toward a 
few samples but rather a sampling program that is appropriate to the structures being evaluated.  
Instead, the Proposed Rule, like the previous LCRR, will inappropriately make CWSs responsible for: 
1. Sampling in facilities where they do not have authority to enter 
2. Implementing sampling protocols that require the cooperation of school and childcare 
facility staff 
3. Providing information to the school that alone is inadequate to guide decision-making 
for decision-makers responsible for those facilities 
4. Placing schools and childcare facilities in a confrontational position with their respective 
communities 
5. Place CWSs in a confrontational position with the schools and childcare facilities they 
serve 
Retention of the LCRR § 141.92 provisions with clarifications is sufficient to draw attention to managing 
lead in these facilities where it has not already occurred.  Imposing additional burden for this task on 
CWS distracts from the primary purpose of the LCRI and the role of the CWS in the communities they 
serve.   
State Legislatures Have Acted – Schools and day care facilities, while only subject to SDWA in special 
circumstances (i.e., when the state deems that facility a PWS), they are subject to state law.  In February 
2023 Environment America and U.S. PIRG Education Fund updated earlier work to reflect lead tap 
monitoring and other elements of state lead in school drinking water statutes and regulatory 
requirements. The authors report that 29 states have considered the need for and established 
monitoring requirements for lead in tap water at schools as well as other measures through state law.102  
Moreover, if Congress had intended for EPA to develop a mandatory monitoring program for lead in 
schools it would have replaced the Lead Contamination Control Act in the wake of Acorn vs Edwards103 
with such provisions and required schools to undertake tap water monitoring in schools and child care 
facilities under federal law. 
Request for Comment 67: “The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community water 
systems from the requirement for lead sampling in schools and child care facilities during the five-year 
period after the LCRI compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021 but prior 
to the LCRI compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver requirements of § 141.92(h).” 
 
101 EPA. Memorandum of Understanding on Reducing Lead Levels in Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care 
Facilities (Updating 2005 MOU). (2019). Available at https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/mou-
reducing-lead-levels-drinking-water-schools-and-child-care.  
102 Environment America and U.S. PIRG Education Fund. 2023. Get the Lead Out, Grading the states on protecting 
kids’ drinking water at school. February 2023.  
103 Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now et al versus Edwin Edwards et al. U.S. Court of Appeals 
for the Fifth Circuit. No. 94.30714. April 22, 1996. 

 
85 
Revise § 141.92(h)(5) to remove constraint that alternative state approved monitoring in schools and 
child care facilities must occur after January 1, 2021.  Some states and systems have moved forward 
more expeditiously than EPA to conduct awareness building lead monitoring these facilities before and 
subsequent to the proposal of the LCRR (§ 141.92(d)).  EPA should recognize these more proactive 
programmatic efforts subject to the other aspects of conformity with the required monitoring program 
under § 141.92. 
Request for Comment 68: “Whether or not to allow States to waive the requirements of § 141.92 for 
CWSs in schools and child care facilities that use and maintain filters certified to reduce lead, and if so, 
whether the waiver should only be allowed where schools and child care facilities are required by State 
or local law to install POU devices and maintain them.” 
Where child care and schools have installed and maintain appropriately certified point-of-use devices for 
drinking water and cooking uses, the facilities have clearly achieved the objective of the LCRR school 
monitoring program.  The facility administration is aware of lead in water as a concern, it has assessed 
the situation in the facility(ies) under its control, and it has installed and maintains a risk management 
strategy that EPA recognizes as adequate in both the LCRR and the LCRI for small CWSs and NCWSs.  The 
same attention and action by the facility’s owner / operator is true when steps have been taken to 
eliminate use of potable water for consumption and where water outlets for drinking and cooking have 
been updated with modern lead-free compliant fixtures.  In these instances, additional monitoring by 
the CWS is not necessary and should not be required. 
Addressing this situation logistically through a “waiver” would be challenging (§ 141.92(h)(1)(ii).  A more 
efficient mechanism to address this situation is to modify § 141.92(a)(1) – (2) to exclude systems with 
these risk reduction measures in place.  Associated preamble and guidance could speak to the use of 
local ordinances, school board administrative instructions, and state laws or regulations as a basis for 
CWS certification of best efforts to compile the list of schools and child care facilities it must sample 
(§141.90(i)(3)(i)).  
Section 141.92(a)(1) – (2) could be revised as follows: 
“(a) General requirements. (1) All community water systems must conduct public education 
and lead monitoring at the schools and child care facilities they serve unless  
(i) those schools or child care facilities were constructed or had full plumbing 
replacement on or after January 1, 2014 or the date the State adopted standards that 
meet the definition of lead free in accordance with section 1417 of the Safe Drinking 
Water Act, as amended by the Reduction of Lead in Drinking Water Act, whichever is 
earlier., or  
(ii) Disconnected affected fixtures used for water consumption; 
(iii) Replaced affected fixtures used for water consumption with fixtures certified as lead 
free; and 
(iv) those schools or child care facilities provide water for drinking and food preparation 
through point-of-use devices meeting NSF/ANSI Standard 53 for total lead removal 
and NSF/ANSI Standard 42 for fine particulates (Class I).    

 
86 
(2) The provisions of this section do not apply to a school or child care facility that is 
regulated as a public water system.”  
Request for Comment 69: “The minimum requirements for States to provide a waiver (e.g., should the 
waiver be limited to locations where the filter use is required by State or local law; should the waiver be 
limited to locations where State or local law requires periodic sampling or testing to ensure proper filter 
use).” 
The regulatory relief that is the topic of this request for comment should not be limited to instances 
where there is a local or state law requiring the use of filters.  See response to Request for Comment 68 
for the basis for this comment and an alternative approach. 
Request for Comment 70: “Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and child care facility 
sampling results publicly available, and if so, how frequently and in what manner.” 
The Proposed Rule, like the prior LCRR, requires the CWS to obtain the cooperation of school district 
staff and leadership, school facility staff, and child-care owner/operators and their staff.  EPA should not 
place CWSs in the position of having to disclose observed results publicly.  Rather the entities 
responsible for the care of the children in those facilities should have the opportunity to communicate 
the results to parents and staff.  Usurping the role of communicator further stretches the legal 
credibility of § 141.92 and importantly creates additional unproductive friction with these facilities, 
which will lead to lower participation rates in sampling by school and day care facilities. 
3.13 Reporting and Recordkeeping 
Request for Comment 71: “EPA is requesting comment on the expansion of the inventory reporting to 
include lead connectors and non-lead service lines.” 
EPA should not require the addition of lead connectors to the inventory.  As described in the following 
the associated potential health benefit is limited and the associated challenges shift resources from 
complying with provisions that afford additional risk reduction.  Moreover, CWSs will have just 
completed the inventories required under the LCRR and this requirement would necessitate a new 
round of records review and field investigations.  
Including Lead Connectors in Inventory -- The tracking of lead connectors should be an element of the 
system’s materials evaluation (i.e., § 141.42(d) as referenced in LCRI at § 141.86(a)(i)) rather than an 
element of the inventory as described in the Proposed Rule at § 141.84.  Lead connectors should not be 
included in the inventory at all, but if included, need not be categorized in the extraordinary detail 
included in § 141.84(a)(2)(ii).   
Lead connectors, that is a “short segment of piping not exceeding two feet” (§ 141.20), are a distraction 
that CWSs can ill afford when considered in the broader context of replacing LSLs and GRRSLs and doing 
so within the timeframe EPA proposes in the LCRI.  Where lead connectors were not already being 
replaced in the course of ongoing CWS infrastructure work, the LCRI will require CWSs to replace them 
when encountered (§ 141.84(e)). Lead connectors will almost exclusively exist where there is a LSL, 
GRRSL, or galvanized service line that has not been replaced.  In many, if not most, CWSs there is little 
distinction between a GRRSL and a galvanized service line, given the high documentation standard for 
demonstrating a galvanized service has never been preceded by lead service line.  An emphasis on 
documenting lead connectors to the degree expected for (1) regulatory filings and (2) presentation to 

 
87 
the public shifts limited available resources away from activities that EPA is emphasizing as an important 
risk reduction measure – identifying and replacing LSLs and GRRSLs.  EPA does not have strong basis for 
include GRRSLs in the LCRR / LCRI inventory and service line replacement requirements.  The premise for 
identifying and proactively targeting these two-foot long or less lengths of lead pipe is weaker still in 
that these short lengths of pipe will tend to be located at a distance from the building such that drawing 
water into the building is unlikely to result in a discernable increase in lead concentration.  As a result 
research to-date has not demonstrated a significant effect on observed lead levels from lead 
connectors. 
Including Non-Lead Service Lines in Inventory – Section 141.90 (e)(1), (2), and (4) as proposed limit the 
system’s duty to report to the LSLs, GRRSLs, and LSUSLs.  This is consistent with the currently codified 
LCRR regulatory text. Because the current proposal requirements for reporting the inventory are so 
burdensome (i.e., § 141.90(e)(4)), EPA should not require reporting of nonlead service lines.  Reducing 
the reporting to those service lines of interest in the rule  
1. Reduces the burden associated with data transfer, especially when states require the use 
of specific data submittal formats that are not amenable to bulk data submission from 
existing CWS data systems 
2. Reduces the potential for inadvertent errors as even a de minimus error rate will be 
magnified by submittal of a dataset that is ten or more times larger than the dataset 
actually needed for oversight of the rule 
3. Adding nonlead service lines to the inventory would beg the question of the applicability 
of the requirement and potentially broaden the applicability of this requirement to all 
CWSs regardless of whether they (a) never had LSLs or GRRSLs or (b) successfully replaced 
all LSLs and / or GRRSLs.  Such an expansion would eliminate the value of regulatory relief 
provided to such systems within § 141.84(b)(1)(ii) and add additional strain on limited 
state capacity to (a) manage the data submitted and (b) focus scare state resources 
effectively. 
As reflected in prior comments above in Sections 3.2 and 3.4 of these comments, the state interest is in 
total service line counts by category, including nonlead service lines. 
Also, the need to report should be distinguished from how a CWS may provide the inventory to the 
public.  As individual property owners and occupants are accessing information about their service 
line(s), the information provided from the water system will also convey nonlead status in some 
manner. 
Request for Comment 72: “EPA has heard concern over the ability of States to review all required site 
sample plans and provide approvals in time for the first tap monitoring period, and is requesting 
comment on whether EPA should consider a phased approach or alternate approach to reduce the 
burden on States following the rule compliance date.” 
EPA should revise the LCRI such that the transition to the revised monitoring pool and sampling protocol 
is phased in over time.  There are two ready alternatives  

 
88 
1. Transitioning as systems approach taking their next LCR sample under the current rule 
(e.g., systems on annual and triennial monitoring stay on their current schedule until the 
next required monitoring period following the initial compliance date) 
2. Transitioning to the new monitoring pool and sampling protocol as a function of system 
size (e.g., systems serving more than 50,000 persons transition on the next monitoring 
period following the initial compliance date, systems serving more than 10,000 but less 
than 50,000 persons transition two – three years later, and systems serving less than 
10,000 persons transition a few years later. 
The latter option based on system size  
1. Affords the greatest consistency in approach nationwide 
2. Organizes the transition in a manner that is aligned with states developing capacity and 
experience overseeing the transition 
3. Postpones the transition of the largest number of systems serving the smallest total 
population until state capacity is ready 
4. Best aligns with implementing other facets of corrosion control in the Proposed Rule, like 
expanding required monitoring of WQPs. 
5. Allows smaller systems to focus on characterizing and removing LSLs and GRRSLs during 
initial final rule implementation. 
The second option above is also preferrable because it also provides an interval between each group of 
systems starting the new monitoring requirements.  In the Proposed Rule it is a task that must be 
accomplish within a few months for a significant portion of CWSs and NTNCWSs. Processing monitoring 
plans is a substantial administrative task, but it is not as daunting a task as managing the subsequent 
surge in state responsibility when a significant fraction of each cohort of systems exceeds the new lead 
action level.  The Proposed Rule must be changed so that states are not overwhelmed by either task 
(i.e., review of monitoring plan submittals, oversight of systems in exceedance of the action level). 
A staged implementation based on system size has been employed previously to facilitate 
implementation of an SDWA regulation.  Examples include the Long-Term 2 Enhanced Surface Water 
Treatment Rule (LT2ESWTR)104 and the Stage 2 Disinfection and Disinfection Byproduct Rule (Stage 2 
DBPR).105 
Another benefit of staged implementation is the development of increased laboratory capacity to meet 
the need for additional sample analysis.  The proposed rule will result in a substantial increase in 
samples, as systems  
1. Return to routine monitoring increasing both the number of samples and sampling 
frequency 
2. Are to take samples after replacements 
 
104 71 Fed. Reg. at 716. 
105 71 Fed. Reg. at 415. 

 
89 
3. Are to offer the opportunity for samples to be taken in multiple instances 
4. Must initiate monitoring in schools and childcare facilities 
As drafted the proposed LCRI requires all systems to implement measure that result in this increase in 
samples to all occur in a single monitoring cycle (six-month window).  While laboratory capacity can 
grow to accommodate the new demand, changing the rule structure so that increased demand is 
metered into the certified laboratories such that capacity can development will reduce the potential for: 
1. Monitoring and reporting violation due to sample processing backlogs 
2. Severe price escalation 
3. Inability to utilize entire six months of routine monitoring window to overcome challenges 
finding appropriate sample site with occupants willing to participate in tap sample 
monitoring 
Where states are active managers of samples or laboratory analyses the potential for state to have to 
rapidly transition systems to undertaking themselves or purchasing from commercial laboratories would 
likely have a particularly large impact on small systems. 
Request for Comment 73: “EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be required to maintain 
records related to distribution system and site assessments conducted by water systems.”  
States should not be required to maintain records related to distribution system and site assessments.  
EPA has not articulated a purpose for or value associated with states retaining records of these 
assessments.  Retaining such records would impose both a recordkeeping burden on the state and 
further trivialize such assessments.  Greater state recordkeeping burden will lead states to take steps 
that simplify their responsibilities, like the creation of a specific form or checklist. As these assessments 
become another paperwork exercise requiring submission of a particular form by a specific deadline 
they become less thoughtful evaluations. 
Moreover, this trivialization of the rule tasks would be reinforced as EPA audits state performance.  Such 
audits emphasize process over substance, again reinforcing the view that what is in reality a challenging 
task for CWSs to accomplish is merely a paperwork exercise.  
Request for Comment 74: “EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be required to maintain 
documentation of determinations of more stringent implementation, including but not limited to 
conditions or approvals related to reduced compliance monitoring and additional information required to 
conduct a review or designate OCCT.” 
Special Primacy Requirements -- States already have a duty to maintain records with the basis for their 
decisions both generally, §142.14(a), and specific to the LCR (Subtitle I), §142.14(d)(8).  An additional 
requirement for documentation of LCRI implementation would be redundant with these existing 
requirements. 
More importantly, the LCRI does not describe the criteria a state must adhere to when it is deciding to 
be more stringent than required by the LCRI.  States have the authority under state law to be more 
stringent than the federal regulation, but if state discretion to require additional stringency is framed in 
the final federal rule, there must be clear, objective criteria for the imposition of more stringent 

 
90 
requirements.  EPA should remove the several provisions from the LCRI that suggest state latitude to be 
more stringent than the federal rule unless EPA incorporates relevant criteria into the final rule and 
amends § 142.16 – Special Primacy Conditions, to require states adhere to those criteria. 
While EPA underestimates the burden associated with implementing the LCRI, the agency does 
recognize that the burden is very high.  In light of the agency advancing this burdensome a regulation 
while it is also promulgating and requiring compliance with a primary drinking water standard for PFAS 
during a similar timeframe, which is also extremely burdensome, EPA should not create additional 
unjustified or described avenues for additional burden. 
Timely policy decisions –Section 2.6 of these comments highlights the importance of timely relevant 
guidance for effective and efficient rule implementation.  Similarly, state practice should entail the 
timely development of state-specific policies.  EPA can facilitate timely development of state policy 
decisions by: 
1. Developing guidance as requested in Section 2.6 
2. Timely engagement with states to develop early implementation agreements that 
incorporate timely state policy development 
3. Timely processing of state primacy submittals 
Under SDWA, states have at a minimum two years to obtain primacy for new rule requirements and 
SDWA provides for a two-year extension (a total of four years). In order to pursue LCRI implementation 
states will need to establish any state specific policies as soon after promulgation as possible and much 
earlier than the end of the complete primacy application process. 
States, like EPA, are better able to develop state-specific policies for SDWA rule implementation when 
they engage the professional drinking water community. EPA should consider the time needed for state-
specific expert discussion and state decision-making when it is planning and budgeting its own work to 
develop guidance, construct information systems, and evaluate state primacy applications. 
3.14 Compliance Dates 
Request for Comment 75: “Whether it is practicable for water systems to implement notification and risk 
mitigation provisions after full and partial service line replacement (§ 141.84(h)), notification of a service 
line disturbance (§ 141.85(g)), and associated reporting requirements (§ 141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) upon the 
effective date of the LCRI.” 
Notification of disturbance – Section 141.85(g) is not feasible as written.  This provision requires CWSs to  
“… provide customers and the persons served by the water system at the service connection 
with information” including “Public education materials that meet the content requirements in 
paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) through (iv) of this section” and do so “before any service line that has 
been shut off or bypassed is returned to service.”   
Setting aside that the reference to § 141.85(a) is to a section regarding the content of “written 
materials.” Systems will not be able to deliver the required notification to “customers” that do not 
inhabit the structure in time to return the structure to service in a timely fashion that meets the needs 
of the structure’s occupants.  To the degree to which EPA assumes service lines impacted by this 
provision are rentals and that a significant portion of those rentals will be inhabited by disadvantaged 

 
91 
households, this provision advertently harms the households EPA is most interested in protecting 
through this rulemaking.  It is worth emphasizing that this requirement to provide written notice prior to 
returning water service also applies to planned and emergency partial and full replacement of service 
lines. 
The only specific description of “delivery” is a footnote on page 4-185 of the Economic Analysis, where 
EPA assumes that a door hanger will be sufficient.  The conundrum is that the anticipated (and costed) 
compliance strategy is not sufficient to assure compliance with the regulatory text as drafted.  EPA did 
not account for delays in returning water service in its economic analysis. Construction to repair or 
modify a pipe, meter, or valve will involve returning water pressure to the line prior to filling any 
associated excavations.  If water service cannot be returned to a structure in a timely manner this 
extends the period of time a work crew will be dispatched to work on a service line but unable to 
complete their work, reducing the overall efficiency of the crew. EPA requests comment on broadening 
this notification provision to main construction.  The implications of extending outages to achieve 
required notification would be detrimental to potentially many impacted households. 
Successfully providing required information to customers that are not resident at the affected structure 
within 24 hours of a disturbance that did not involve discontinuing water service is also infeasible for the 
same reasons as above. Importantly, if the proposed LCRI is not allowing systems to convey information 
to building occupants by way of the customer, communicating with the customer in this instance is 
unnecessary.  An absentee landlord does not drink the water at a structure they don't occupy, so 
notifying them within a longer timeframe should be sufficient, as their health is not affected and the 
Proposed Rule requires the CWS to contact the occupants directly. 
Repeated “disturbances” at a single structure – The proposed LCRI treats each “disturbance” as a unique 
event requiring the provision of information and in some instances pitcher filters. If multiple 
“disturbances” affect a service line the final rule should provide a mechanism to not require the system 
provide multiple information packets and additional pitcher filters / replacement cartridges. 
Vibration as a disturbance – Section 141.85(g) is proposing that CWSs provide risk mitigation when LSLs, 
GRRSLs, and LSUSLs are subject to “physical action or vibration (e.g., mechanical or vacuum excavation 
during service line material investigations).”106  While “e.g.” connotes an example rather than a 
complete list, the Proposed Rule § 141.85(g) is so broadly drafted that compliance is infeasible and EPA’s 
economic analysis of the Proposed Rule is inadequate.  The Proposed Rule text reads: 
“Actions taken by a water system that cause a disturbance include actions that result in a shut 
off or bypass of water to an individual service line or a group of service lines (e.g., operating a 
valve on a service line or meter setter, or reconnecting a service line to the main), or other 
actions that cause a disturbance to a service line or group of service lines, such as undergoing 
physical action or vibration that could result in pipe scale dislodging and associated release of 
particulate lead.” 
As written, the regulatory text lacks any objective delimitation.  Neither the preamble nor the docket 
provide a technical basis for this requirement. The agency’s economic analysis of the “physical action or 
vibration” trigger condition is limited to disturbances associated with inventorying.     
 
106 88 Fed. Reg. at 84925. 

 
92 
EPA has not provided a technical basis for this provision, adequately costed the regulatory requirement, 
or articulated a demonstrable quantitative benefit. The agency should remove “or other actions that 
cause a disturbance to a service line or group of service lines, such as undergoing physical action or 
vibration that could result in pipe scale dislodging and associated release of particulate lead” from 
§141.85(g). 
Main Replacement – The provision cannot and should not be applied to encompass main rehabilitation, 
repair, or replacement.  As drafted and evaluated in the Economic Analysis, “actions taken by water 
systems” are singular events rather than multi-day or multi-step processes.  As currently drafted, a field 
crew working on a single block could be tasked with providing the required notice on multiple occasions, 
reaching occupants prior to restoration of service and reaching “customers” who may not be resident: 
1. To all the building units on a block with service lines characterized as LSUSL, LSL, or GRRSL 
per the LCRI, when initial trenching is done to set up a pipe relay for temporary service 
2. To all building units on a block when the main is valved off to insert the relay 
3. To each building unit when service is valved off to transfer service to the relay pipe  
4. To each building unit prior to returning water service to any service that would still be 
characterized as LSUSL, LSL, or GRRSL per the LCRI. 
In the instance when some or all of the structures have multiple units, the CWS’s crews would have to 
comply with the LCRI’s expectations that an effort will be made to reach all the affected units.  Not only 
would the field crew need to undertake the above but the efforts undertaken will, per the LCRI, have to 
be documented.    
Time and effort spent engaging building occupants must be used wisely, not just to effectively utilize 
CWS resources, but to assure that occupants give serious consideration to the information a CWS 
provides. 
Request for Comment 76: “Whether earlier alternative compliance dates for LCRI are practicable such 
that water systems transition directly from LCR to LCRI in less than three years (i.e., one or two years) 
based on the assumption that water systems would comply with the LCR until the LCRI compliance date.” 
The SDWA provides three years following promulgation for implementation of a national primary 
drinking water regulation unless “the Administrator determines that an earlier date is practicable” (42 
U.S. Code § 300g–1(b)(10).  The Administrative Procedures Act (APA) requires that final regulations be a 
logical outgrowth of the proposal.  EPA has not described in the preamble or docket a basis for 
promulgating the final LCRI on an expedited schedule. 
While EPA has underestimated the burden ($3.0 – 4.8 billion annualized) associated with the LCRI, EPA 
has judged this rulemaking to be much more expensive than any prior SDWA rulemaking.  The agency’s 
annualized cost reflects annualizing over 35 years the capital and operational costs that will accrue in 
communities across the U.S. in a brief 10-year period.  These costs are compared against highly 
theoretical benefits.  There is neither an expectation that 1, 2, or 3 year earlier implementation of the 
final LCRI would significantly increase any actual health risk reduction nor is there an expectation that 
earlier implementation would significantly reduce the cost burden on communities and individual 
household water rates.  Moreover, if the incremental benefits of more rapid implementation were 

 
93 
defensible, EPA would have promulgated the LCRR more rapidly and the current administration would 
have proposed this rule in a more timely manner, as well as, actively sought the infrastructure funding 
necessary to implement the rule.   It is unreasonable for the Administrator to accelerate LCRI 
implementation when the agency is not yet prepared to provide the support that communities have 
repeatedly sought over the course of this and prior rulemakings, including: 
1. Collaborate in the timely preparation of guidance to support aspects of the rulemaking, 
like corrosion control treatment, that could already be in preparation 
2. Develop and field in the foreseeable future a data system adequate to support states 
receiving all of the information transfers anticipated by the LCRI 
3. Provide translation services support that has been requested by states and water systems 
to facilitate required outreach to individuals for whom English is not their primary 
household language 
4. Provide funding for full-lead service line replacement adequate to meaningfully support 
the replacement of service lines on private property at the scale required by the LCRI 
5. Provide useful risk communication support that fairly communicates the risk posed by 
environmental exposures to lead (e.g., model lead exceedance brochures required by 
Proposed Rule § 141.85(a)(1)) 
Request for Comment 77: “Whether there are other LCRR provisions besides the initial inventory and 
notifications of service line material for which the October 16, 2024, compliance date should be 
retained.” 
EPA must act immediately (prior to the intended promulgation of the LCRI) to extend the compliance 
dates for the provisions of the LCRR that EPA does not intend to continue under the LCRI.  Currently, 
systems are expending resources to comply with the LCRR as it is the codified regulation, while EPA is 
proposing to dramatically change both the substance and deadlines for all but three of the LCRR 
requirements.  Water systems have a duty to comply and have no assurance EPA will meet it 
promulgation timeline nor that enforcement discretion will occur should EPA not publish the final rule 
prior to the LCRR compliance dates. 
3.15 Consumer Confidence Report 
Request for Comment 78: “EPA is requesting comment on the proposed requirement for systems to 
provide an informational statement in the CCR about the school sampling requirements with the 
information that consumers can contact the school or child care facility about any potential sampling 
results.” 
The consumer confidence report (CCR) is already a complicated document containing information that is 
difficult to convey within the confines of the CCR rule.  To add an additional component regarding in-
school lead sampling would be a further and substantial complication.  The CCR must already capture 
and characterize compliance monitoring which reflects parameters from both finished water and 
distribution system monitoring.  That data includes monitoring from LCR compliance monitoring.  Within 
the service area there may be multiple school systems and likely multiple child care centers, some of 
which will be engaged in monitoring in each of years one through five of the LCRI school and child care 
monitoring program.  There could also be requested monitoring, and there may be additional 

 
94 
monitoring required by state law.  Introducing this complexity into the CCR only serves to create 
confusion in the community the water system serves rather than a clear targeted communication of 
relevant information. 
3.16 Definitions 
Request for Comment 79: “EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed definitions, and 
specifically the following: b. EPA is proposing to define a two-foot maximum length of connectors. EPA 
proposes that “connectors” that exceed two feet in length be treated as a service line. EPA is requesting 
comment on the defined length of a connector.” 
Service line -- The definition of a service line at § 141.2 of the proposed LCRI is incomplete and will be 
misconstrued.  The current definition reads: 
“Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe which 
connects the water main to the building inlet. Where a building is not present, the service line 
connects the water main to the outlet.”  
The definition should be revised to read: 
“Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe which 
directly connects the community water system’s water main to the building inlet first fitting 
inside the building (i.e., connecting the service line to the building water system). Relevant 
service lines are those that supply water for drinking and cooking in the building.  The term 
service line does not include private water mains. Where a building is not present, the service 
line connects the water main to the outlet. Where a private main exists between the 
community water system main and a building, associated service lines are not subject to 
subpart I.”  
CWSs should not be responsible for (1) diagraming on-site distribution system piping networks or (2) 
taking responsibility for “distribution systems” maintained by others and only connected to the water 
system by virtue of the sale of water through a mass meter.  Many, if not most, of these situations either 
are state-recognized public water systems or are public water systems as defined by SDWA.107  Their 
status as unregulated (or less regulated) PWSs should not lead to a burden on regulated PWSs. 
Vacant and unimproved lots are addressed through other comments in this submission that recommend 
that service lines associated with such lots be addressed through administrative mechanisms rather than 
the Proposed Rule requirements (see Section 3.4 of these comments).  If EPA believes it must include 
instances where a building is not present in this definition then, the current text should be modified to 
read, “Where a building is not present, the service line connects the water main to the first outlet.” Or 
similarly revised to match the same intent if EPA revises the definition of service line as recommended in 
Section 3.16 of these comments. 
Description of Full-Replacement -- The Proposed § 141.84(d)(6)(iii)(B) description of a full-replacement is 
currently unclear and can be misconstrued. As proposed, the pipe being replaced will also have to be 
disconnected from the customer’s side of the connection.  
 
107 42 U.S. Code § 300f(4) 

 
95 
3.17 Questions from within Preamble 
Request for Comment 80: “A system’s existing authority to access the service line and complete the full 
service line replacement might provide the system with the legal authority to conduct the service line 
replacement over the objection of the property owner or resident. However, as some stakeholders noted, 
requiring service line replacement at properties where customers object to their replacement could 
create potential safety concerns for utility staff. EPA is seeking comment on whether the proposed LCRI 
should either allow systems to treat those service lines as not under the control of the system and forego 
replacement of the lines or require systems to conduct full service line replacement in situations where 
the system has legal access to conduct the full replacement but property owners or residents deny 
physical access.”  
See comments in Legal Review section of these comments (see Section 4.7). 
Request for Comment 81: “While EPA is not proposing to establish a maximum stagnation time in the 
LCRI because the Agency is concerned about samples being invalidated solely because the sample result 
it high, EPA is seeking comment and data, including modeling and sampling data, on potential maximum 
stagnation times, and specifically how stagnation times inform corrosion rates.”  
EPA should utilize this rulemaking as an opportunity to improve the clarity of the current model 
household sampling protocol instruction and incorporate elements to support final rule implementation.  
Through this rulemaking, EPA must provide the required sampling protocol instructions so that water 
systems can implement sampling without fear that their best efforts are second-guessed by state or 
federal regulators.  This will require updating the current EPA model instructions to support the final 
rule provisions.  EPA should work with AWWA and CWSs to ensure the protocol supports 
implementation as well as assure the understandability of the instructions through focus groups and/or 
consultation with experts in public health communication. 
EPA is well aware that at very long periods of protracted stagnation water quality is impacted by a 
number of chemical and biological processes, hence among other activities, the M/DBP rulemaking that 
is now underway. The more relevant question is whether a stagnation timeframe of a few days leads to 
meaningfully different lead observations from a 6, 10 or 12 hour stagnation period.  The Proposed Rule 
Tiers includes galvanized piping as well as multi-family building sample sites.  Sample sites can include 
both kitchen and bathroom faucets, even when a faucet (like a second or third bathroom) is not in 
routine use.  Systems are striving to accrue sufficient samples to meet the required number of routine 
monitoring sample sites and thus prompting households to sample even when a housing unit has been 
uninhabited (e.g., on return from a vacation or business travel).  There is clearly the possibility that 
water could be stagnant for protracted periods, sufficient to warrant simple measures to help assure 
some degree of trust that the sample result reflects what it is intended to represent.  Such measures can 
be included in the household sampling protocol instructions.  Measures like: 
1. Draw the sample from a faucet that is routinely used and has been used regularly in the 
last several days 
2. If a faucet has a single control for hot and cold make sure its last routine use was with cold 
water before starting the stagnation period 
3. If a faucet has not been used in the last 18 hours wait and initiate the stagnation period 
after more regular use is occurring 

 
96 
The LCR provides very limited opportunity to invalidate samples once accepted.  So, adherence to 
household tap sample instructions should be captured in the chain of custody tracking for the sample, 
such that when a sampler documents inappropriate sample practice, the sample can be recognized as 
problematic, discarded, and re-sampling attempted. 
Request for Comment 82: “EPA is seeking comment about the potential inclusion of samples from lower-
priority tiers (i.e., Tiers 3 through 5) that have a higher lead or copper concentration than samples from 
Tier 1 and 2 sites for calculation of the 90th percentile for systems that do not have a sufficient number 
of samples from Tier 1 and 2 sites. Additionally, EPA is seeking comment on whether to require systems 
to use samples with the highest lead and copper concentration regardless of sampling tiers, such as 
including samples from lower-priority tiers (i.e., Tier 3 through 5) in the 90th percentile calculation for 
systems that are collecting compliance samples from all Tier 1 and 2 sites.”  
Incorporating Tier 3 – 5 Sample Results in Exceedance Calculation  -- In calculating whether a system has 
exceeded the lead action level, § 141.80(c)(3)(ii), reads,  
“For water systems with lead service lines with sites identified as Tier 1 or 2 under § 
141.86(a) with enough Tier 1 or 2 sites to meet the minimum number of sites listed in § 
141.86(c) or (d) as applicable: … Lead or copper sample results from Tier 3, 4, or 5 sites 
cannot be included in this calculation.”   
EPA cannot intend to preclude systems from including Tier 3, 4, or 5 sample sites when the CWS has 
otherwise exhausted necessary efforts to otherwise achieve sampling at Tier 1 and 2 sample sites shown 
in the monitoring plan submitted to the state prior to compliance monitoring per § 141.90(a)(i).  Where 
systems have attempted but failed to successfully engage Tier 1 and 2 customers in compliance 
monitoring, Tier 3 – 5 sample sites should be acceptable in the compliance dataset, even if the service 
line inventory continues to reflect unsampled homes with lead services.  This clarification will be 
increasingly important over time as CWSs successfully reduce the number of lead service lines in their 
service area, and the remaining occupants with LSLs are either difficult to reach or uncooperative and 
where the remaining LSLs are associated with vacant properties.  The report required in § 141.90(a)(i)(B) 
provides an opportunity to report the system’s best efforts to comply. 
Highest Lead and Copper Concentration Regardless of Sampling Tiers – EPA is now in its second 
rulemaking in three years for the singular purpose of emphasizing controlling lead release from LSLs and 
GRRSLs.  The current exceedance calculation involves: 
1. Prioritizing Tier 1 and 2 sample sites 
2. If needed to complete the compliance dataset adding the highest values from 
supplemental monitoring data that fit Tier 1 and 2 sample sites and sample protocol 
requirements 
3. Then adding the highest values from Tiers 3, 4, and 5. 
The sampling pool for the Tier 1 – 5 samples other than supplemental monitoring data points reflect a 
sample plan approved by the state.  In this construct, the proposed incorporation of high lead and 
copper observations from Tier 3 – 5 will be necessary as pointed out in the comment response above. 

 
97 
A revised construct that brings Tier 3 – 5 observations forward preferentially should be accompanied by 
removal of the supplemental monitoring dataset from the exceedance calculation.  The supplemental 
monitoring dataset will likely be lower quality data in that it will be less well curated than the 
compliance data set in the approved monitoring plan.  This critical calculation should use the more 
curated dataset. 
Request for Comment 83: “A deadline for inventory completion that precedes the deadline for 
mandatory service line replacement could reduce the possibility of non-compliance with the replacement 
deadline, but it would not have the advantages of a consolidated deadline as described above. EPA seeks 
comment on its rationale for the consolidated deadline approach as compared to an earlier deadline for 
identifying unknown service lines.”  
The docket does not include information that captures the practical steps CWSs must undertake to 
implement a program such that EPA would have a factual basis for setting an alternative deadline for 
inventory completion.  CWS are balancing lead service line characterization, validation, and replacement 
activities.  EPA has acknowledged there are numerous variables specific to each CWS that will determine 
how each CWS will pursue program implementation and which elements will be prioritized over another 
in a particular CWS’s program timeline.  For example, there will be CWSs that: 
1. Have a significant percentage of their service lines that are LSUSLs due to a lack of 
information about customer-owned service line materials 
2. Are attempting to overcome barriers to program implementation that require changes in 
local or state law (e.g., access issues that EPA has alluded to in the preamble) 
3. The number of replacements required are more daunting than the remaining effort to 
complete the inventory and warrant an early focused effort on known LSLs 
4. Systems that are reliant on a successful validation study to assure state acceptance of 
their inventory (and the subset of those systems which have validation studies that fail) 
Request for Comment 84: “While water systems are required to notify consumers of disturbances 
resulting from water main replacement under these proposed requirements, EPA is also requesting 
comment on whether to require distribution of filters for this type of disturbance.”  
Disturbances as described in § 141.85(g) is so broad a scope of potential “actions” as drafted that 
providing the information Proposed Rule compliance is infeasible (see comment above in Section 2.7).   
The addition of the burden of providing filters would further complicate the logistics of field activities by 
requiring CWSs to implement a measure in additional instances that EPA has not demonstrated will 
afford any meaningful additional risk reduction beyond protections that already occur or are already 
incorporated into the Proposed Rule.  See related responses to Requests for Comment 55, 57, 59, and 
73 regarding the value of filter distribution in this scenario as well. 
4 
LEGAL REVIEW 
4.1 
Introduction to Legal Section 
The proposed LCRI revision raise serious policy and legal questions relating to the scope of EPA’s 
authorities under the SDWA and does not comply with the Agency’s obligations under the APA. For 
example, the SDWA provides that EPA can only promulgate national drinking water regulations that are 

 
98 
“feasible.” The SDWA defines “feasible” by reference to treatment techniques that “are available (taking 
cost into consideration).”108  When assessing feasibility, EPA’s analysis should be governed by several 
guiding principles: First, as EPA has previously recognized, inherent in the idea of “feasibility” is the 
notion that a standard or requirement will not result in widespread non-compliance, particularly for 
reasons outside of a PWS’s control.109  This means that even if a requirement might be “possible” for 
well-resourced systems under unique circumstances, EPA must regulate with an eye towards the nature 
of those entities it is regulating, taking into account that many are small, rural, public, or quasi-public, 
and that rate structures result in compliance costs being passed onto customers. 
Second, “feasibility” cannot be viewed in a vacuum: EPA must recognize that it has, or is in the process 
of finalizing a number of additional requirements that it will impose of these same systems during the 
same time period as this Proposed Rule.  When considering what is “feasible” for these systems, EPA 
must holistically consider the cumulative impacts of these rules in terms of their costs and resource 
demands so that it does not set these systems up for failure or create undue hardships for customers. 
Notably, while EPA has underestimated the burden ($3.0 – 4.8 billion annualized) associated with the 
LCRI, even by its own under-estimation, EPA has judged this rulemaking to be much more expensive 
than virtually all prior SDWA rulemakings. And EPA’s annualized cost reflects amortizing over 35 years 
the capital and operational costs that will accrue in communities across the U.S. in a brief 10-year 
period.  At the same time, EPA is proposing a costly MCL for several PFAS that will also require 
significant capital expenses for these same water systems. 
As explained throughout these comments, many aspects of the Proposed Rule are not feasible.  AWWA 
raises these issues in the hope that they will inform a final rule that can both further public health and 
stand on a firm legal footing.  In addition, the Proposed Rule goes beyond EPA’s statutory authority 
under the SDWA by attempting to regulate service lines and other facilities not within the control of 
PWSs. 
 
108 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(4)(D) (defining “feasible” to “mean[] feasible with the use of the best technology, 
treatment techniques and other means which the Administrator finds, after examination for efficacy under field 
conditions and not solely under laboratory conditions, are available (taking cost into consideration)”); see also 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI), 88 Fed. Reg. 84,878, 
84,901 (Dec. 6, 2023). When establishing a treatment technique in lieu of an MCL, the Agency must identify those 
treatment techniques “which, in the Administrator’s judgment, would prevent known or anticipated adverse 
effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible.” 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). Legislative history of the SDWA 
indicates that feasibility is relative to the resources of large public water systems: “[T]he Committee intends that 
the Administrator’s determination of what methods are generally (taking cost into account) is to be based on what 
may reasonably be afforded by large metropolitan or regional public water systems.” H.R. Rep. No. 93-1185, 
reprinted in 1974 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6454, 6470–71 (1974); see also S. Rep. No. 104–169, at 3 (1995) (feasibility is based 
on best available technology affordable to “large” systems). In the litigation over the original LCR, the D.C. Circuit 
found reasonable EPA’s interpretation of “feasible” to mean “capable of being accomplished in a manner 
consistent with the [Safe Drinking Water] Act.” AWWA v. EPA, 40 F.3d 1266, 1271–72 (D.C. Cir. 1994). “‘[F]easible’ 
must mean what EPA says it does: technically possible and affordable.” City of Portland, Or. v. EPA, 507 F.3d 706, 
712 (D.C. Cir. 2007). 
109 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,476 (EPA recognizing that if it set an MCL for lead, many water systems would be out of 
compliance and there is “no indication” in the SDWA or in its legislative history that “Congress envisioned 
establishment of MCLs that would result in widespread noncompliance among water systems because of 
contamination caused by conditions by their control.”).  

 
99 
Below is a more detailed and extended description of the legal and policy issues that AWWA has 
identified, focusing on points not specifically addressed in the earlier more technically based comments. 
We note that because the Agency is required to act in a lawful way that complies with the limits of the 
SDWA, the Paperwork Reduction Act, the APA, and must not be arbitrary or capricious (such as through 
inadequate or improper benefit - cost analysis) many of the comments raised throughout this letter also 
address potential legal infirmities in the Proposed Rule. What follows are additional specific points not 
addressed in detail elsewhere in this letter.     
4.2 
Legal Standard 
As EPA knows, courts will set aside agency action that is “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or 
otherwise not in accordance with law.”110 Agency action that violates its organic statute is not in 
accordance with law within the meaning of the APA,111 and to the extent the final LCRI goes beyond 
EPA’s authority under the SDWA, it therefore also violates the APA.  In addition, the APA requires EPA to 
engage in reasoned decision-making, including to “consider[] the relevant factors and articulate[] a 
rational connection between the facts found and choice made.”112  The LCRI will be set aside if the 
agency fails to provide a reasonable explanation for its decision, fails to consider an important part of 
the problem, or provides an explanation that runs counter to the evidence before it.113  “Conclusory 
explanations for matters involving a central factual dispute where there is considerable evidence in 
conflict do not suffice to meet the deferential standards” of arbitrary and capricious review 114 and 
“[m]erely referencing a [statutory] requirement is not the same as complying with that requirement. And 
stating that a factor was considered—or found—is not a substitute for considering or finding it.”115 In 
addition, the rule must be supported by substantial record evidence. EPA mut also ensure that its 
benefit - cost analysis for this rule complies with both the SDWA and APA’s requirements.116   
 
110 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A). 
111 See Nat. Res. Def. Council v. Regan, 67 F.4th 397, 411 (D.C. Cir. 2023) (Pan, J., concurring); Ethyl Corp. v. EPA, 
306 F.3d 1144, 1150 (D.C. Cir. 2002). 
112 City of Portland, 507 F.3d at 713 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); see also Env’t Def. Fund v. 
FERC, 2 F.4th 953, 967–68 (D.C. Cir. 2021) (“[T]he overarching question . . . is whether the [agency]’s decision 
making was reasoned, principled, and based upon the record.” (internal quotation marks and citation omitted) 
(alteration omitted)); id. at 968 (When the agency’s “explanation for a contested action is lacking or inadequate, it 
will not survive judicial review and the matter will be returned to [the agency] for appropriate action.”). 
113 See Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the U.S., Inc., v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983). 
114 Genuine Parts Co. v. EPA, 890 F.3d 304, 346 (D.C. Cir. 2018) (quoting Int’l Union, United Mine Workers v. Mine 
Safety & Health Admin., 626 F.3d 84, 94 (D.C. Cir. 2010)). 
115 Cigars Ass’n of Am. v. USDA, 964 F.3d 56, 62 (D.C. Cir. 2020) (quoting Gerber v. Norton, 294 F.3d 173, 185 (D.C. 
Cir. 2002)); see also Lindeen v. SEC, 825 F.3d 646, 657 (D.C. Cir. 2016) (observing that agency action is arbitrary and 
capricious if the agency fails to consider “a factor the agency must consider under its organic statute” (citation 
omitted)). 
116 Although an agency’s cost-benefit analysis is generally afforded some level of deference, “a serious flaw 
undermining that analysis can render the rule unreasonable.” Nat’l Ass’n of Home Builders v. EPA, 682 F.3d 1032, 
1040 (D.C. Cir. 2012); see also City of Portland, 507 F.3d at 713 (where SDWA permits or requires cost-benefit 
analyses, courts “will [not] tolerate rules based on arbitrary and capricious cost-benefit analyses”); Owner–
Operator Indep. Drivers Ass'n v. Fed. Motor Carrier Safety Admin., 494 F.3d 188, 206 (D.C. Cir. 2007) (vacating 
regulatory provisions because the cost-benefit analysis supporting them was based on an unexplained 
methodology). See also Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201, 1217–22 (5th Cir. 1991) (faulting agency’s 
cost-benefit analysis for failing to analyze “intermediate state[s] of regulation” and failing to account for risk-risk 
 

 
100 
4.3 
EPA Reasonably Determined Not to Set an MCL for Lead Because it Remains Infeasible 
to Do So. 
The SDWA operates by imposing either MCLs on a water system, or using a treatment-technique-based 
approach when the EPA finds “it is not economically or technologically feasible to ascertain the level of 
the [regulated] contaminant.”117 In such a case, the EPA identifies treatment techniques, that in its 
judgment, “would prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent 
feasible.”118 If EPA elects to use an MCL for a contaminant, it must set the MCL “as close to the 
maximum contaminant level goal as is feasible.”119  The maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG) is “the 
level at which no known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons occur and which allows 
an adequate margin of safety.”120  
Here, it is important to recognize that EPA is not writing on a blank slate, and both the agency and the 
public water systems have several decades of experience working through the challenges associated 
with reducing lead levels in drinking water. EPA introduced the first LCR in 1988 and in 1991, EPA set the 
MCLG for lead at zero solely based on the adverse health effects of lead without consideration of cost or 
technical feasibility.121  
Since 1991, water systems, states, and EPA have made tremendous progress in reducing lead exposure 
in drinking water and keeping communities and children safe through the use of a treatment technique-
based rule.  The number of large water systems that have exceeded the lead action level has dropped by 
over 90% and the median concentration of lead in children’s blood has dropped 95%.122  This progress 
demonstrates that use of a treatment technique to address lead in drinking water has been successful.  
AWWA appreciates and recognizes the need to do more to address these issues.  However, those who 
have advocated for an MCL, rather than a treatment technique, fail to understand the complexities of 
treating lead in drinking water, which is more effectively addressed through a treatment technique. 
 
trade-offs among alternative agency actions); Bus. Roundtable v. SEC, 647 F.3d 1144, 1149–54 (D.C. Cir. 2011) 
(faulting agency’s cost-benefit analysis for failing to “estimate and quantify” certain costs (or stating that such 
costs could not be estimated), relying on empirical studies that only provided “mixed” support, unduly discounting 
certain costs, and failing to consider the costs that the rule would be counterproductive to statutory costs). Cf. 
Michigan v. EPA, 576 U.S. 743, 752–53 (2015) (“Agencies have long treated cost as a centrally relevant factor when 
deciding whether to regulate. Consideration of cost reflects the understanding that reasonable regulation 
ordinarily requires paying attention to the advantages and the disadvantages of agency decisions.”).  The SDWA 
likewise directs EPA to analyze the costs and benefits of its proposals to set national primary drinking water 
regulations. See 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(3)(C)(ii). 
117 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
118 Id.   
119 Id. § 300g-1(b)(4)(B). 
120 Id. § 300g-1(b)(4)(A).   
121 See Maximum Contaminant Level Goals and National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper, 
Final Rule, 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460, 26,460 (June 7, 1991). Indeed, EPA typically sets the MCLG at zero for 
contaminants with carcinogenic effects and for microbial contaminants. ELENA H. HUMPHREYS, CONG. RES. SERV., 
REGULATING CONTAMINANTS UNDER THE SAFE DRINKING WATER ACT (SDWA) 13 (Jan. 5, 2022) (citing How EPA Regulates 
Drinking Water Contaminants, EPA, https://www.epa.gov/sdwa/how-epa-regulates-drinking-water-
contaminants#standards (last visited Sept. 26, 2022)). 
122 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, Proposed Rule, 84 Fed. 
Reg. 61,684 61,685 (Nov. 13, 2019); National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 
Final Rule, 86 Fed. Reg. 4,198, 4,199 (Jan. 15, 2021). 

 
101 
While MCL-advocates focus on the rate of lead service line removal, corrosion control provides the most 
immediate protection to the public and will continue to be necessary even after LSL have been fully 
removed.   
From the beginning, EPA recognized the inherent difficulties of regulating lead in drinking water, as did 
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit when it upheld a challenge to EPA’s first LCR.123  EPA has 
continued to recognize these issues in subsequent rulemakings, including for the LCRR and again in its 
proposed LCRI.  The agency is correct in identifying these challenges, which continue to make an MCL 
infeasible, and are briefly summarized below.  
First, lead contamination results primarily from corrosion of historic lines and plumbing materials 
through which treated water flows.124 While lead is no longer used when new lines are installed, many 
lead-containing lines and materials remain in place.  So unlike other contaminants, which can be treated 
at water facilities, lead contaminates drinking water post-treatment as it flows through service lines, 
private lines and fixtures before it reaches the consumer.125 Because corrosion from these historic 
materials is the primary contributor to lead in drinking water, techniques used by water systems to 
reduce water corrosivity and prevent the leaching of lead from premise plumbing and distribution 
system components have been the most effective way address lead exposure.126  
Second, and relatedly, lead was historically used in both service lines, some of which are owned and 
controlled by water systems, as well as in privately owned service lines and plumbing materials located 
on property outside of the control of those systems. Congress prohibited the further introduction of 
plumbing materials that are not “lead free” but it did not take the further step of requiring that historic 
lead-containing materials be removed; as a result, these materials continue to exist in certain older 
buildings.  While PWSs may have the ability to detect and measure lead in tap water for public-owned 
buildings and structures that they control such as water treatment plants, they do not have the 
authority to control lead in private, customer-owned structures.  Thus, it is not technically feasible to set 
an MCL for lead in PWSs.  
 
123 See AWWA v. EPA, 40 F.3d 1266 (D.C. Cir. 1994) See 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,471–73. 
124 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,897 (“Lead can enter drinking water when plumbing materials that contain lead corrode, 
especially where the water is highly acidic or has a low mineral content that corrodes pipes and fixtures. The most 
common sources of lead in drinking water are lead pipes, faucets, and fixtures.”); 86 Fed. Reg. at 4,199.  Corrosion 
is “the electrochemical interaction between a metal surface such as pipe wall or solder and water.” 84 Fed. Reg. at 
61,692.   
125 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,906 (“As EPA described in 1991, and is still accurate today, lead and copper do not 
generally occur in source water, but instead are introduced in drinking water by the corrosive action of water in 
contact with plumbing materials containing lead and copper.”); see also 84 Fed. Reg. at 61,702; 56 Fed. Reg. at 
26,473. 
126 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,910 (“Considering the above information and analysis, EPA is determining that the same 
conditions that prompted EPA to promulgate a treatment technique rule for lead and copper in 1991, still exist 
today and justify continued use of a treatment technique rule for regulating lead and copper. This includes the 
nature of lead contamination, where much of the lead in drinking water continues to originate in the distribution 
system and from sources outside the control of water systems, the condition of water systems’ plumbing and 
distribution system varying from system to system, and the variability of lead and copper levels at the tap.”); see 
also 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,476 (“Water systems can control the main contributor to dissolution of lead . . . plumbing 
materials – corrosivity of the water.”); id. at 26,477 (“The [EPA] believes that the treatment technique approach . . 
. will achieve the public health goals of the SDWA without the problems associated with establishing MCLs.”).  

 
102 
Third, even if EPA had the authority to require PWSs to determine or address the level of lead in private 
homes and other buildings, it is difficult and unpredictable to ascertain the level of lead in drinking 
water and comparing it to an MCL because lead levels vary significantly across locations, depend on 
private plumbing materials, and vary over time based on water use.  Lead levels in drinking water are 
highly variable and depend on several factors that affect water corrosivity such as the amount of lead in 
plumbing materials, temperature, age of plumbing components, chemical and physical characteristics of 
distributed water, and the length of time water is in contact with lead-bearing materials.127  
Additionally, source waters of systems vary in the degree of their corrosiveness and the extent to which 
that corrosivity can be reduced through pH/  alkalinity adjustment, or a corrosion inhibitor.128  
Developing an effective corrosion control treatment to account for these various conditions is therefore 
an inherently complex process for individual water systems.129  EPA correctly relied on updated studies 
in this Proposed Rule that demonstrate that these concerns that justified the original determination to 
use a treatment technique remain true.130  Notably, EPA has established a record that affirms that 
plumbing materials on private property continue to be a source of lead in drinking water and can be a 
source of particulate lead.131 
Recognizing these complexities, EPA correctly determined in the original LCR that “water systems should 
not be held directly responsible for plumbing materials within private home.”132 And EPA correctly 
reaffirmed this conclusion in the LCRR.133  
When the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit upheld EPA’s use of a treatment technique in a 
challenge to the first LCR., the Court explained:  
“Because lead generally enters drinking water from corrosion in pipes owned by customers 
of the water system, an MCL for lead would be neither; ascertaining the level of lead in 
water at the meter (i.e. where it enters the customer’s premises) would measure the public 
water system’s success in controlling the contaminant but not the quality of the public’s 
drinking water (because lead may still leach into the water from the customer’s plumbing), 
while ascertaining the level of lead in water at the tap would accurately reflect water quality 
but effectively hold the public water system responsible for lead leached from plumbing 
owned by its customers.”134 
The SDWA grants authority to EPA to promulgate a treatment technique for just such circumstances. 
Specifically, EPA may do so if it finds that it is not “economically or technologically feasible” to determine 
 
127 See 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,473. 
128 See id; 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,936–37; see also id. at 84,937 (noting external comments “about the uniqueness of 
each water system with respect to CCT and that CCT for each water system is different due to the water system’s 
specific mix of plumbing materials and operations.”). 
129 EPA correctly reaffirmed in the Proposed Rule that “New information available since the 1991 LCR continues to 
show that the variability of lead and copper levels make it infeasible to ascertain the level of the contaminant and 
does not meet the statutory standard for an MCL under SDWA.” See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,907. 
130 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,907-84,911.  
131 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,909. 
132 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,476. 
133 See 86 Fed. Reg. at 4,200 (“Water systems cannot unilaterally implement all of the actions that are needed to 
reduce levels of lead in drinking water.”). 
134 AWWA, 40 F.3d at 1271. 

 
103 
the level of lead in a public water system.135  The D.C. Circuit was clear over three decades ago that: 
“EPA is not required by the [SDWA] to set an MCL for lead at the tap,” because the EPA found it was not 
feasible to do so.136  Notably, EPA recognized that if it set an MCL for lead, many water systems would 
be out of compliance and there is “no indication” in the SDWA or in its legislative history that “Congress 
envisioned establishment of MCLs that would result in widespread noncompliance among water systems 
because of contamination caused by conditions by their control.”137 Thus, inherent in EPA’s assessment 
of “feasibility” is the important notion that a standard or requirement is not feasible if it would result in 
widespread noncompliance. It remains neither technically possible nor affordable to set an MCL for lead 
because PWSs lack the authority, capabilities, and financial resources to ascertain lead in privately 
owned lines and other plumbing materials. 
Additionally, as EPA recognized in 1991, setting an MCL at the tap for lead is inconsistent with the 
SDWA’s statutory structure. To set an MCL, EPA must not only determine that it is feasible to measure 
the contaminant in drinking water; it must also select a level that is as close to the MCLG as 
“feasible.”138 Given lead’s inherent variability across water systems, EPA concluded in 1991 that “there is 
no precise level at the tap that may generally be considered ‘feasible’ based upon application of the [best 
available technology] in all water systems across the country.”139 While lead levels are dramatically 
lower and more stable than they were in 1991, there is still a high variability relative to conservative 
performance criteria that EPA proposes to impose and much of that variability arises due to factors 
beyond the water system’s control.140  This variability also explains why an MCL is not only infeasible, 
but also inconsistent the SDWA’s objective of preventing “known or anticipated adverse effects on the 
health of persons to the extent feasible.”141  As EPA correctly explained in the 1991 rulemaking are 
reaffirmed in this Proposed Rule, the use of an MCL would lead to “unnecessarily high exposures of 
significant segments of the population” because systems below the MCL “would not be required to 
install any treatment to be in compliance” even when certain subsets of their customers had lead levels 
in their drinking water above the MCL.142 Simply put, an MCL does not offer the same flexibility for EPA 
to craft a rule that can address variability within a system. 
It is also worth noting that the SDWA has been amended since EPA’s 1991 rulemaking, including specific 
revisions related to the use of lead in plumbing products. While Congress redefined “lead free,” as it 
applies to lines and plumbing materials, Congress never mandated that EPA set an MCL at the tap, an 
those post-1991 amendments to the SDWA did not change the fundamental concern that setting an 
MCL for lead would increase exposure of other drinking water contaminants. In addition, while the 
SDWA amendments allow EPA to set a higher MCL than otherwise required if necessary to prevent a 
harmful increase in the concentration of other contaminants, this does not abrogate EPA’s duty to 
consider what is feasible nor what is within the control of public water systems, nor does it suggest in 
 
135 42 U.S.C. § 300f(1)(C)(ii). 
136 AWWA, 40 F.3d at 1268. 
137 Id. 
138 See 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(4)(B). 
139 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,473. 
140 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,907–09; id. at 84,909–10 (“As described above, the variability of lead and copper levels 
make it ‘technologically infeasible to ascertain whether the lead or copper level at a tap at a single point in time 
represents effective application of the best available treatment technology.’” (quoting 53 Fed. Reg. at 31,527)). 
141 See 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A)); 88 Fed. Reg. 84,907. 
142 See 88 Fed. Reg. 84,907 (citing 56 Fed. Reg. 26,477). 

 
104 
any way that EPA must restructure the treatment technique approach that has been successful since 
1991. Notably, the SDWA amendments did not remove EPA’s discretion to make a reasonable choice 
between MCLs and treatment techniques. Nothing in the statute or its legislative history show that 
subsequent amendments changed EPA’s discretion and approach to regulating PWSs.  
In sum, nothing in the record supports undermining the discretion Congress gave EPA and revisiting the 
treatment technique approach EPA chose for lead over three decades ago.  As such, it would have been 
arbitrary and capricious for EPA to change its position after so many decades without adequate support 
in the record to justify this change.143  EPA has provided a reasoned explanation based on updated 
studies and data that fully support its decision to continue to follow this approach  AWWA therefore 
supports EPA’s continued approach to use a treatment technique to address lead through the LCRI.  
4.4 
A Treatment Technique-Based Rule Remains the Most Sound Approach for Regulating 
Lead in Drinking Water and EPA is Within its Discretion to Continue to Use This 
Approach.  
EPA’s decision to continue to use a treatment technique-based rule is not only within the Agency’s 
discretion but is also a proven and reasonable approach that has successfully reduced lead in drinking 
water and effectively accounts for the inherent complexities of lead contamination.  Unlike an MCL, 
which mandates a level but does not allow EPA to select specific compliance methods, the use of a 
treatment technique for lead allows EPA to craft a rule that includes optimizing corrosion control, public 
education, water quality parameter monitoring, source water treatment, and LSL replacement. This is 
particularly important for an issue like lead, where presence in private plumbing materials or other 
factors can result in variability between specific buildings. As previously noted in these comments, a 
MCL-based rule would mean that a water system could achieve compliance with the standard even 
when certain subsets of the customer base exceeded the MCL.  While no regulatory approach is ever 
perfect, by instead using a treatment technique approach, EPA can provide a variety of risk reduction 
strategies that more holistically address this complex issue. 
Corrosion remains the primary pathway for lead entering drinking water, and it occurs when treated 
water reacts with lead-containing plumbing materials and lead is released from plumbing materials and 
into the water system.  To control corrosion, water systems can adjust the treated water’s corrosivity to 
mitigate its potential to leach lead from plumbing materials.  As such, corrosion control remains one of 
the most cost-effective and efficient methods for public water systems to address the complex problem 
of lead exposure in drinking water.  However, corrosion control is complex and effective treatment 
depends on many factors such as source water quality, composition of distribution system and 
plumbing, water pH, water alkalinity, temperature, water use patterns, and the presence or absence of 
protective scales inside pipes. While corrosion control has its own limitations, the LCRI effectively 
accounts for these variables by providing water systems with the flexibility to consider which corrosion 
control treatment methods are most effective for particular locations and particular water systems. A 
treatment technique-based rule that includes corrosion control treatment has demonstrated success in 
reducing lead exposure as the number of large water systems that has exceeded the lead action level 
 
143 See FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc., 556 U.S. 502, 515 (2009) (agencies must show “that there are good 
reasons for [a] new policy”). 

 
105 
has dropped by over 90% and the median concentration of lead in children’s blood has dropped by 95%. 
AWWA has provided supporting materials as appendices to this comment letter.144  
4.5 
A more stringent regulatory regime or implementing LCRR until LCRI goes into effect 
would not be feasible.   
AWWA supports EPA’s proposal for public water systems to continue to comply with the LCR 
requirements, other than specific LCRR provisions for preparation of an inventory, customer notification 
of service line materials, and public notification, until the LCRI compliance date.145 Given the myriad of 
specific differences between the LCRR and LCRI requirements, and the aggressive timeline for LSL and 
GRRSL removal under the LCRI, it would not only be a tremendous waste of resources for systems to 
implement the LCRR, but would also be infeasible for systems to do so and be prepared to comply with 
LCRI.  As explained further below, EPA has wisely chosen to focus the limited resources of PWSs and the 
states on preparing to implement the LCRI.  Indeed, doing otherwise would have been arbitrary and 
capricious.  As EPA has correctly recognized, preparing for and implementing the LCRR will not cause 
water systems or states to be further prepared for the LCRI but will instead detract and distract from 
their ability to do so.  
EPA must recognize the monumental difference in regulatory requirements now being proposed for 
water systems through the LCRI, and in order to make this transition possible, EPA must provide a 
further delay of the compliance dates in the LCRR (beyond those still required by the LCRI) before 
finalizing the LCRI. As detailed further below, this will save water systems from the impending need to 
devote resources to preparing to comply with a rule that EPA has already declare it intends to replace. 
LCRR compliance should not become a distraction to systems and states as they attempt to prepare for 
the LCRI. A one-year delay in LCRR compliance would likely provide sufficient time for EPA to finalize the 
proposed LCRI. With a final LCRI, water systems would clearly understand how LCRI impacts LCRR 
provisions, and they could make the proper investments to comply with the rule. In doing so, EPA would 
be following the same approach that it has recently taken for lead and copper rulemakings. In 2021, EPA 
adjusted the effective date of the LCRR twice in order for the agency to review the rule requirements. In 
the second of those adjustments, the agency made a reasoned decision to delay the rule compliance 
dates. Now is the time for EPA to take a similar action. 146 
Requiring compliance with the LCRR prior to the LCRI’s compliance date would be both infeasible and bad 
policy. -- PWSs, many of whom are small, public, or quasi-public entities, have limited resources and 
ability to rapidly respond to changes in regulatory requirements. Due to the public or quasi-public 
nature of many PWSs, they often need time in advance of new requirements to submit budget 
 
144 See  Brown et al, 2013, Strategies for assessing optimized corrosion control treatment of lead and copper, 
Journal AWWA:105:5, figure 1, https://doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2013.105.0066, (see Appendix G); see also EPA, 
"Analysis of Impacts of Corrosion Control Treatment on Lead and Copper Levels over Time" March 2014" Multiple 
figures, (see Appendix H). 
145 See Proposed § 141.80(4)(i) (“community water systems and nontransient non-community water systems must 
comply with 40 CFR 141.80 through 141.91, as codified on July 1, 2020, except systems must also comply with 40 
CFR 141.84(a)(1) through 141.84(a)(10) (excluding §§ 141.84(a)(7)); 141.85(e); 141.90(e)(1) and 141.90(e)(13); 
141.201(c)(3); 141.202(a)(10); and 141.31(d), as codified on July 1, 2023.”).  
146 See National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 86 Fed. Reg. 14,003 (Mar. 
12, 2021); Delay of Effective Date National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions; 
Delay of Effective and Compliance Dates, 86 Fed. Reg. 31,939 (June 16, 2021). 

 
106 
proposals to the bodies that approve their budgets. Even investor-owned PWSs will have to plan their 
budgets, accounting for other EPA regulations being simultaneously introduced and consider how to 
adjust water rates so that they do not rise at too rapid a pace for their customers. Given these budgeting 
and operational constraints, responding to EPA regulations, and providing safe, affordable, and reliable 
drinking water is often a zero-sum game. Every marginal dollar and staff hour spent complying with any 
given set of regulatory requirements must be shifted away from controlling other contaminants or 
implementing necessary operational maintenance or improvements. While EPA may compare costs and 
benefits for the nation as a whole, individual water systems that incur compliance costs must pass those 
costs directly to that system’s local customer base.  Those costs can result in higher rates (i.e., 
household water bills) with no corresponding benefit in water quality or public health. Such costs can be 
particularly difficult for small systems that serve a limited number of customers.  
Congress recognized, and addressed, this very concern when enacting and amending the SDWA.147 
Indeed, the SDWA defaults to a the compliance date three years after the publication of the rule, so that 
these systems and the states with primacy have the time necessary to make changes to their operations 
and prepare budgets for the new requirements.148 This unique aspect of the SDWA stands in contrast to 
most statutory schemes, where Congress has allowed agencies flexibility to determine appropriate 
compliance dates, and generally takes no position on whether a rule goes into effect within days or 
weeks of a rule’s promulgation. It demonstrates Congress’s recognition of the unique challenges posed 
to water systems in implementing national drinking water regulations and the Congressional intent to 
provide those systems with appropriate time to implement new requirements. The statute only allows 
for a shorter timeline before compliance when “the Administrator determines that an earlier date is 
practicable.”149  Notably, the Administrator has not made any such determination for this or any 
previous iteration of the lead and copper rule—nor could he, as the costs and complexity of these 
treatment technique rules would make it not only not practicable but impossible for water systems to 
begin to comply with a shorter lead time.  Because no record can be made to support a shorter period 
EPA must, at a minimum, retain the three years between the LCRI’s promulgation and effective date. 
This same default presumption of three years to prepare for compliance is also what makes EPA’s 
decision to largely transition from the LCR to the LCRI so critical: the LCRR and it’s now almost certain to 
be replaced provisions is set to go int effect on October 16, 2024.  EPA has wisely recognized that water 
systems will need the SDWA’s default of three years from final publication in order to prepare for the 
implementation of the final LCRI, and has therefore proposed a compliance date three years from the 
finalized LCRI’s publication.150  Indeed, AWWA would argue that three years is insufficient time given all 
of the requirements in the Proposed Rule, and less time would certainly be infeasible and therefore 
urges EPA to use the authority Congress provided it for just such circumstances by granting a nationwide 
 
147 See H.R. Rep. No. 104-632, at 9 (1996) (customers “are not willing to pay for complying with drinking water 
rules that provide only marginal increases in health protection at significant costs” (citation omitted)); See also H.R. 
Rep. No. 115-380 at 12 (“Most community water systems (82 percent of all CWSs) are relatively small, serving 
3,300 people or fewer; but these systems provide water to just 9 percent of the total population served by 
community water systems. In contrast, 8 percent of all CWSs serve 82 percent of the population served.”). 
148 See 42 U.S.C. § 300g1(b)(10). 
149 Id. 
150 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,897. 

 
107 
two-year extension to this deadline because of the capital improvements (in the form of LSL removal) 
required by the Proposed Rule.151 
Likewise, states with primacy have limited resources and budgets which will be better directed at 
preparing for and implementing LCRI than attempting to comply with interim requirements during a 
three-year transitional period between LCRR and LCRI. AWWA therefore agrees with EPA that  
“[a]llowing water systems to transition from compliance with the LCR to compliance with the 
LCRI, while requiring systems to prepare the initial LCRR inventory, customer notification of 
service line materials, and public notification requirements in the interim, would result in more 
resources being focused on service line characterization and subsequent full service line 
replacements and thus, broader and faster health risk reduction than if adequate planning for 
LCRI compliance did not take place because of the diversion of scarce system and State 
resources towards short-term implementation of the LCRR.”152  
This is a sound and reasonable approach that recognizes the realities of the challenges that states and 
public water systems face in addressing this complex and costly problem.  
EPA has also correctly recognized a number of places where the LCRR misdirected the limited resources 
of states and public water systems and AWWA applauds EPA’s revisions which are designed to remove 
requirements that would detract from focusing those resources on best addressing ways to remove lead 
from drinking water, including:  
1. Revising OCCT requirements because “resources would be better devoted to other 
mitigation activities rather than repeating the same steps, as well as the proposed LCRI 
would require those systems that continue to exceed the action level to conduct 
additional public education …”153  
2. Recognizing that “a requirement for the water system to document the material 
composition of each fitting and all solder in the service line would not be practicable and 
would divert resources from replacing LSLs and GRR service lines as quickly as feasible as 
well as likely result in the unnecessary replacement of lead free fittings and solder where 
documentation of their material is unable to be obtained.”154  
3. Explaining that “[e]xcavation efforts to search for lead connectors would draw funding 
and staffing resources from the identification and replacement of LSLs and GRR service 
lines, likely delaying elimination of these service lines in the system as quickly as 
feasible.”155  
4. Removing pipe loop study requirements because it “would allow water systems to 
dedicate more staffing and financial resources to replacing lead and GRR service lines 
within five years rather than focusing on a pipe loop study with results that may no 
 
151 42 U.S.C. § 300g–1(b)(10) (EPA “Administrator, or a State (in the case of an individual system), may allow up to 2 
additional years to comply with a maximum contaminant level or treatment technique if the Administrator or State 
(in the case of an individual system) determines that additional time is necessary for capital improvements”). 
152 88 Fed Reg at 84,903.  
153 88 Fed Reg at 84,902.   
154 88 Fed Reg 84,917.  
155 88 Fed Reg 84,936. 

 
108 
longer be applicable following 100 percent replacement of lead and GRR service 
lines.”156  
5. Removing the requirement to develop a LSL replacement plan based on the (different) 
requirements for triggered replacement under the LCRR, when the LCRI introduces a 
faster rate and mandatory schedule, meaning that the LCRR-based plan would likely be 
unused and obsolete by the time LCRI is in effects. 
In sum, EPA has also correctly recognized why requiring compliance with the LCRR prior to the 
compliance date for the LCRI is both infeasible and counterproductive. EPA should continue to take this 
approach in the final LCRI, as it is both reasonable and helps to ensure that the resulting requirements in 
the LCRI are feasible.  
EPA must undertake a separate rulemaking immediately to extend the compliance dates for the LCRR in 
light of the Proposed Rule. -- In addition to removing the majority of the LCRR-based requirements 
during the period between the finalization of the LCRI and its compliance date, it is critical that EPA 
undertakes a separate rulemaking in the interim (i.e., before the LCRI is finalized) to extend the 
compliance dates for the LCRR. This action is necessary to avoid the very situation that EPA’s proposed 
transition directly from the LCR to the LCRI is deigned to avoid: namely, water systems currently 
expending (and wasting) resources on preparing for compliance with the LCRR because there is no 
assurance that the LCRI will be finalized as proposed, and no assurance that it will be finalized before the 
October 16, 2024 effective date for the LCRR.  This is a small, but absolute necessary change, and AWWA 
would proposed the following revision to ensure that the LCRR does not go into effect prior to the 
finalization of the LCRI:  
“Between October 16, 2024 and October 16, 2025, community water systems and nontransient 
non-community water systems must comply with 40 CFR 141.80 through 141.91, as codified on 
July 1, 2020, except systems must also comply with 40 CFR 141.84(a)(1) through 141.84(a)(10) 
(excluding §§ 141.84(a)(7)); 141.85(e); 141.90(e)(1) and 141.90(e)(13); 141.201(c)(3); 
141.202(a)(10); and 141.31(d), as codified on July 1, 2023.” 
As noted above, in proposing the LCRI, EPA correctly recognized the challenge PWSs will face 
transitioning from meeting the current LCRR compliance deadlines and obligations and to 
simultaneously prepare to comply with new obligations under the LCRI, which differ in many critical 
respects from the LCRR. AWWA appreciates the agency’s recognition that simultaneously complying 
with the LCRR and preparing for the LCRI is not feasible or productive for public health. However, water 
systems are now in a difficult position where they must immediately expend resources to ensure they 
are prepared to comply with LCRR requirements by October 16, 2024, while they await the LCRI 
promulgation.  Those deadlines are not limited to preparing lead service line inventories and meeting 
Tier 1 public notification requirements following lead exceedances. Instead, systems must continue to 
prepare lead service line replacement plans, revisit monitoring plans, prepare to initiate monitoring 
campaigns at child-care facilities and schools, and align operating practices to support customer / 
resident notification requirements.   
Because of the nature of the rulemaking process, water systems also cannot assume that the LCRI will 
be finalized as proposed, or that EPA will not alter the provisions within LCRR which they are required to 
 
156 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,938. 

 
109 
comply before the LCRI’s effective date. In order to avoid the untenable position of risking 
noncompliance and an enforcement action based on an existing regulation, these systems are currently 
having to make the requisite investments now to assure reliable compliance by October 2024, even as 
EPA proposes to modify compliance timelines.  A parallel concern is the burden the current situations 
places on state primacy agencies, which must simultaneously guide and prepare to process water 
system LCRR submittal while also preparing for implementation under the LCRI. 
EPA also cannot assure that the current rulemaking process will be complete prior to the impending 
LCRR compliance deadline, a deadline that occurs within eight months of the close of the LCRI comment 
period.  With recent agency rulemakings as a guide, only five months will be available for EPA to compile 
and consider comments prior to interagency review.  Moreover, interagency review may take longer 
than three months.  Most importantly, EPA as a matter of practice does not provide water systems any 
assurance that compliance deadlines will be changed until the LCRI is actually published in the Federal 
Register.  Water systems will be forced to work toward current requirements, expending resources in an 
inefficient manner unless EPA immediately undertakes this small separate rulemaking.  Based on EPA’s 
own statements in the Proposed Rule, failing to extend the compliance dates would result in an 
outcome that is infeasible, arbitrary, and just plain bad policy.  
In order to avoid these unnecessary and unintended consequences, AWWA proposed that EPA simply 
do what it has already proposed to do (i.e., remove many of the unnecessary and counterproductive 
LCRR requirements), but to do so through a small separate rulemaking that will provide water systems 
and primacy states with the clarity that they need in order to avoid wasting resources during the next 
eight months.  A one-year delay in LCRR compliance would likely provide sufficient time for EPA to 
finalize the proposed LCRI and to give water systems more clarity about what they need to do in the 
interim as they await the provisions of the final LCRI.  This would be in keeping with the same approach 
that EPA has recently taken for previous lead and copper rulemakings.  For example, in 2021, EPA 
adjusted the effective date of the LCRR twice in order for the agency to review the rule requirements.  In 
the second of those adjustments, the agency made a reasoned decision to delay the rule compliance 
dates.157  Now is the time for EPA to take a similar action to avoid unnecessary costs to customers and 
distractions for water systems and primacy states as they prepare for the final LCRI. 
The proposal to remove all LSLs and GRRSL within 10 years is not feasible and raises environmental 
justice concerns. -- While some may advocate for a faster LSL and GRRSL removal schedule, it is simply 
not feasible to mandate complete lead service line replacement on a faster timeline than proposed 
under the LCRI.  Indeed, as AWWA has repeatedly noted throughout these comments, many, if not all 
systems will be hard-pressed to meet the deadlines set by EPA in the proposed LCRI, especially in light of 
all the additional requirements layered on top of the deadlines.  As noted elsewhere in these comments, 
most of the success stories cited by EPA as examples of water systems able to complete LSL in less than 
10 years were extraordinary circumstances rather than typical scenarios that are indicative of what is 
feasible for the typical system.  EPA’s examples involve unique situations where there was a public 
health crisis, and substantial external funding and technical resources (including from EPA) were 
introduced to address the problem.  By contrast, the removal requirements in the proposed LCRI leaves 
 
157 See National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 86 Fed. Reg. 14,003 (Mar. 
12, 2021); Delay of Effective Date National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions; 
Delay of Effective and Compliance Dates, 86 Fed. Reg. 31,939 (June 16, 2021). 

 
110 
systems to attempt on their own to secure funding and expertise, and all systems will complete with 
each other for these same limited resources as all systems nationwide will simultaneously be attempting 
to comply with the mandated timelines.  As noted elsewhere in these comments, EPA has 
(under)estimated the burden ($3.0 – 4.8 billion annualized) associated with the LCRI, making it more 
expensive than virtually all prior SDWA rulemakings.  EPA’s annualized cost reflects amortizing over 35 
years the capital and operational costs that will actually accrue in communities over a 10-year period 
based on the proposed implementation timeline.  
And even if EPA were to determine that the 10-year timeline, and the LCRI more generally, is feasible for 
a subset of large, municipal and regional water systems, it would be arbitrary and capricious to finalize a 
regulatory regime where the agency’s record demonstrates that the requirements cannot be met by a 
high percent of regulated entities due to limitations in their resources, their size, and the age of their 
infrastructure (and therefore number of lead service lines in their systems). 
Requiring public water systems to go replace service lines more rapidly risks also disproportionate harm 
to environmental justice communities.  When amending the SDWA in 1996, Congress acknowledged the 
burdens that regulations place on water systems, the states, and ultimately consumers.  This is because 
costs of SDWA compliance are ultimately passed on to ratepayers.  Because low-income and 
overburdened households pay a larger percentage of their income on water and other utilities, this 
means that increases in rates from regulatory requirements can also disproportionately impact 
environmental justice communities.158  And as noted previously in these comments, grants and other 
forms of funding are not as readily available to address this fiscal concern as the Proposed Rule’s 
preamble suggests.   
AWWA is therefore concerned about, and notes, the inequities borne by racially and economically 
disadvantaged communities and the increased risks of lead exposure that these communities already 
face. Setting an even more infeasible regulatory requirement would only increase the financial and 
social stress caused by this Proposed Rule in these fragile communities for which neither Congress nor 
EPA has provided an adequate financial safety net.  Not only are water systems serving disadvantaged 
communities at increased risk under a more rapid replacement program schedule, disadvantaged 
households and businesses within robust communities would also be adversely impacted.  Where 
communities must act quickly to comply with a federal mandate, the community will be forced to pass 
on the cost of the more accelerated pace to households, including low-income households.  And, like 
EPA and state government, when the timeline for action becomes overwhelming, administrative 
flexibility decreases.  The same would be true of accelerated replacement programs – disadvantaged 
households, being of limited means, would bear the greatest burden from a loss of program flexibility.  
AWWA requests that EPA take these concerns into account, in accordance with the presidential 
directives on environmental justice.159 
 
158Diego S. Cardoso and Casey J. Wichman, Water Affordability in the United States (2022), available at 
https://mleead.umich.edu/files/Event_LegislativeForum_2023/Water%20Affordability/Research%20Articles/Wate
r%20Affordability%20in%20the%20United%20States.pdf (“This analysis reveals that the vast majority of 
households facing unaffordable water service are concentrated in the lowest income deciles.”). 
159 See, e.g., Executive Order on Revitalizing Our Nation’s Commitment to Environmental Justice for All (April 21, 
2023).  

 
111 
4.6 
EPA Reasonably Interpreted the SDWA’s Anti-Backsliding Provision in Light of the 
Treatment Technique Approach  
EPA must periodically review and revise drinking water standards to ensure protection of public health, 
and each revision shall maintain or provide for greater protection of public health. 160  Through the 
proposed LCRI, EPA has more than fulfilled its statutory obligation to ensure that it is maintaining or 
providing greater protection from lead in drinking water.  AWWA believes that the proper baseline for 
comparison is the LCR, but even if it were not, AWWA agrees with the Agency that the LCRI provides 
meaningful additional requirements to lower lead levels in drinking water.  Because the protections in 
the LCRI are so extensive, this remains true even without requiring interim compliance with the LCRR 
requirements.  EPA is therefore correct that the “proposed LCRI would improve public health protection 
more than either the LCR or LCRR in accordance with section 1412(b)(9) of SDWA.”161 
First, as EPA correctly notes,  
“[a]llowing water systems to transition from compliance with the LCR to compliance with the 
LCRI, while requiring systems to comply with the LCRR inventory requirements in the interim, 
would result in more full service line replacements and thus, broader and faster health risk 
reduction than if adequate planning for LCRI compliance did not take place because of the 
diversion of scarce system and State resources towards short-term implementation of the 
LCRR.”162  
Second, in the LCRI, 
“EPA is proposing to remove the lead trigger level and reduce the lead action level to 0.010 
mg/L, which would require more water systems to take public notification and public 
education actions than under the LCR and LCRR. This change is intended to provide greater 
health protection at all systems subject to the rule including those without LSLs or GRR service 
lines as a result of the actions required of a system after an action level exceedance.”163  
Congress did not speak precisely on the question of whether the anti-backsliding provision applies to 
each change in a national drinking water regulation,164 as Congress did not define a “revision” and 
therefore, the anti-backsliding provision is ambiguous as to whether to applies to the entire regulation 
or each individual revision.  When the statute is silent or ambiguous, as it is on this question, then the 
court must uphold the agency’s interpretation of the statute if it is reasonable.  This review is a 
deferential one as courts may not substitute their judgments for that of the agencies.165  It was 
reasonable for EPA to interpret the anti-backsliding provision with reference to the entire LCRI instead 
of individual benchmarks in this case because a treatment technique rule promulgates an integrated set 
of procedures rather than a single, enforceable compliance level.  Notably, EPA has previously 
determined that it could move from an MCL-based rule to a treatment technique-based rule without 
 
160 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(9). 
161 88 Fed Reg 84,902.  
162 88 Fed Reg 84,903.  
163 88 Fed Reg 84,902. 
164 See 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(9). 
165 Department of Commerce v. New York, 139 S. Ct. 2551, 2561 (2019). 

 
112 
running afoul of the SDWA’s anti-backsliding provisions. 166  Specifically, in the Revisions to the Total 
Coliform Rule, EPA determined that after more than 20 years of using an MCL-based rule, it could (and 
did) create a treatment technique rule that was more stringent with regard to protecting public 
health.167  In that rulemaking as here, EPA appropriately considered the evolving nature of the public 
health problem and new data available after many years of regulation to help inform its decision on how 
to best protect public health going forward.168 
The SDWA does not require EPA to compare individual provisions in a treatment technique rule in order 
to comply with the anti-backsliding provision. Rather the revised rule requirements, as a whole, must 
result in a more protective rule.  EPA has done so here.  EPA’s approach is also in keeping with the D.C. 
Circuit’s decision in American Water Works Ass’n v. EPA because it takes into account “the purpose of 
the Act to promote safe drinking water generally.”169  Demanding that the EPA perform a backsliding 
analysis on every individual revision, such as lead service line replacement, is inconsistent with the 
nature carefully crafted holistic regulations and is not possible with respect to a complex treatment-
technique based rulemaking. 170  
Even if the SDWA’s anti-backsliding provision to apply to each revision of a treatment-technique based 
rule, the LCRI’s LSL replacement revisions maintain or provide for greater protection of public health 
because the LCRI initiates more LSL replacements on a faster timeline than the LCRR.  For example, the 
LCRI requires more systems to engage in LSL and GRRSL replacement than the LCRR by requiring all 
CWSs to remove these lines and explicitly removing the small system flexibility provision of the LCRR 
with respect to service line replacement. In addition, the proposed LCRI anticipates virtual all CWSs to 
complete required service line replacements within 10 years, which is substantially sooner than the 
more than 30 year replacement schedule anticipated for triggered replacement in the LCRR, and will 
result in lines being replaced at a faster rate (even taking into account the period before compliance is 
required) than under the LCRR. 
These changes in the requirements and definitions will also have the net effect of more LSL and GRRSL 
replacement and more rapid replacement.  As previously explained, the LCRI requires all systems to 
complete service line material characterization in 10 years, and has the practical effect of requiring 
characterization sooner than 10 years in order to meet other rule requirements.  The LCRI require a 
validation study to assure that service line characterization practice was sufficiently robust to distinguish 
LSLs and GRRSLs from non-lead service lines.  This validation will occur within seven years so that 
necessary corrections and subsequent replacements can be completed in 10 years. 
 
166 See EPA, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Revisions to the Total Coliform Rule, 78 Fed. Reg. 10,270 
(Feb. 13, 2013).  
167 Id. at 10,309.  
168 Id. at 10,278.  
169 40 F.3d at 1271. 
170 A treatment technique rule is not analogous to an MCL or to other statutory schemes that involve a specific 
regulatory level. This difference is made clearer in NRDC v. EPA, which explained that the CAA puts states “onto a 
one-way street whose only outlet is attainment of the NAAQS 643 F.3d 311, 322 (D.C. Cir. 2011) (emphasis added). 
The same cannot be said for states and water systems in the SDWA when it comes to lead because states and 
water systems do not need to achieve a single standard of lead in drinking water in order to comply with the Act. 
Their other outlet, in this case, is complying with a treatment technique.  

 
113 
Likewise, the revised flexibility afforded to small water systems does not violate the anti-backsliding 
provision of the SDWA because the LCRI no longer allows small systems to either replace LSLs and 
GRRSLs or implement corrosion control (or install and maintain point-of-use filters).  
4.7 
The SDWA does not allow regulation of private property outside of public water 
systems and “control” cannot be equated with “access.” 
EPA’s proposed definition is not supported by the statutory text. --The SDWA regulates public water 
systems,171 but does not provide EPA with any authority to regulate other entities, such as businesses, 
landlords, or private residences.  Similarly, it does not give EPA authority over private property or other 
persons, and therefore cannot be used to compel removal of lead in private lines or plumbing fixtures 
that are private property.  By requiring PWSs to inventory and conduct LSR replacements on property 
that is not part of the PWS, the LCRI exceeds the scope of EPA’s authority under the SDWA and is 
therefore contrary to law.172 
Based on the statutory text, it is clear that the definition of “public water systems” does not include 
portions of the drinking systems under which operators have no “control,” including over private lines 
and lead in plumbing fixtures in private homes and businesses.  Indeed, the Supreme Court has clarified 
that agencies cannot require regulated entities to go beyond their proverbial fencelines to comply with 
 
171 The SDWA defines a public water system as a “system for the provision to the public of water for human 
consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances, if such system has at least fifteen service 
connections or regularly services at least twenty-five individuals.” 42 U.S.C. § 300f(4).  
172 See Proposed § 141.84(a) (“All water systems must develop a service line inventory that identifies the material 
and location of each service line connected to the public water distribution system. The inventory must include all 
service lines connected to the public water distribution system regardless of ownership status (e.g., where service 
line ownership is shared, the inventory includes both the portion of the service line owned by the water system 
and the portion of the service line owned by the customer).”); Proposed § 141.84(a)(2) (“All water systems must 
develop an updated initial inventory, known as the ‘baseline inventory’. . . .  The baseline inventory must include 
each service line and connector that is connected to the public water distribution system regardless of ownership 
status (e.g., where service line ownership is shared, the inventory includes both the portion of the service line 
owned by the water system and the portion of the service line owned by the customer).”); Proposed § 141.90(d) 
(“Mandatory full service line replacement. (1) All water systems must replace all lead and galvanized requiring 
replacement service lines under the control of the water system unless the replacement would leave in place a 
partial lead service line. (2) Where a water system has access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full 
service line replacement, the service line is under its control, and the water system must replace the service line. 
Where a water system does not have access to conduct full service line replacement, the water system is not 
required by this rule to replace the line, but the water system must document the reasons that the water system 
does not have access and include any specific laws, regulations, and/or water tariff agreements that affect the 
water system’s ability to gain access to conduct full lead and galvanized requiring replacement service line 
replacement identified pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)(viii) of this section. The water system must provide this 
documentation to the State pursuant to § 141.90(e)(10)”); Proposed § 141.90(i) (“This rule does not establish the 
criteria for determining whether a system has access to conduct full service line replacement. Any State or local 
laws or water tariff agreement requirements to gain access to conduct full service line replacement must be 
identified in the service line replacement plan as described in paragraph (c) of this section and in the notification 
provided to persons served by lead, galvanized requiring replacement, and unknown service lines as described in § 
141.85(e).”).  

 
114 
federal law when the underlying statute omits such authority.173  The definition of “public water 
systems” in the SDWA limits systems’ responsibility to portions of the distribution system under control 
of the system as the Act defines PWSs to include “(i) any collection, treatment, storage, and distribution 
facilities under control of the operator of such system and used primary in connection with such system, 
and (ii) any collection of pretreatment storage facilities not under such control which are used primarily 
in connection with such system.”174  By drawing this distinction between facilities under a PWS’s control, 
and those which are not, Congress clearly recognized that there are facilities, lines, and other matters 
that are in some sense connected to drinking water distribution but that nonetheless were not intended 
to be regulated as part of the PWS.  By contrast, there are certain state definitions of a “public water 
system” that do not contain this same limitation (i.e., only what is under the system’s control) when 
defining the PWS, demonstrating that this was a clear legislative decision on the part of Congress in 
drafting the SDWA.175 
Here, EPA proposes to replace the statutory limit (“control”) with its own preferred term (“access”): 
“Where a water system has access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full service line 
replacement, the service line is under its control, and the water system must replace the service line.”176 
But as noted above, Congress clearly addresses this issue by delineating between parts of a system 
under a system’s control and those which are not, and did not offer a third option for other parts of the 
system that a PWS may access.  “Agencies have only those powers given to them by Congress, and 
enabling legislation is generally not an open book to which the agency may add pages and change the 
plot line.” 177 Indeed, “an agency literally has no power to act . . . unless and until Congress confers power 
upon it.”178  As a result, EPA cannot alter the definition of a PWS, even if it believes doing so would 
better meet its policy goals.  
EPA’s proposed definition is not supported by the structure or legislative history of the SDWA. -- The 
structure and legislative history of the SDWA confirm that Congress intended to limited regulatory 
authority to PWSs, not other persons or property.  As EPA recognized before, “Congress does not appear 
to have anticipated the problem encountered with corrosion by-products,” and under such 
circumstances “the consequences of setting MCLs for lead and copper at the tap run counter to the 
purposes and structure of the [SDWA].”179  Post-1991 amendments to the SDWA confirm that Congress 
takes a different approach to handling lead in drinking water from private dwellings by expanding bans 
 
173 See West Virginia v. EPA, 142 S. Ct. 2587 (2022). 
174 42 U.S.C. § 300f (emphasis added).  
175 See, e.g., Mo. Stat. § 640.102(6) (“[A] system for the provision to the public of water for human consumption 
through pipes or other constructed conveyances, if such system has at least fifteen service connections or regularly 
serves an average of at least twenty-five individuals daily at least sixty days per calendar year. Such system 
includes any collection, treatment, storage or distribution facilities used in connection with such system.”). But I 
have yet to find a case interpreting the omission as meaningful. 
176 Proposed § 141.90(d)(2).  
177 West Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2609 (internal quotation marks omitted).   
178 Louisiana Pub. Serv. Comm’n v. FCC, 476 U.S. 355, 374 (1986); see also Michigan v. EPA, 268 F.3d 1075, 1081 
(D.C. Cir. 2001).  
179 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,476. 

 
115 
on lead faucets and on the sale of leaded solder and flux. 180 Notably, the provisions of the SDWA 
providing EPA authority to promulgate this rule only apply to PWSs.181  
By contrast, Congress has mandated that other lead-specific requirement apply not just to PWSs, but to 
all persons and all residential and nonresidential facilities.  Specifically, Congress dictated that “No 
person may use any pipe, any pipe or plumbing fitting or fixture, any solder, or any flux, after June 19, 
1986, in the installation or repair of- (i) any public water system; or (ii) any plumbing in a residential or 
nonresidential facility providing water for human consumption, that is not lead free.”182  When 
introducing these provisions, Congress did not amend the statutory provisions providing EPA with 
authority to pass a national drinking water regulation, and did not expand EPA’s authority to determine 
how PWSs address lead.  This clearly demonstrates that Congress both knows how to apply a lead-
focused ban to all persons and to ensure it reaches beyond the “public water system” including 
residential or nonresidential facilities.  The differences in the scope of this prohibition highlights that 
Congress did not make such a choice.  Congress also did not take the further step of requiring the 
removal of any plumbing materials that are not “lead free.”  Instead, it allowed those lead-containing 
material to remain in place and prohibited the further introduction of such materials in installations or 
repairs.  And it is not as though the broader issue of lead in drinking water has escaped Congress’s sight 
in the years since those amendment: Congress subsequently specifically amended the definition of “lead 
free” that applied to these pipes plumbing materials.183  And despite public attention on lead-related 
crisis like in Flint, MI, Congress has chosen not taken action to amend the SDWA to extend the authority 
of EPA beyond those parts of the system under that actual ownership and control of PWSs, or otherwise 
mandated removal of lead-containing materials outside of PWSs.  
Many arguments in favor of a broader definition of “control” advocate that EPA’s current position, which 
appropriately focuses on ownership, can result in policy outcomes that they see as sub-optimal, such as 
partial line replacements and customers being required to pay for the costs of replacing their own lines.  
Even if EPA finds these concerns to be compelling, they do not alter the fact that Congress has simply 
not authorized a broader statutory authority to mandate removal by PWSs.  For better or worse, 
Congress has determined that national drinking water regulations should apply only to PWSs, and has 
defined the term in a way that does not allow for EPA’s proposed requirements.  
EPA’s proposed definition is not supported by court decisions. -- AWWA has not found any court 
decisions that would support EPA’s overly broad and flawed reading of the SDWA. In 1991, U.S. Court of 
Appeals for the D.C. Circuit declined to reach the question regarding the scope of the EPA’s authority 
under the SDWA to require water systems to enter private property without customer consent.184  By 
contrast, in Bass v. Ledbetter, the Georgia Supreme Court determined that “[c]learly, the private lines 
running from the service connections of the distribution facilities into the homes of the residents are not 
 
180 S. Rep. No. 104–169, at 95. 
181 42 U.S.C. § 300g.  
182 42 U.S.C. § 300g–6(a)(1)(A).  
183 See EPA, Use of Lead Free Pipes, Fittings, Fixtures, Solder, and Flux for Drinking Water, available at 
https://www.epa.gov/sdwa/use-lead-free-pipes-fittings-fixtures-solder-and-flux-drinking-water.  
184 See AWWA, 40 F.3d at 1275. 

 
116 
within the control of the operator, and consequently, the EPD is charged with no responsibility for those 
private lines.”185 
EPA’s proposed definition is not reasonable and contrary to the ordinary meaning of “control.” -- Even if 
Congress had not directly addressed this issue, EPA’s attempt to redefine the term “control” is not a 
reasonable one.  There is meaningful distinction between the terms “control” and “access”: the former 
evincing the authority to manage or direct by virtue of ownership (or contract or similar legal 
mechanism), and the latter requiring authorization by the person or entity with actual control.186  With 
respect to property ownership, “control” necessarily encompasses the ability to exclude others (i.e., to 
grant, deny, or revoke access), as courts have long recognized.187  EPA, however, would flip this 
definition on its head by instead equating “control” with a scenario where the party with the actual 
control and actual ability to exclude has decided not exercise that right. Granting another party access 
to your property does not indicate that you no longer control it; indeed it is a demonstration of your 
control.  
It defies logic to suggest that each time a property owner invites a guest into their home, allows a third 
party to conduct an inspection, or gives permission for a governmental authority to enter for some 
limited purpose, that they have ceded “control” over their property to that person or entity.188  Even 
where government actors are granted temporary access to property by virtue of law, there are 
recognized limits (e.g., scope, duration, frequency, location)—not to be equated with a transfer or 
cessation of control.189  Indeed, the proposed LCRI implicitly recognizes the material difference between 
access and control by including proposed provisions for when ownership of a private property changes. 
Namely, the Proposed Rule suggests that a PWS’s “control” of the private property can change when a 
new owner grants the system “access” to the property. But as this scenario demonstrates, it is the 
owner and not the PWS with control over the property.  It also ignores the fact that a new owner can 
 
185 363 S.E.2d 760, 761 (Ga. 1988).  
186 Compare Control (noun), Black’s Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019) (“The direct or indirect power to govern the 
management and policies of a person or entity, whether through ownership . . . ; the power or authority to 
manage, direct, or oversee), and Control (verb), Black’s Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019) (“To exercise power or 
influence over,” or “[t]o regulate or govern,” or “[t]o have a controlling interest in”), with Access, Black’s Law 
Dictionary (11th ed. 2019) (“A right, opportunity, or ability to enter, approach, pass to and from, or communicate 
with”). 
187 See Cedar Point Nursery v. Hassid, 141 S. Ct. 2063, 2072 (2021) (“[T]he right to exclude is ‘universally held to be 
a fundamental element of the property right,’ and is ‘one of the most essential sticks in the bundle of rights that 
are commonly characterized as property.’” (quoting Kaiser Aetna v. United States, 444 U.S. 164, 176 (1979))); see 
also Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419, 435 (1982). 
188 This is often why a sharp distinction is drawn between a license, which is revocable at will and provides no 
interest in the real property aside from use, and an easement, which is irrevocable and does provide a property 
interest. See Restatement (First) of Property: Servitudes § 512 (Oct. 2023); see also, e.g., Seven Lakes Dev. Co. v. 
Maxson, 2006 WY 136, ¶ 11, 144 P.3d 1239, 1245 (Wyo. 2006) (describing difference between license and 
easement). 
189 See, e.g., 29 U.S.C. § 657(a) (authorizing inspections of “any . . . workplace or environment where work is 
performed” during “regular working hours and at other reasonable times”); 42 U.S.C. § 5413(b) (authorizing 
inspections anywhere “manufactured homes are manufactured, stored, or held for sale” at “reasonable times and 
without advance notice”); Miss. Code Ann. § 49–27–63 (authorizing inspections of “coastal wetlands” “from time 
to time”); Mich. Comp. Laws § 208.1435(5) (authorizing inspections of any “historic resource” “at any time during 
the rehabilitation process”; Boise Cascade Corp. v. United States, 296 F.3d 1339, 1352 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (affirming an 
injunction requiring property owner to allow government agents to enter its property to conduct owl surveys). 

 
117 
deny access, even when it has been granted by a prior owner.  So, for example, if a property was sold 
while a PWS was in the midst of a replacement, the new owner could block the PWS’s access to the 
private property and thus prevent the replacement.  If a PWS had control in the true sense of the word, 
this would not be the case. 
This scenario demonstrates why EPA’s proposed definition and provisions regarding changes in 
ownership are completely unworkable.  Under the proposed LCRI, PWSs my check with a property 
owner four separate times through two separate methods before they can determine that they do not 
have access to the property and therefore do not need to count the portions of the LSL on that private 
property towards the LSL removal requirement.190  But as EPA recognizes, property ownership is unlikely 
to remain static over a 10-year period.  So, any number of properties which denied a system access in 
year one may be sold by or even in year-10, necessitating that the system restart outreach efforts and 
readjust its calculation of how many removals have been completed just as it is reaching the end of its 
allowable time to remove all lines.  Ever-shifting property ownership will make it impossible for PWSs to 
accurately forecast operational budgets for line removals.  To make matters worse, EPA puts the onus 
on water systems to somehow track changes in property ownership so that it can conduct the 
regulatorily mandated outreach.191  Specifically, the Proposed Rule would give PWSs only six months 
after a change in ownership to offer to make a full LSL replacement, and only one year to conduct the 
mandated outreach of four attempts through two different methods.192  But EPA does not explain how 
PWSs are to track these changes in ownership with certainty or account for the burden in doing so.  
While a system is often made aware when there is a change in occupant (and therefore a different 
customer), for rental properties this will not correspond to a change in ownership.  As a result, even if 
EPA retains the current and unlawful proposed definition, it must remove the requirements that water 
systems determine a change of ownership and any obligations to again provide outreach must be 
triggered off of a system being provided with actual notice of the change in ownership through some 
means other than a notice of change in occupancy.  
Another practical problem with EPA’s proposed definition is one where a law, regulation, laws, 
regulations, or water tariff agreement provisions that impacted “access” are changed during the course 
of the 10-year time period during which water systems are responsible for removing lines.  Should, for 
example, a state law be amended in year 9 of the time period, PWSs could be in the untenable position 
 
190 See Proposed § 141.84(3) (“Where a water system has legal access to conduct full service line replacement only 
if property owner consent is obtained, the water system must make a ‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain property 
owner consent. If such a water system does not obtain consent after making a ‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain it 
from any property owner, then the water system is not required by this rule to replace any portion of the service 
line at that address. (i) A ‘reasonable effort’ must include at least four attempts to engage the property owner 
using at least two different methods of communication (e.g., in-person conversation, phone call, text message, 
email, written letter, postcard, or information left at the door such as a door hanger) before the applicable 
deadline of mandatory service line replacement as described in paragraph (d)(4) of this section. The State may 
require systems to conduct additional attempts and may require specific outreach methods to be used.”).  
191 See Proposed § 141.84(3)(ii) (“Within six months of any change in ownership of the property, the water system 
must offer full service line replacement to any new property owner and make a ‘reasonable effort’ to obtain the 
property owner’s consent as described in paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section within one year of any change in 
property ownership. If the water system is unable to obtain consent from the current property owner after making 
a ‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain it, the water system is not required under this rule to replace the line. This 
paragraph continues to apply after a system completes its mandatory service line replacement program.”).  
192 See Proposed § 141.84 (d)(3)(ii). 

 
118 
of suddenly needing to contact and attempt removal of many additional lines that they had not 
accounted for in their planning processes, and that they are not financially or technically prepared to 
remove.  EPA simply cannot regulate over a 10-year time horizon based on an ever-changing target and 
doing so when there are significant enforcement risks raises due process concerns.  
The problem with EPA’s proposed definition is further highlighted by the fact that EPA declines to define 
“access.”  As EPA recognizes, this will be complex and fact-specific even under the best of circumstances, 
as it can be impacted by state and local laws and regulations, and/or water tariff agreements.193  But 
rather than attempting to provide answers, EPA instead places additional burdens on PWSs by 
mandating that they identify “any laws, regulations, and/or water tariff agreements that affect the 
water system’s ability to gain access to conduct full lead and galvanized requiring replacement service 
line replacement, including the citation to the specific laws, regulations, or water tariff agreement 
provisions.”194  This still does not answer the more fundamental question of what it means to have legal 
and physical access to a property, including who (the property owner or the occupant) has the right to 
grant such access, or what a water system should do when, for instance, the owner grants legal access 
but the occupant denies physical access.  And while it leaves this question unanswered, it does highlight 
the fact that “access” and property rights are matters of state and local law where it is not 
appropriate—particularly absent any clear directive from Congress—for EPA to assert authority.  Put 
simply, introducing requirements that are beyond the scope of what Congress intended for the SDWA to 
regulate, EPA has introduced a host of new practical problems, and AWWA therefore urges EPA to 
remove these requirements from the final LCRI.  
EPA has not provided a proper justification or explanation for its change in definition. -- Even if EPA’s 
interpretation of the statute were a permissible one, it has not justified its change in position here.195  
EPA previously equated “control” with “ownership,” appropriately recognizing that “the broader 
definition of ‘control’... could result in unintended delays and other complications.”196  EPA has not (as it 
must under the APA) justified this departure from its prior position.  EPA provides only a cursory 
statement that:  
“EPA is proposing to treat a service line as under the system’s control wherever a water 
system has adequate access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full service line 
replacement  . . . EPA is proposing to treat a connector as under the system’s control 
wherever a water system has adequate access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct 
replacement of the connector. EPA is not proposing to delineate the prerequisites or 
elements of “access” that a system would need to conduct full service line or connector 
 
193 See Proposed § 141.84(c)(1)(viii). 
194 Id.  
195 See Nat’l Cable & Telecommunications Ass’n v. Brand X Internet Servs., 545 U.S. 967, 981 (2005) (observing that 
an “[u]nexplained inconsistency” in agency interpretation could be “a reason for holding an interpretation to be an 
arbitrary and capricious change from agency practice under the Administrative Procedure Act” (citing State Farm, 
463 U.S. at 46–57)). 
196 2000 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 65 Fed. Reg. at 1950, 1966 (Jan. 12, 2000) (stating that “EPA has 
eliminated the ‘control’ terminology from the Rule” and “revise[d] §141.84(d) to require the water system to 
replace only the portion of the [lead service line] that it owns.”). 

 
119 
replacement because of the wide variation of relevant State and local laws and water tariff 
agreements as well as the potential for these to change over time.””197 
EPA provides no explanation for why access to these lines, which it readily admits can shift with changes 
in local laws, agreements, or property ownership, can be fairly equated with the statutory term 
“control.”  
AWWA also notes that EPA’s proposed definition, which would add or remove (and then perhaps re-
add) LSL on private property to the definition of “service lines” will, as a practical matter, result in the 
partial line replacements that EPA seeks to avoid.198  Specifically, the proposed § 141.84(d)(1) states that 
“All water systems must replace all lead and galvanized requiring replacement service lines under the 
control of the water system unless the replacement would leave in place a partial lead service line” and 
proposed § 141.84(d)(2) states that “Where a water system does not have access to conduct full service 
line replacement, the water system is not required by this rule to replace the line.”  But regardless of how 
EPA defines or redefines the private portion of the line, the fact remains that the LCRI will create a de 
facto requirement to conduct a partial LSR removal each time a system is denied access to a private 
property by mandating that the portion of the line under the actual control of the system is removed to 
meet the 100% LSL removal requirement.  Put simply, by playing with the definitions, EPA can change 
the requirements, but it cannot change the fact that these properties contain lead, or the risks 
associated with mandating a partial line removal when they do.  
It is also worth noting that it is hard to square general prohibition of partial line replacements with both 
this de facto partial replacement in the absence of “access,” as well as the exception when the 
replacements occur “as part of an emergency repair or in coordination with planned infrastructure 
work, excluding planned infrastructure work solely for the purposes of lead or galvanized requiring 
replacement service line replacement.”199  As noted elsewhere in these comments, due to changes in 
practices, partial line replacements do not generally present the same risks that they may have 
historically.  EPA’s allowance for these exemptions demonstrates the arbitrariness of the more general 
prohibition on partial replacements and should be revised in the final LCRI.  
EPA’s proposed requirements for schools and daycares present similar concerns and are likewise beyond 
EPA’s statutory authority. -- These same concerns noted above exist with regard to EPA’s proposed 
provisions related to the proposed school and childcare facility monitoring program, which likewise 
exceeds EPA’s statutory authority under the SDWA.  Indeed, Congress has repeatedly demonstrated its 
intent for local educational agencies, not PWSs, to oversee testing and remediation of lead 
contamination in schools and childcare facilities.  Furthermore, the program also implicates federalism 
concerns.  AWWA raised many of these concerns when EPA first proposed their inclusion in the LCRR 
and reincorporates those arguments here for the agency’s further consideration in this rulemaking.  As 
with other LCRR requirements that EPA has revisited and determined to lack a clear legal basis or a 
demonstrable health benefit, EPA must take this opportunity to revisit the Proposed Rule.  While AWWA 
deeply appreciates the need to keep children safe from exposure to lead in drinking water, schools and 
 
197 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920. 
198 See, e.g., 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,917 (“Research has found that partial LSLR has not been shown to reliably reduce 
lead levels in the short term and may temporarily increase lead levels due to disruptions of established scales or 
galvanic corrosion.”).  
199 Proposed § 141.84(g). 

 
120 
daycares are currently highly regulated, primarily at the state and local level, through a complex 
network of agencies overseeing everything from licensing to health requirements.  It is neither 
appropriate nor beneficial for PWSs to wade into these regimes, and their resources can be far better 
used when focusing on the area where they do have both the experience and authority to meaningfully 
impact public health.  
First, schools and childcare facilities are not part of the “public water system” over which EPA has 
jurisdiction for the same reasons discussed above.  Second, Congress intended that local educational 
agencies, not PWSs, oversee the type of school monitoring requirements in the proposed rule.  It is 
worth noting that health considerations in schools and childcare facilities are already highly regulated, 
indicating that this is not an area where Congress has simply failed to take action or intended for EPA to 
fill in statutory gaps.  Indeed, Congress has repeatedly visited these concerns and declined to follow the 
approach proposed by EPA here.  For example, in the Lead Contamination Control Act of 1988, Congress 
required states to establish programs to assist local educational agencies in monitoring and remediating 
lead contamination from schools.200  However, the Fifth Circuit found that this requirement violated the 
Tenth Amendment.201  More recently, in the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act, 
Congress directed EPA to “establish a voluntary school and child care program lead testing grant 
program to make grants available to states to assist local educational agencies in voluntary testing for 
lead contamination in drinking water at schools and childcare programs under the jurisdiction of the 
local educational agencies.”202  Both times, Congress demonstrated its intent for states and local 
educational agencies, not PWSs, to oversee testing and remediation of lead contamination in schools 
and childcare facilities.  
The school monitoring program likewise exceeds EPA’s monitoring authority.  EPA can require PWSs to 
“conduct such monitoring . . . as the Administrator may reasonably require” to assist in 1) establishing 
new regulations, 2) evaluating compliance with existing regulations, 3) administering financial 
assistance, 4) “evaluating the health risks of unregulated contaminants,” or 5) “in advising the public of 
such risks.”203  The last category is most relevant here.  The phrase “advising the public of such risks” is 
informed by the preceding clause, which refers to the “health risks of unregulated contaminants.”  EPA 
can therefore require water systems to conduct reasonable monitoring to assist EPA in advising the 
public of the health risks of unregulated contaminants.  Lead is not an unregulated contaminant.  Thus, 
EPA’s monitoring authority also does not provide grounds for the school monitoring program proposed 
here.  The proposed school monitoring program exceeds EPA’s authority under the SDWA and is 
therefore contrary to law.  The Proposed Rule assigns this task to PWSs, in contravention of Congress’ 
demonstrated intent. the school monitoring program raises federalism concerns.  Some state public 
utility commissions (PUCs) prohibit utilities from “cross-subsidization,” where certain customers’ rates 
are used to subsidize other customers’ services.204  A PWS using ratepayer funds to fulfill the school 
 
200 Acorn v. Edwards, 81 F.3d 1387, 1388-89 (5th Cir. 1996).   
201 Id. at 1392-94.   
202 42 U.S.C. § 300j-24(d)(2)(A).   
203 42 U.S.C. § 300j-4(a)(1)(A). 
204 By way of example, California law requires “government owned public utility rates be based on the cost of 
service. This precludes cross subsidies within and among customer classes[.]” EPA, Drinking Water and Wastewater 
EPA, 2016, Utility Customer Assistance Programs at 18, available at 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-04/documents/dw-ww_utilities_cap_combined_508.pdf.   

 
121 
monitoring requirements would be engaging in cross-subsidization because the program is targeted to 
benefit a small class of consumers. PWSs in a state that prohibits cross-subsidization will not be able to 
comply with the school monitoring program and their PUC rules at the same time. 
AWWA notes that this does not mean there is no solution to the issue. As EPA itself recognizes in the 
proposed LCRI, regulation over lines and plumbing fixtures on private property and regulation of schools 
and daycares remain issues of state law and regulatory authority, and the states---almost all of which 
already have primacy under the SDWA---have the ability to take further steps in this area beyond EPA’s 
authority. 
4.8 
The Proposed Rule creates federalism concerns and risks creating unnecessary conflicts 
with state and local laws.  
The Proposed Rule takes the unusual and unnecessary step of mandating that: 
“ Where the State determines that a shortened replacement deadline is feasible for a water 
system (e.g., by considering the number of lead and galvanized requiring replacement 
service lines in a system’s inventory), the State must require the system to replace service 
lines by an earlier deadline than required in paragraph (d)(4) of this section and establish a 
different minimum replacement rate in accordance with paragraph (d)(5)(iv)(A). The State 
must make this determination in writing and notify the system of its finding. The State must 
set a shortened deadline at any time throughout a system’s replacement program if a State 
determines a shorter deadline is feasible. This paragraph also applies to systems eligible for 
a deferred deadline as specified in paragraph (d)(5)(v) of this section.”205 
The SDWA of course gives the states the freedom to pass more stringent water regulations, so long as 
they do not conflict with federal law and are not otherwise preempted.  This allows states and their local 
constituency the freedom in our democratic system to govern themselves as they see fit and to respond 
appropriately to local determinations about how to balance competing demands, including those 
related to public health and the corresponding costs and benefits of taking certain actions.  But here EPA 
proposes to take the additional step of mandating that states set more stringent requirements, based on 
nebulous criteria, for systems that it determines can feasibly replace lines on a faster timeline.  This 
provision has no basis in the SDWA, places an extraordinary additional burden on states, deprives them 
of their traditional police powers to oversee public health and welfare, and would cause them to create 
unnecessary and unjustified enforcement risks for PWSs within their jurisdiction by creating a shifting 
and unpredictable compliance schedule for service line removal.  This provision, and any other 
provisions mandating that states set stricter requirements must be removed from the final rule.  
Likewise, the mandate that “be required to identify potential barriers to full service line replacement in 
State laws, including statutes and constitutional provisions, in their application for primacy for the 
LCRI”206 has no basis in the SDWA and will only serve to create unnecessary tensions between states and 
EPA.  EPA makes clear that the purpose of this requirement is to create political pressure for states to 
change their laws: 
 
205 Proposed § 141.84(d)(5)(iv). 
206 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,928.  

 
122 
“By identifying these potential barriers and making the information publicly accessible in the 
replacement plan, these proposed requirements can better support a community discussion 
about where barriers exist and how best to address them as part of the replacement 
program.”207 
But pressuring sovereign states into taking actions that align with EPA’s policy goals is not the 
appropriate role of federal regulation, and is a role best left, if at all, to Congress.  Absent a clear 
congressional directive EPA cannot and should not finalize such a requirement.  
EPA’s proposed provisions regarding removal of lines outside of a PWS likewise create unnecessary 
conflict with state law.  For example, some states already have provisions in place addressing when and 
how utilities may replace public lines.  In a scenario where a water system replaces a customer’s portion 
of a line and does so at the water system’s expense, those costs will likely be passed on to all of a 
system’s customers in the form of higher water rates. But some state public utility commissions (PUCs) 
prohibit utilities from “cross-subsidization,” where certain customers’ rates are used to subsidize other 
customers’ services.208  In such circumstances, a water system may have “access” to a customer’s lines, 
but if the customer refuses to pay for the removal, then the system would have no way to recover the 
costs of removal.  Other states allow for the replacement of customer-owned lead service lines, but 
include PUC-approved caps on the number of such lines that can be replaced annually.209  Such caps 
could easily conflict with the Proposed Rule’s ten year mandatory line replacement provisions unless 
EPA revises the definition to only include lines within the PWS as defined in the SDWA.  
5 
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
EPA’s Economic Analysis of the proposed LCRI contains a number of fundamental flaws. 
5.1 
Estimate of Lead Risk Reduction is Not Substantiated 
To support these comments AWWA obtained an expert review of EPA’s analysis and presentation of the 
benefits anticipated from the proposed LCRI.  That review is attached in whole as Appendix A to these 
comments.  The following is a summary of the detailed recommendations arising from this review: 
1. The inclusion of cardiovascular and pulmonary (CVP) mortality significantly increases the 
estimates of both lifetime health risk and economic benefits of mitigation.  That increase, 
however, is largely dependent on how the analysis treats the value of a statistical life. 
Greater justification for this value is required to clearly explain the economic benefits and 
why CVP mortality plays such a large role in the LCRI analyses. 
AWWA supports consideration of CVP mortality effects in EPA’s decision-making, and the 
focus on the studies in Exhibit 21 of the Abt’s 2023 report.210 However, AWWA seeks 
 
207 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,928. 
208 By way of example, California law requires “government owned public utility rates be based on the cost of 
service. This precludes cross subsidies within and among customer classes[.]” EPA, Drinking Water and Wastewater 
EPA, 2016, Utility Customer Assistance Programs at 18, available at 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-04/documents/dw-ww_utilities_cap_combined_508.pdf.   
209 See, e.g., 66 Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes 1311(b)(2)(vi). 
210 Abt. “Selection of Concentration Response Functions between Lead Exposure and Adverse Health Outcomes for 
Use in Benefits Analysis: Cardiovascular-Disease Related Mortality”, Revised Report. (2023) EPA-HQ-OW-2022-
0801-0587. 

 
123 
greater clarity on how the decision was taken to now consider the database sufficient to 
not only claim that lead is a risk factor for CVP mortality, but that it is now scientifically 
justified to quantify the exposure-response characteristics at levels of lead in drinking 
water found in homes. 
2. The proposed LCRI economic analyses require extrapolation of health effects from high to 
low levels of exposure (or blood lead levels (BLL)) typical in homes. Total benefits of lead 
mitigation in the U.S. population contain a large fraction of benefits attributable to 
mitigation at very low levels of exposure but encompassing large populations.   
a. The proposed LCRI benefit analysis does not break down the contributions to 
population benefits by level of lead exposure in water (or BLL), although such 
information will have been generated at some point during the analysis and would 
be available to EPA. It would be useful to provide this breakdown so decision 
makers and the public can better understand how much of the calculated benefit 
is attributable to benefits at low levels of exposure where questions might arise 
over the justification for linear extrapolation to zero. 
b. EPA’s most authoritative and current summary of lead health effects211 does not 
contain evidence that rules out a threshold for IQ decrement effect, or at least a 
large degree of non-linearity, below BLLs of 5 µg/dL.  Assuming IQ decrement 
occurs below 5 µg/dL and can be calculated on the basis of linear extrapolation 
downwards is consistent with policy default assumptions but leaves decision 
makers with the mistaken impression that the estimates of IQ decrement, and 
hence the benefits of mitigation, in the large population of children with BLLs 
below 5 µg/dL is well established by the available scientific data rather than being 
the result of the policy default assumption. 
There is a similar but less severe concern with the extrapolation of CVP mortality. 
Again, the agency should explain why the risk coefficient from the range of 
observed effects is appropriate for extrapolation to a lower range of BLLs. 
3. Co-benefits are described qualitatively.  While the SDWA requires consideration of both 
quantifiable and nonquantifiable health risks, absent evidence of whether these co-
benefits are large or small compared to the primary health risks and benefits underlying 
decisions on lead mitigation.  It is not clear how the co-benefit claims add to the analysis 
and conclusions of the Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis. 
4. In finalizing the economic analysis for the LCRI, EPA should clarify the claim in the current 
analysis that economic benefits to the total U.S. population from mitigation attributed to 
CVP mortality are correct.  The Proposed Rule analysis does not demonstrate that the 
economic benefits to an individual in a given home are dominated by CVP mortality.  This 
distinction is important to decision makers determining if and how to finalize the rule 
requirements as well as to risk communication to the public. 
5. Research shows that fifth liter sample lead observations are on average approximately a 
factor of five higher than time-weighted average (TWA) values presumed in health effects 
 
211 EPA. Integrated Science Assessment (ISA) for Lead (2024) EPA/600/R-23/375. 

 
124 
models. If this factor of five is accounted for, both the IQ and CVP benefits calculated on 
the basis of compliance samples would be reduced by a factor of five and the net benefit 
to cost ratio is considerably less. 
EPA’s analysis indicates a low scenario benefit of ~$17 billion and cost of ~ $2 billion. 
Reducing the benefit by five due to not using TWA substantially alters the benefit-to-cost 
ration.  Simply comparing an adjusted EPA estimate of benefit accounting for this factor 
against EPA’s estimate of the cost of the proposed LCRI brings the benefit-to-cost ratio 
closer to one. 
6. In summarizing the benefit cost analysis for the proposed LCRI the Federal Register reads 
“…the Administrator has determined that the quantified and nonquantifiable benefits of 
the proposed LCRI NPDWR justify the quantifiable and nonquantifiable costs.”.212 By 
including ‘nonquantifiable’ in this statement, the EPA is implying that the nonquantifiable 
benefits play some significant role in the judgement that costs are justified; this is not 
true, and should be stated as such in the LCRI rationale. This distinction is not only 
important to decision makers determining if and how to finalize the rule requirements but 
to risk communication to the public. 
7. The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis considers qualitatively the impact of public 
information and education on effects and benefits, with no attempt to quantify this, 
including no attempt to show whether public education will have a significant or 
insignificant impact on effects and benefits. It is notable that there is no review of the 
extensive literature on ‘uptake rates’ of behaviors in response to environmental policies, a 
literature that would inform a decision as to how effective public information can be on 
behavioral change.  
8. EPA proposes an expanded and enhanced program of public education on the risks of lead 
exposure and the benefits of reducing that exposure.  This includes improvements to the 
Consumer Confidence Reports, capturing the recent advances in understanding risks and 
benefits.  This is appropriate both because the public needs to understand these risks and 
benefits to take informed decisions, and because the proposed LCRI relies in part on 
voluntary behavioral changes by consumers.  However, the language suggested in the 
proposed LCRI is inadequate.  It speaks too often of vaguely defined terms such as ‘no safe 
level’, ‘possible effects are…’, ‘can cause serious health effects in people of all ages’.  
The problem here is not that these statements are factually incorrect, but rather that they 
fail to provide the public sufficient information to take informed decisions. 
Simply stating that lead can cause effect “X” is insufficient to inform the public of health 
risk and associated benefits of mitigation.  Comparative risk assessment was developed to 
help the public understand how the probability and severity of a given stress such as lead 
in water compares against the universe of other concerns they might have and for which 
they probably have a better level of understanding and emotional grasp (road safety, 
smoking, gun violence etc.).  
 
212 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,034. 

 
125 
Consider the case of children exposed at the proposed Action Level of 10 µg/L. As 
explained previously, this will result in an IQ decrement of 0.4 points. It is necessary to 
establish whether such a decrement is clinically significant, including whether it will lead 
to any decrease in the lifetime earnings.  Systems for classifying IQ scores generally 
contain 6 or 7 categories of differential ability on tasks that are expected to influence life 
chances. Those categories have a width of approximately 10 IQ points.  For the vast 
majority of children (more than 97%), a shift of 0.4 points up or down would leave them in 
the same category of performance and life chances.  The Proposal documentation should 
at least mention this issue, explaining why small changes in IQ are assumed to produce 
the levels of change in lifetime earnings per IQ point change that have been developed 
from studies that examine economic impacts of significantly larger IQ differences.  
Language such as that provided in the proposed LCRI required communications, preamble 
and supporting documents fails to do this, leaving the public improperly informed as to 
the magnitude of effects and benefits.  In addition, the language in the proposed LCRI fails 
to place waterborne lead into the context of all other sources of exposure to lead. Such an 
understanding of context would allow the public to better assess whether their primary 
concern should be on mitigating Pb in water, or dealing with problems of Pb in paint, dust 
etc. 
9. A distinction must be drawn between the economic benefits of IQ decrement and CVP 
mortality.  For IQ, the economic benefits are measurable effects on lifetime earnings (at 
least at the high values of BLL underlying the studies of this effect). IQ decrement can 
therefore be described as having an objective economic effect based on market 
transactions, as they will have an impact on the life chances of an individual child and on 
the magnitude of the economy (such as per capita gross domestic product (GDP)). By 
contrast, the CVP mortality benefits in the Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis are based on 
Value of a Statistical Life (VSL) drawn from willingness to pay surveys and thus are not 
actual economic impacts, either to the individual consumer or to society. They have no 
direct impact on the life chances of an individual or the magnitude of the economy, since 
they involve no economic transactions.  The use of VSL’s in economic analysis is only 
sound when it is presented in a manner that appropriately informs decision makers and 
the public.  The proposed LCRI docket contains the factual basis for the benefits analysis 
but the agency is not forthcoming and transparent in the implications of its approach for 
policymakers. 
5.2 
Health Burdens (Costs) Not Addressed in Analysis 
While EPA attributes a number of potential health benefits to marginal improvement in lead exposure 
achieved through the LCRI proposal, the agency does not consider the real-world health risks associated 
with the rulemaking.  EPA encourages regulated entities like CWSs to fully consider the environmental 
and social impacts of their actions, EPA should hold itself to a similar standard in its economic analyses 
as is reflected in EPA’s “Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses,” 
 
“To be complete, an estimate of social cost should include both the opportunity costs of 
current consumption that will be foregone as a result of the regulation, and the losses that 

 
126 
may result if the regulation reduces capital investment and thus future consumption.” 
(Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses, 2010 (as amended), page 8-2)213 
 
Where opportunity costs are defined as, “… the value lost to society of any goods and services that will 
not be produced and consumed as a result of a regulation.”214  In this instance the lost value is foregone 
public health protections. 
In addition to not comporting with EPA guidance for economic analysis these gaps are at odds with 
EPA’s efforts to meet the expectations of Executive Order 13045 (Protection of Children from 
Environmental Health and Safety Risks), Executive Order 12898 (Federal Actions to Address 
Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations), and Executive Order 14096 
(Revitalizing Our Nation’s Commitment to Environmental Justice for All).  By not address opportunity 
costs EPA neglects analyzing whether the proposed LCRI requirements pose a net benefit to these 
important groups as directed by Executive Order. 
 
Adverse Impacts of Proposed Rule Provisions -- The current analysis does not consider: 
1. The potential loss of fire protection to structures when the LCRI ban on partial 
replacement and LCRI requirement to provide customer notification prior to return to 
service prevents water systems from returning water service to a structure.  As the LCRI is 
currently drafted this risk applies to both water service lines that are providing potable 
water service and to service lines that serve fire suppression systems. 
2. The potential illnesses associated with inadequate sanitation when water service is not 
returned to residences in a timely manner as described above, when the increased cost of 
service associated with the LCRI leads to a failure to pay for water service and associated 
shutoffs, and where states and localities to assist CWSs implement the LCRI ban partial 
replacements more broadly. 
3. The pace and nature of accelerated service line replacement programs deteriorating 
street pavement, such that accidents result. 
4. The introduction of heavy equipment and excavations in residential and commercial areas 
creates the opportunity for vehicular accidents as well as accidents involving pedestrians.   
At the scale and pace of LSL and GRRSL replacement reflected in the LCRI, the above risks are not trivial 
and should be considered in the agency’s analysis. 
Alternative Investments of Scarce Resources -- A more challenging analysis that the agency also does not 
consider is the public health consequences of directing limited available resources toward the 
requirements of the proposed LRCI. Resources that are expended to meet the agency’s directive to 
achieve a marginal theoretical health risk reduction at the pace and scale proposed, mean that those 
resources are not available to for other purposes including: 
1. Replace failing distribution system infrastructure with the associated potential fire, flood, 
and sanitation implications 
 
213 EPA, Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses (as amended) (2010)  
214 Id. at 8-1.  

 
127 
2. Investing in maintaining and improving drinking water treatment facilities for currently 
regulated contaminants of health concern 
3. Investing in water infrastructure investments needed to assure a reliable and safe water 
supply into the future, whether those investments are due to climate change or other 
factors, such as EPA’s failure to protect waters of the U.S. from contaminants like PFAS 
4. Investing in water supply infrastructure to assure adequate water supply to continue to 
provide the fire protection and public health benefits of a centralized water system into 
the future. 
CWS have limited resources and must effectively use those resources to protect public health.  EPA is 
familiar within its own organization with the effects of shifting priorities leading to the loss of funding 
for important programs.  The effect of a federal rule is similar.  A sound economic analysis weighs the 
benefits of action against the missed / foregone risk reduction opportunities expending resources to 
achieve those risks cause. 
Social Cost of Greenhouse Gas – This administration has placed a particular strategic focus on the 
reduction of greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide.  The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis 
provides a cursory response to “Order 13211: Actions That Significantly Affect Energy Supply, 
Distribution, or Use” but does not attempt to address “Sec. 5.  Accounting for the Benefits of Reducing 
Climate Pollution” of “Executive Order 13990: Protecting Public Health and the Environment and 
Restoring Science to Tackle the Climate Crisis.”  In September 2022 EPA published “Report on the Social 
Cost of Greenhouse Gases: Estimates Incorporating Recent Scientific Advances.” The report describes 
the discounted cost of carbon dioxide for use when evaluating regulatory proposals.  EPA has not 
incorporated the greenhouse gas effects of this rulemaking into its benefit-cost analysis.  As EPA 
describes in other elements of the rule cost analysis there are: 
1. Extensive mobilization of staff, contractors, and other service providers to undertake all 
facets of the LCRI.  These mobilizations will require travel using automobiles, trucks, and in 
some instances require the use of heavy equipment.  At present these vehicles will be 
primarily diesel and gasoline powered.  Tasks involving vehicles include: 
a. Service line material characterization 
b. Service line material validation study 
c. Service line replacement 
d. Public education requirements including delivery of pitcher filters 
e. Sample kit delivery and collection 
2. The anticipated increased use of pH / alkalinity control and the addition of 
orthophosphate at increased doses to achieve targeted OCCT.  There are embedded 
carbon cost in the anticipated increase in treatment by required by the LCRI proposal, 
including 
a. Production, transportation, and use of orthophosphate addition 
b. Wastewater treatment costs associated with removal of phosphate  

 
128 
c. Production, transportation, and use of chemical feeds used to adjust pH and 
alkalinity 
The above referenced report was published as part of the economic analysis of “Standards of 
Performance for New, Reconstructed, and Modified Sources and Emissions Guidelines for Existing 
Sources: Oil and Natural Gas Sector Climate Review”215 which specifically references the above Executive 
Order. In that rulemaking, EPA estimates the cost of greenhouse gases by discount rate per year with 
costs per metric ton ranging from $130 to $370 at 2.5 and 1.5 percent discount rates, respectively, in 
2026.   
 
5.3 
Distributing Cost over Time 
The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis (as described by the agency) distributes the Proposed Rule’s 
financial impacts over time when as a practical matter the fiscal impact of the rule will impact 
communities in a very small window of time.   
While capital costs, particularly large infrastructure capital expenses are funded through debt and debt 
with interest is paid over a period of years.  Many of the costs of the Proposal are operational costs that 
will be funded as operational expenses.  As fiduciaries CWSs will not, except under the most extreme 
situations, incur debt for operational expenses.  Not only is such practice poor financial practice it is at 
odds with the basic tenants of rate making where rate payers are charged for the services, they 
themselves receive.   
In addition to appropriately representing the period in which expenses are incurred, EPA must consider 
the bolus of tasks that are required simultaneously by the rule, such that operational expenses are 
required in the same, and in this rule, limited portion of the period costed.  Examples of operational 
expenses in the rule that EPA cannot annualize over an extended period and to a substantial degree will 
occur at the same time include: 
1. All of the rule’s public education provisions 
a. Notification to customers of service line materials 
b. Notification to occupants of service line related construction 
c. Outreach and notification in the wake of a lead action level exceedance 
d. Provision of filter instructions and filters associated with service line construction 
/ disturbance 
e. Making filters available when there is a continuing lead action level exceedances 
f. Support for customer requested sampling 
g. Tier 1 public notification  
2. It is also inappropriate to annualize costs over a period that exceeds the useful life of the 
item that has been purchased.  The clearest example in the economic analysis being 
 
215 EPA. 2021. Standards of Performance for New, Reconstructed, and Modified Sources and Emissions Guidelines 
for Existing Sources: Oil and Natural Gas Sector Climate Review. EPA Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2021-0317. 

 
129 
pitcher filters and POU filters when provided following as a prophylactic measure 
associated with service line construction / disturbance, an action level exceedance. 
5.4 
Cost of Service Line Replacement 
The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis significantly underestimates the cost of LSL replacement. This 
underestimate affects the benefit-cost analysis for the Proposed Rule and it underestimates the 
cumulative cost of replacement programs at the national or state level.  The latter being central to 
decisions regarding federal funding that is needed.  
In 2022 AWWA provided EPA with a detailed engineering analysis of actual service line replacement 
programs.216, 217  The AWWA cited CDM Smith Report has costs reported by over 25 CWSs for full LSL 
replacement and over 20 CWSs for partial replacement.  The table below summarizes the costs reported 
adjusted to 2022 dollars.  The replacement costs themselves are actual prices and represent what CWSs 
have to pay for direct replacement to outside contractors.  Also, included are required ancillary costs 
such as engineering services, permitting, administration, outreach and post-replacement costs.  EPA’s 
Proposed Rule also recognized the need for ancillary services.  In this analysis ancillary costs are not in 
the “replacement” costs except restoration.  Therefore, the total cost estimates for service line 
replacement are the bottom-line figures of $7,600 to $37,800 with an average cost of $12,500. 
LSLR Component  
Minimum 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Average 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Maximum 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
  
  
  
  
Full Replacement (CWS and Private Side) 
$6,000 
$9,900 
$30,000 
Restoration 
$1,769 
$2,919 
$8,847 
Utility Side Replacement 
$2,300 
$4,990 
$10,000 
Private Side Replacement 
$4,150 
$7,150 
$25,000 
  
  
  
  
Engineering Services 
$660 
$1,090 
$3,300 
Field Inspection (Per SL) 
  
  
  
Customer Provided Data 
-- 
$10 
-- 
Door-to-Door Inspections 
-- 
$69 
-- 
Vacuum Excavation 
-- 
$320 
-- 
Mechanical Excavation 
-- 
$1,120 
-- 
  
  
  
  
Internal Labor Administration 
$175 
$289 
$876 
  
  
  
  
Customer Outreach 
$108 
$178 
$539 
  
  
  
  
Permitting 
$576 
$950 
$2,879 
  
  
  
  
 
216 AWWA, Lead and Copper Rulemaking Improvements Rulemaking (2022), Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0813 
(Federalism Comments). Attachment 1. CDM Smith. Final Report. Considerations when Costing Lead Service Line 
Identification and Replacement, (Nov. 2022). (see Appendix K) 
217 EPA, Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis Appendices at A-6 (2023). 

 
130 
LSLR Component  
Minimum 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Average 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Maximum 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Post-Replacement Provisions 
$78 
$118 
$158 
Pitcher Style Filter with 6 Months of Cartridges 
-- 
$58 
-- 
Water Sample 
$20 
$60 
$100 
Totals (rounded to nearest hundred) 
$7,600 
$12,500 
$37,800 
 
The cost estimate in the Proposed Rule Economic Analysis is summarized in the table below. The values 
shown in the economic analysis for minimum and maximum costs were reported as representing the 25 
and 75th percentile. No average cost was presented but presumably the modeling resulted in a median 
cost in the middle of the two values. The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis notes that the costs include 
ancillary costs other than those included elsewhere.  Note that neither analysis has inspection services 
for overseeing the replacements which are needed and significant. As an example, it is estimated in the 
response to Request for Comment 14 above that a crew can replace at best three service lines per day. 
An inspector cost for one day is approximately $480 or $160 per replaced service line.  This cost would 
need to be added to the average cost.  
LSLR Component  
Minimum 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Average 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
Maximum 
Cost 
($/LSLR) 
  
  
  
  
Full Replacement (CWS and Private Side) 
$6,507  
$0  
$8,519  
Partial Replacement 
$1,920  
$0  
$5,400  
GRR Replacement 
$1,920  
$0  
$5,400  
 
Comparing the above tables illustrates the significant underestimate in the costs reflected in the 
Proposed Rule Economic Analysis.  The Proposed Rule economic analysis reflects a maximum cost that is 
approximately the same as the actual minimum cost for full LSLR, which AWWA provided EPA in 
December 2022 (in the above table costs extracted from EPA’s analysis are in 2020 dollars and CDC 
Smith report costs are in 2022 dollars).  In the Proposed Rule economic analysis EPA eliminated high 
costs and only used the 75th percentile value at the high end of the replacement cost range.  This 
approach incorrectly eliminates actual costs being paid by CWSs; the upper values are not “statistical 
outliers”.  
Appendix A to the Proposed Rule Economic Analysis stated that  
“EPA did not utilize the auxiliary cost data due to potential issues with double counting 
because some auxiliary costs (such as planning, data management, customer outreach, filters, 
and sampling) are already accounted for elsewhere in the estimated rule costs for the 
proposed LCRI, and other costs (such as engineering and inspection costs) are already included 
in the DWINSA data.”  
However, as can be seen the Proposed Rule Economic Analysis costs are much lower than those in the 
CDM Smith report.  Accounting for the ancillary costs elsewhere does not result in a true cost benefit 

 
131 
analysis of replacement costs and again underestimates (1) the burden associated with the proposed 
LCRI and (2) the amount of federal funds necessary to achieve the rule requirement.  Even when 
comparing only CDM Smith construction costs to Proposed Rule Economic Analysis costs that include 
some ancillary items, the economic analysis costs are much lower.  The average CDM Smith report 
construction only cost is $9,900 compared to the economic analysis maximum cost with some ancillary 
items of $8,500. 
For comparison purposes the data from the CDM Smith report was analyzed to produce 25th and 75th 
percentile values as well as 10th and 90th percentiles (in 2022 dollars). The comparison with the Proposed 
Rule economic analysis is shown in the table below. These costs are only the actual construction costs 
for the CDM Smith report. Even at 75th percentile values the Proposed Rule economic analysis 
significantly underestimates actual costs. But again, the upper end costs should not be discarded.  
 
CDM Smith Estimate 
10% 
25% 
(Minimum 
Cost) 
75% 
(Maximum 
Cost) 
90% 
Full Replacement (CWS and 
Private Side) 
$7,053  
$8,113  
$10,537  
$13,329  
Partial Replacement 
$4,523  
$4,994  
$8,552  
$11,502  
 
 
 
 
 
LCRI Proposal 
10% 
25% 
(Minimum 
Cost) 
75% 
(Maximum 
Cost) 
90% 
Full Replacement (CWS Private 
Side) 
-- 
$6,507  
$8,519  
-- 
Partial Replacement 
-- 
$1,920  
$5,400  
-- 
 
EPA presented two arguments for why the Proposed Rule Economic Analysis costs were lower than the 
CDM Smith report costs and acceptable.  One argument was that the economic analysis had a larger 
data set than did AWWA. However, as shown in Exhibit A-3 the differences are not significant with 
AWWA having 38 cost estimates and the economic analysis having 43 cost estimates.  The second 
reason given was that the CDM Smith report data was only from systems serving populations larger than 
10,000 persons and may not have factored in smaller system costs. 218  Depending on which exhibit is 
used in the economic analysis, roughly 85% of all LSLs are in CWSs serving more than 10,000 persons. 
The cost estimates should not be biased downward for small systems when by far the costs will be 
borne by larger systems with more issues related to traffic control, coordination, and restoration.  
Cost estimates reviewed in preparing these comments indicate that CWSs are facing, still higher 
replacement costs. Restoration costs in particular are increasing, especially where replacements are not 
associated with main replacement projects.  
In summary 
 
218 EPA. Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis Appendices. (2023) A-6. 

 
132 
1. The costs used in the Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis are low and do not reflect true 
costs. 
2. The costs should include ancillary costs to construct a true value for lead line 
replacements and the total costs should be used in the cost benefit analysis.  
3. It is not reasonable to exclude the top 25% of CWS reported costs as these are true costs 
being borne to replace lead lines. 
4. The CDM Smith Report on replacement costs should not have been dismissed as 
representing systems serving more than 10,000 persons as such systems are burdened 
with replacing 85% of all the lead lines.  
EPA’s Estimate is in 2022 Dollars – The agency’s Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis and the above 
described CDM Smith report escalated available cost information to 2022 dollars.  The information on 
replacement costs provided to EPA in 2022 do not yet reflect more recent increases in costs.  The above 
per-line replacement costs do not reflect recent cost trends that are continuing to increase the cost of 
service line replacement programs: 
1. Inflation as an over-arching economic trend 
2. Recent rapid increases in spending on public infrastructure construction is resulting in 
increased demand for available construction resources and with that demand price 
escalation. 
3. Federal funding for infrastructure investment has with it federal cross-cutter requirements 
including wage, material origin, environmental impact assessment, and other 
requirements that both directly increase costs and represent additional logistical and 
administrative burdens, which themselves impose both operating expenses and create 
opportunity costs by introducing timing delays and uncertainty into project 
administration. 
Even well-established programs funded through CWS resources with established contractor pools are 
experiencing substantial cost increases.  One large CWS in EPA Region 3 received bids for service line 
replacement in the Fall of 2023 more than one-third higher than pricing reported previously in the CDM 
Smith report (adjusted to 2022 dollars).   
Engineering Standard of Care in Cost Estimation -- The American Association of Cost Engineering 
describes five classes of cost estimates that are distinguished by maturity level of project definition, end 
usage, methodology, and the expected accuracy range. A Class 1 estimate represents a level of project 
definition exceeding 50% where a detailed unit cost and detailed take-off have been used to estimate 
the costs and the cost could be as much as 15% higher. Alternatively, a Class 5 estimate represents a 
level of project definition of less than 2% where concepts are being screened and the use of parametric 
models were used and so the costs could be as much as 100% higher. In consideration of the data that 
are available for EPA to consider in estimating costs and given that site-specific conditions cannot be 
factored into the estimate, the EPA LCRI service line replacement cost estimate is likely to be considered 
a Class 4 or Class 5 estimate where costs could be 50% or 100% higher. EPA’s current cost estimate does 
not incorporate contingency costs or communicate estimate uncertainty in keeping with the recognized 

 
133 
engineering profession standard of care. As a result, (1) the cost of lead service line replacement is likely 
underestimated and (2) the range of uncertainty is not adequately conveyed to decision makers. 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) – EPA notes that BIL provides $15 billion over five years (i.e., $3 
billion per year in federal fiscal years 2022 – 2026).219, 220 In proposing the LCRI the agency estimates that 
service line replacement will cost more than $2.4 – 3.5 billion per year when annualized over 35 years.  
The federal funding afforded CWSs through BIL is important and helpful, but EPA should not hold that 
funding up as significantly addressing the cost implications of the proposed LCRI. 
5.5 
Likelihood of Additional WQP Sampling Site 
The proposed LCRI changes the sampling pool, returns many systems to routine monitoring, and reduces 
the concentration of lead in individual compliance samples at which CWSs must conduct WQP 
assessments.  The LCRI also expands ongoing monitoring implications to systems that do not operate 
under OCCT.  As revised, constraints on placement of evaluation sites following a high lead observation 
are: 
1. In the same sized water main 
2. In the same pressure zone 
3. Within a one-half mile radius of the LCR compliance monitoring site that was elevated 
This is a continuing provision of the proposed LCRI, consequently, 
1. As initial LCRI implementation proceeds systems will be seeking increasingly scarce Tier 1 
and 2 sample sites, and then Tier 3 sample sites 
2. Late in the LCRI implementation sample sites will be geographically dispersed as the state 
directs the compliance monitoring pool to be widely representative across the water 
system as the system transitions to Tier 4 and 5 sites. 
In either scenario there is little reason to assume close proximity between tap sample stations and WQP 
monitoring stations, as the two monitoring networks are geared toward two different facets of the rule.  
The compliance tap monitoring sample set as sentinel sites for lead release and the WQP monitoring 
sites as a check on operational control.   
CWSs do not have uniform density.  There are CWSs that serve urban centers, but there are also CWSs 
serving suburban and rural development patterns.  EPA does not have a basis for assuming that WQP 
monitoring stations suitable for a continuing monitoring requirement that meet the above criteria are 
readily available. 
Yet, in the Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis221 EPA assumes that only 10% of the required sample site 
and distribution system assessments will result in a new WQP monitoring site in a system serving more 
than 100,000 persons and only 20% for systems serving more than 1,000 but less than 100,000 persons.  
The basis for this this probability is not explained. For EPA to conduct this economic analysis with 
 
219 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Pub. L. 117–58). 
220 88 Fed. Reg. at 84881. 
221 EPA. Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis. (2023) Page 4-157. 

 
134 
credibility, it should assume that every compliance monitoring sample over 10 µg/L results in a new 
WQP monitoring station until the system reaches the cap on the number of sites.  
Given the requirement for WQP monitoring sites on similar sized mains and in close proximity to the tap 
sample site, the WQP sites will tend to be in residential areas.  CWSs must have reliable access to 
sample locations for parameters requiring routine monitoring like WQP sampling.  EPA should not 
establish a regulatory requirement that requires systems to rely on poor quality sampling stations like 
fire hydrants.  EPA has not incorporated a mechanism for or the cost of systems transitioning from the 
sample site used in the required timeframe following a high lead observation and construction of 
dedicated sampling stations.   
5.6 
Assuming No Reduction in Lead Exposure 
EPA cannot assume that lead exposures will be constant for the duration of the LCRI economic analysis 
as described in the Proposed Rule Economic Analysis.222  EPA is conducting this Economic Analysis in the 
context of: 
1. A White House and EPA Administrator led “Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan” that is 
intended to be an all of government effort to reduce exposures to environmental sources 
of lead (see Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis, page 1-2).  At EPA alone, there are two 
completed rulemakings and four rulemakings underway as part of this plan.  EPA has the 
analyses from these rulemakings that the agency can use to inform the LCRI rulemaking. 
2. There is a continued ongoing decline in observed lead levels in the U.S. population, 
including the upper percentile blood lead level concentrations in children. Levels have 
declined so significantly and to such low levels that the Centers for Disease Control has re-
framed both its metric to guide primary exposure reduction and recently once again 
lowered that reference blood lead level concentration to 3.5 µg/dL (i.e., the 97.5 
percentile blood lead level in children one to five years old in the U.S.). 
“The geometric mean BLL in U.S. children aged 1–5 years has declined over time 
from 15.2 µg/dL in 1976–1980 to 0.83 µg/dL in 2011–2016 (Table 2) (8). During 
the same period among U.S. children aged 6–11 years, the geometric mean BLL 
declined from 12.7 µg/dL to 0.6 µg/dL.” (Ruckart et al., MMWR, October 29, 2021, 
Vol. 70, No. 43) 
While the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) does not report a 
97.5 percentile geometric mean for children aged one to five the 95th percentile value is 
2.02 µg/L.223 
Both the overall declines in BLLs and the likely doses of environmental lead exposure from multiple 
media (e.g., water, dust, soil, air, etc.) must be considered when evaluating public policy choices with 
such large costs for small incremental reductions in lead exposure.  Zatarian et al.224 which underpins 
 
222 EPA. Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis. (2023) Page 5-22. 
223 CDC, National Exposure Report Home, Biomonitoring Data Tables for Environmental Chemicals, Blood Lead 
(2011 - 2018), CAS Number 7439-92-1) (2023) https://www.cdc.gov/exposurereport/index.html.  
224 Zatarian V, Xue J, Tornero-Velez R, Brown J. Children’s Lead Exposure: A Multimedia Modeling Analysis to Guide 
Public Health Decision-Making,” Environmental Health Perspectives. Environ Health Perspect. Sep 
12;125(9):097009 (2017). 

 
135 
EPA’s lead health risk assessment clearly demonstrates that relative source contribution is a significant 
factor in lead exposure, even in special scenarios like the case of bottle-fed infants.  
5.7 
Understanding Post-Partial Lead Concentrations 
As noted in the above response to Request for Comment 21, EPA’s analysis of lead exposure post-partial 
replacement does not take into account modern lead service line replacement practice.  As seen in 
Exhibit 5-4: Summary Statistics for Tap Water Lead Concentrations by LSL and CCT Status Combinations, 
Country, and Citation225 the dataset underpinning EPA’s Economic Analysis predates the 2017 
AWWA/ANSI C810 standard for lead service line replacement and subsequent WRF research that inform 
current practice.  EPA does not account for the benefits of the AWWA/ANSI standard in subsequent 
steps in the analysis. 
 
5.8 
Costing Expectations for CCT Decision-making 
The Proposed Rule and the associated Economic Analysis project that adapting corrosion control to 
comply with the LCRI revisions (e.g., action level, sampling protocol, sampling pool, sampling frequency, 
and action level calculation) merely entails three things (1) a state instruction, (2) in some instances a 
pipe rack study and (3) installation or adjustment of   chemical feeds.    The agency analysis does not 
capture the level of care that must go into either a state issuing instructions or a system discerning how 
it will cope with: 
1. The unintended consequences of complying with the state’s direction (e.g., the addition of 
orthophosphate, ending the application of a polyphosphate, etc.) 
2. Preparing the distribution system for a change in corrosion control (e.g., removing 
sediment, revising water supply diversification practices, etc.) 
EPA describes the scope of CCT analysis and CCT adjustment in its Economic Analysis.  Note that EPA did 
include costs for which it does not offer a well-reasoned explanation, such as inclusion of a relatively 
low-cost activity of spot flushing as a means of improving water quality near LCR sample sites (page 4-
151).  This is an unlikely approach for most system under the LCRI given the nature of the relevant water 
quality drivers and an impractical strategy given the uncertain nature of the compliance sample 
collection process.  If EPA utilized this strategy to substantially alter the cost consequences of the rule 
within the SafeWater model, it should be removed from the economic analysis. 
5.9 
Analysis Misjudges the Impact of Orthophosphate Addition on Cost 
Inclusion In Economic Analysis-- EPA did not include the cost of orthophosphate removal from 
wastewater in the agency’s analysis beyond an informational addition.226  This is contrary to EPA’s 
internal guidance for the development of Economic Analyses and is inconsistent with the intent of 
SDWA’s requirement that attributable costs of a regulation that will be borne by the households paying 
for implementing the primary standard be included in the health risk reduction and cost analysis 
required by the rule.227  EPA cannot forgo including these costs when weighing the benefit-cost ratio for 
the Final LCRI because EPA must assume that give CWA policies, the incremental cost burden on 
wastewater treatment facilities will in most instances be borne by the same customers as the CWS 
 
225 EPA. Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis. (2023) Page 5-9. 
226 Ibid. Page C-3. 
227 42 U.S. Code § 300g–1(b)(3)(C)(i)(III) 

 
136 
applying orthophosphate.  The Economic Analysis already notes the use of water quality trading as a 
mechanism for such cost transfers to CWSs where there is not a one-to-one correspondence between 
the impacted wastewater agency and the CWS. 
Analysis Inconsistent with EPA Program Goals -- The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis conflicts with the 
greatest programmatic emphasis in EPA’s CWA program, the control of nutrients.  EPA has had a 
Nutrient Reduction Strategy across multiple administrations for multiple decades, see 
epa.gov/nutrientpollution. That strategy includes supporting numeric nutrient criteria and National 
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions under existing narrative criteria. In November 
2023 EPA published the National Rivers and Streams Assessment 2018 – 2019.  In that assessment EPA 
found “Forty-two percent of the nation’s river and stream miles were in poor condition, with elevated 
levels of phosphorus, and 44% were in poor condition for nitrogen.”  Yet in the Proposed LCRI Economic 
Analysis, EPA describes the impact of orthophosphate addition as a negligible concern.  In short, EPA 
argues that one of the most sustained regulatory programs under the CWA is irrelevant because, 
1. CWA requirements are not a legal or technical constraint on SDWA requiring phosphate 
addition for corrosion control, because publicly operated treatment works (POTWs) will 
remove the added phosphate under CWA requirements 
2. Currently most POTWs are not subject to phosphate limits so the implications of CWA regulation 
are only pertinent to a few locales 
3. The CWA related costs associated with orthophosphate addition are not significant  
4. The incremental difference in phosphate addition between the LCRR and LCRI is small 
5. This incremental addition of phosphate to waters of the US is a small marginal addition 
compared to all other anthropogenic sources 
For decades, EPA’s CWA policy has been to reduce existing anthropogenic sources of nutrients from 
every regulated point discharge, prevent new influxes of anthropogenic nutrient pollution, and to utilize 
regulatory pressure on point dischargers to motivate control of nonpoint nutrient releases.  To evaluate 
the Proposed LCRI as though this decades long CWA regulatory framework will not have meaningful 
consequences for CWSs and the costs borne by households as a result of the Proposed LCRI is not sound. 
A Significant Local Constraint -- This administration did not oversee the decision to issue a variance to 
Denver Water (December 16, 2019), so it may not be aware of how central a role the issue of nutrient 
control under the CWA plays in local decision making.  A review of the record for that decision in Region 
8 would illustrate that addition of orthophosphate for purposes of corrosion control will lead to 
implications for water systems well beyond EPA’s estimated annualized increase of $4.2 - $5.9 million.  
Denver Water operates in a semi-arid environment but federal and state emphasis on nutrient control is 
a ubiquitous regulatory pressure nationwide.  Slabaugh et al. (2015)228 demonstrated that much less 
significant changes than those undertaken in the LCRI would account for hundreds of millions of annual 
costs for phosphate removal.   
 
228 Slabaugh, RM, RB Arnold Jr., S Chaparro, and CP Hill. National Cost Implications of Potential Long-Term 
LCR Requirements. Journal AWWA Vol. 107, Issue. 8, Pages 389 – 400 (2015) 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2015.107.0097. 
 

 
137 
5.10 Alternative Definition of Lead Content Service Lines to be Replaced 
The Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis both under-estimates the cost and overestimates the public 
health benefits associated with including galvanized services preceded by a lead connector in the 
definition of service lines warranting replacement.  In Exhibits 8-14 – 8-17 of the Proposed LCRI 
Economic Analysis229 EPA presents its “high scenario” annualized cost and health benefit estimates at 3 
and 7% discount rates.  EPA presents that the expanding the definition of service lines requiring 
replacement to include “Lead Connectors and Galvanized Lines Downstream or Previously Downstream 
of Lead Connectors Must be Replaced” would have a substantial net positive benefit (see following 
table).   
 
Discount 
Rate 
Total Annualized 
Difference 
 ($ Billions [2022 USD]) 
LCRI 
Increment 
3% 
Cost 
$0.20  
$0.20  
Benefit 
$2.07  
$2.07  
Net Benefit 
$1.87  
$1.87  
7% 
Cost 
$0.24  
$0.24  
Benefit 
$1.25  
$1.25  
Net Benefit 
$1.01  
$1.01  
 
EPA does not describe a defensible basis for estimating any benefit associated with this alternative.  Any 
benefits analysis is constrained by: 
1. The alternative definition’s inclusion of “or Previously Downstream of Lead Connectors 
Must be Replaced” must be assumed, given the information provided, to be similar to 
EPA’s treatment of potential historical presence of lead service lines in GRRSL definition.  
In this instance EPA cannot attribute any increased incremental benefit from galvanized 
pipe preceded by lead connector because EPA has no information on which to base the 
likely occurrence of actual galvanized service lines preceded by lead. 
EPA could attempt to craft such a probability distribution based on the 2023 Needs Survey 
but that dataset is so troubled that EPA has (1) chosen not to report the lead connector 
data in the survey and (2) resorted to a supplemental information collection request for 
the lead service line characterization data previously collected. As illustrated by rows 2 – 4 
of the following table, the Needs Survey has marked differences in the occurrence of 
service line materials (see following table). The differences are as likely to be the result of 
an inadequately representative sample and a difficult to complete survey questionnaire, 
as to be credible differences in material occurrence.  This concern would likely be 
especially evident if the data were normalized for date of construction. 
 
229 EPA. Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis (2023) Pages 8-12 – 8-14. 

 
138 
AWWA demonstrated in information submitted to EPA during the Federalism consultation 
for the Proposed LCRI.230 The nature of available records and the distribution of 
galvanized service lines nationally are such that the states where EPA is otherwise 
collecting better quality service line material data are not where galvanized service lines 
are most likely to be found. 
Service Line Material 
Large and 
Medium Systems 
Small 
Systems 
1.    Lead Service Lines 
3% 
1% 
2.    Standalone Galvanized Service Lines 
5% 
1% 
3.    Lead- and Galvanized-Free Service Lines 
18% 
61% 
4.    Unknown Service Lines 
56% 
37% 
5.    Unreported Service Lines 
18% 
0% 
Total 
100% 
100% 
 
2. EPA’s definition of service line is such that any analysis of exposure and thus benefits will 
misrepresent health risk because service lines that are in fact not delivering water to 
potable water uses in structures are included in the service line replacement requirement. 
3. Also described earlier, EPA lacks a demonstrable linkage between lead connectors (i.e., a 
less than two-foot-long length of lead that is typically located at the main) with elevated 
lead exposure levels.  Just applying back-of-the-envelope comparison of benefits with and 
without the additional service lines, it appears that EPA treated removing 2 feet of lead as 
having the same incremental public health benefit as removing an entire lead service line. 
4. Because few systems will have strong records for the use of lead connectors, any 
galvanized service line not otherwise captured in the GRRSL category will have to be 
included in the cost of: 
a. Service line characterization 
b. Service line replacement  
c. Implications for communities meeting the goal of replacing all targeted service 
lines in 10-year and annual 10% replacement rate 
d. Application of all public education provisions associated with replacement or 
disturbance, including distribution of pitcher filters, customer requested samples, 
etc.  
e. Response to requests for replacement  
 
230 EPA. Summary Report on Federalism and Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (UMRA) Consultation for the 
Development of the Proposed LCRI National Primary Drinking Water Regulation. (2023) EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-
0500.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1114 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0762 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
284
LEAD AND LANDLORDS 
KAREN CZAPANSKIY* 
 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................... 284 
I. 
WHAT’S THE PROBLEM? .............................................................. 286 
II. 
PRACTICAL SOLUTIONS RECONSIDERED ..................................... 290 
A. Some Tenants Have Property Right to Replace or  
 
Consent to Replacement of the Private-Side Service Line ... 290 
B. Landlord’s Duty to Maintain Includes Duty to Replace  
 
or Consent to Replacement of Private Side Lead Service  
 
Line ....................................................................................... 291 
C. Interpret the ownership interest in a rental property  
 
as not including the right to refuse access for the  
 
purpose of replacing the private side lead service line. ........ 295 
CONCLUSION ............................................................................................. 300 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Lead is a toxin that humans cannot safely consume.1 As has been 
known for decades, people suffer exposure to lead because of its use in paint 
and gasoline. In recent decades, water has been added to the list of delivery 
systems. Often, lead enters water when pipes containing lead are used to 
transport water from a public water system (“PWS”) to the tap in a home or 
 
* 
 Professor Emerita, University of Maryland Carey School of Law. Many thanks 
are due to the three people whose commitment to eliminating environmental injustice 
inspired me and my students to study how to eliminate lead service lines in the District of 
Columbia: Tom Neltner of the Environmental Defense Fund and Professors Karen Baehler 
and Marquise McGraw of the American University School of Public Affairs. I was fortunate 
to be joined in this endeavor by the students in MLAW 358B during the spring of 2022 at 
the University of Maryland College Park, whose hard work and enthusiasm sweetened my 
last semester of teaching before my retirement. Thanks as well to the Belmont Law Review 
and the students who put together the Symposium and this issue. 
1. 
 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 
86 Fed. Reg. 4198, 4238 (Jan. 15, 2021) (“Exposure to lead can cause serious health effects 
in all age groups. Infants and children who drink water containing lead could have decreases 
in IQ and attention span and increases in learning and behavior problems. Lead exposure 
among women who are pregnant increases prenatal risks. Lead exposure among women who 
later become pregnant has similar risks if lead stored in the mother’s bones is released 
during pregnancy. Recent science suggests that adults who drink water containing lead have 
increased risks of heart disease, high blood pressure, kidney or nervous system problems.”).  

2023] 
LEAD AND LANDLORDS 
285 
a business—as many as 10 million homes in the United States.2 In Flint, 
Michigan, for example, the buffering material inside the pipes was disturbed 
when the PWS started using a more acidic source of water and, at the same 
time, failed to add buffering chemicals to the mix. When lead leached from 
the service lines into the taps in people’s homes, thousands of residents—
many of them particularly vulnerable infants and children—drank water from 
lead-contaminated pipes and were poisoned.3 
Many PWSs and local, regional and state governments have been 
working to eliminate lead contamination from water pipes. Significant new 
funding for these efforts was included in the infrastructure bill signed by 
President Biden in November 2021.4 Unfortunately, some of the people who 
historically have borne the greatest burden of lead exposure from all sources 
are less likely than others to see the benefits. One important reason for the 
differential is that people of color and people with little income and wealth 
are more likely to live in rental housing. In most jurisdictions, landlords are 
viewed as having exclusive power to decide whether and when to replace the 
portion of the water service line which is called “private”—the lateral portion 
of the service line that connects the main service line to the building. Getting 
the consent from a landlord to replace a lateral service line, as it turns out, is 
not always easy. When a landlord does not replace a line or consent to its 
replacement by the PWS, tenants continue to be exposed to significant levels 
of lead contamination from the pipes. 
In this article, I argue that the accepted practice of requiring the 
consent of the landlord before replacing the lateral service line is, at least, 
questionable law. In making this claim, I’m asserting that property rights are 
properly subject to limits that affect a landlord’s autonomy around the 
question of whether a lead service line should be replaced on their property. 
While this assertion is contrary to the usual approach, it is anything but alien 
to property law. Unless judges and legislators are urged to consider more 
deeply the costs of landlord authority and opportunities to limit it, 
assumptions will continue to prevail over a more considered analysis.5  
The assumption that the authority of the landlord is total rests on two 
common claims, both of which are questionable. The first claim is that a 
property owner, such as a landlord, has the right to exclude everyone from 
their property in all circumstances, throughout the property and regardless of 
who occupies the property. The second is that a property owner such as a 
 
2. 
 See generally Review of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead 
and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR), 86 Fed. Reg. 71574, 71575 (Dec. 17, 2021). 
3. 
 See generally MONA HANNA-ATTISHA, WHAT THE EYES DON’T SEE (2018); Karen 
Syma Czapanskiy, Preschool and Lead Exposed Kids, 35 TOURO L. REV. 171 (2019). 
4. 
 Sophia Campbell and David Wessel, What Would It Cost to Replace All the 
Nation’s Lead Water Pipes?, BROOKINGS INST. (last updated Apr. 14, 2022), 
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2021/05/13/what-would-it-cost-to-replace-all-the-
nations-lead-water-pipes/ [https://perma.cc/VZ4B-ATXP]. 
5. 
 Nadav Shoked, The Duty to Maintain, 64 DUKE L.J. 437, 509 (2014). 

286 
BELMONT LAW REVIEW 
[Vol. 10: 284 
landlord has no affirmative duties relating to the property. Together, 
assumptions such as these preclude appropriate consideration of practical 
solutions to problems around replacing private side water lines in rental 
housing.   
I. 
WHAT’S THE PROBLEM? 
Using lead for plumbing is an ancient practice, so old that the 
chemical name for lead, Pb, is short for plumbum, the Latin word for 
plumbing.6 What was not understood until more recently is that even small 
amounts of lead in drinking water can result in dangerously elevated blood 
lead levels in humans, causing special risks for infants and children. About a 
decade after that connection was documented in the District of Columbia, the 
Flint water crisis cemented in public consciousness the connection between 
childhood lead poisoning and municipal PWS.  
Reducing the risk of lead poisoning from drinking water requires 
replacing service lines which contain lead because that lead can leach out of 
the pipes or fittings and enter the water. Unless and until the lines are 
replaced, the risk remains, at least if the PWS does not protect pipes 
effectively against corrosion.  
Lead service lines include two segments. The first segment is the 
main, also called the “public” side, which includes the pipes which convey 
the water from the PWS source to the street. The second segment is the 
“private” side, the lateral branch which conveys the water from the main or 
public side to the fitting which connects to pipes in the building.  
Replacing service lines on the public side is typically done by the 
PWS. Replacing pipes on the private side can be done several ways. The first 
way, also the least expensive and safest method of replacement, occurs where 
a PWS replaces the main and the lateral branches at the same time. Some 
systems or jurisdictions require the owner of a building to pay the PWS or a 
private plumber to pay for the simultaneous private side replacement. The 
second way is for  a property owner to spur the PWS to do a public side 
replacement by undertaking the private side replacement. The last way is for 
the PWS to replace only the public side lines without arrangements to replace 
the private side lines simultaneously. This results in a partial replacement 
which can leave the inhabitants of the building subject to risks to their health 
from unpredictable exposure to lead emanating from remaining lead service 
lines.7 Experts agree that a partial replacement is risky, although the degree 
of risk is disputed.8  
 
6. 
 See David A. Dana & Nadav Shoked, Property Edges, 60 B.C. L. REV. 753, 792–
93 (2019).  
7. 
 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 
86 Fed. Reg. 4198, 4218 (Jan. 15, 2021). 
8. 
 During its recent reconsideration of the Lead and Copper Rule (“LCR”), the 
Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) discouraged PWSs from doing partial 

2023] 
LEAD AND LANDLORDS 
287 
Among the many challenges inherent in lead service line 
replacement is the cost, which is massive. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law 
passed in 2021 provides $15 billion over five years.9 The money generally 
can be spent only on replacing public service lines, leaving most private-side 
lines uncovered. Even with that limitation, the money is probably only 
enough to cover between half and a third of the total cost.10  
Given the cost issue, priorities will be established. Because people 
of color have historically borne the greatest burden of exposure to lead, 
fairness and public health considerations counsel that communities of color 
deserve priority.11 Historically, however, that has not happened on either the 
public side or the private side. A case study of lead service line replacements 
in the District of Columbia from 2010 through 2018, for example, showed 
that many more full replacements were done in the highest income 
neighborhoods.12 Partial replacements were more common in the lowest 
income neighborhoods, leaving many children of color at risk.13 Research 
that I did with students in a seminar at the University of Maryland College 
of Law in the spring of 2022 established that, even during the last several 
years after the District of Columbia and its PWS announced their 
commitment to greater fairness in communities of color, relatively less work 
was done in the neighborhoods with the highest concentrations of people in 
poverty and people of color.14 
One reason that full lead service line replacements are more common 
in higher income neighborhoods is that many jurisdictions require private 
property owners to pay for private-side work. The cost can exceed two 
thousand dollars. Homeowners in low-income neighborhoods are less likely 
to be able to afford a private-side replacement. Low-income neighborhoods 
are also more likely to have a large number of rental properties, and landlords 
may be less willing to pay to replace service lines serving a building where 
 
replacements but did not prohibit them. See id. at 4214. According to the EPA, “partial 
LSLR [lead service line replacements] can cause lead levels to be temporarily elevated,” and 
that risk should be mitigated by providing residents with temporary water filtration where 
possible. Id. at 4218. 
9. 
 U.S. Env’t Prot. Agency,, Bipartisan infrastructure law: A Historic Investment in 
Water, https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-11/e-ow-bid-fact-sheet-
final.508.pdf [https://perma.cc/6SN9-5R6K]. 
10.  See Campbell & Wessel, supra note 4.  
11.  National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 
86 Fed. Reg. at  4215 (“Data … suggest that non-Hispanic black individuals are more than 
twice as likely as non-Hispanic whites to live in moderately or severely substandard housing 
[which] … is more likely to present risks from deteriorating lead-based paint … minority 
and low-income children are more likely to live in proximity to lead-emitting industries and 
to live in urban areas, which are more likely to have contaminated soils”). 
12.  Karen J. Baehller et. al, Full Lead Service Line Replacement: A Case Study of 
Equity in Environmental Remediation, 14 SUSTAINABILITY 352, 362 (2022).  
13.  Id. 
14.  MLAW Briefing (5/16/2022) (on file with author).  

288 
BELMONT LAW REVIEW 
[Vol. 10: 284 
they do not live.15 While some jurisdictions fund full replacements,16 and 
others provide subsidies for low-income homeowners and to landlords who 
rent to low-income tenants,17 cost remains a significant barrier.  
Even when the cost is not borne wholly or partially by landlords, 
private-side replacements remain a problem for the many people of color who 
occupy rental properties in low-income communities. The reason is that the 
usual practice is not  to perform any work on the private side without the 
consent of the landlord, and the landlord may fail to provide or affirmatively 
deny consent.18 The result is that tenants are left at risk of lead poisoning and 
have no way to get the pipe replaced. 
States and local jurisdictions can make it less likely that a landlord 
will refuse consent by requiring landlords to replace the service line and 
imposing negative consequences when the landlord fails to hire a plumber or 
provide a PWS with consent so the PWS can do the job. Examining such 
laws demonstrates how difficult it is to solve the problem so long as the 
underlying assumption is that a landlord has an inviolable right to say no to 
replacing the service line and that the PWS must defer to the landlord.  
Illinois provides a good example of a recent statute under which the 
property owner is empowered to deny access to the PWS.19 In 2021, Illinois 
enacted the Lead Service Line Replacement and Notification Act20 based on 
the findings of the General Assembly that “there is no safe level of exposure 
to heavy metal lead” and that lead service lines must be replaced because 
they transport lead and thereby jeopardize the general health, safety and 
welfare of residents.21 The Act requires most of the state’s PWSs to replace 
lead service lines over the coming decades. In the interim, whenever a lead 
service line is identified, the PWS must notify the owner and occupants of 
the building.22  
The Act acknowledges the dangers of partial replacements, and 
prohibits PWSs from doing them in most circumstances.23 Nonetheless, the 
Act allows for a partial replacement whenever a landlord fails to provide a 
 
15.  Review of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR), 86 Fed. Reg. 71574, 71575 (Dec. 17, 2021) (“a higher incidence of 
rental housing in [low-income and of color] communities creates an additional barrier to lead 
service line replacement (LSLR) where the property owner does not consent to full 
replacement.”  
16.  Id. at 71578–79. 
17.  Id. at 71580.  
18.  Id. at 71575. 
19.  415 ILL. COMP. STAT. 5 /17.12(c) (2022) (defining “service line” as the “piping, 
tubing, and necessary appurtenances acting as a conduit from the water main or source of 
potable water supply to the building plumbing at the first shut-off valve or 18 inches inside 
the building, whichever is shorter”). 
20.  Lead Service Line Replacement and Notification Act, Pub. Act 102-0613, 2021 
Ill. Laws 3739.  
21.  415 ILL. COMP. STAT. 5 /17.12(b).  
22.  415 ILL. COMP. STAT. 5 /17.12(j). 
23.  415 ILL. COMP. STAT. 5/17.12(ff). 

2023] 
LEAD AND LANDLORDS 
289 
PWS with consent to access to the private side of the service line. Regardless 
of whether the replacement is planned or results from an emergency, the PWS 
must contact the owner of the building to request access and permission to 
replace the service line on the private side.24 In the absence of the owner’s 
consent, the water company has to follow up on the partial replacement by 
providing warnings to the building’s owner and residents about the dangers 
they now face because of the partial replacement.25 The sole consequence for 
a property owner who fails to consent is that, between the time a partial 
replacement occurs and the time when the private service line is replaced, if 
that ever occurs, the property owner may be required to provide at least one 
certified filter on a source of potable water.26 
A bill introduced in 2022 in the District of Columbia requires all 
property owners to remove lead water service lines by 2030.27 Owners can 
comply by registering to have the PWS replace the line or by hiring a plumber 
to do the job.28 Unlike in Illinois, owners who fail to comply face significant 
consequences. Non-compliant property owners are subject to fines and losing 
eligibility for business licenses, occupancy permits and construction permits 
for the offending property.29 Importantly, under the bill, the landlord has no 
inviolable right to deny access to the property, although overruling the 
landlord’s decision requires invoking the judicial process. A tenant on the 
property or the City’s Attorney General can bring an action for abatement 
against a non-complying landlord. If successful, a tenant can also be awarded 
attorneys’ fees and a portion of the fine paid by the landlord.30  
The contrast between the laws of Illinois and the District of 
Columbia proposal is telling. Under the former, a tenant in a building where 
the landlord fails to consent may get a water filter. Under the latter, leaving 
the tenant unprotected can result in the landlord losing the right to decide 
whether the PSW can enter the building to replace the private-side service 
line. The District of Columbia’s proposal is preferable, because it advances 
the desired outcome of reducing lead exposure. That said, as this article 
explores, not only is the deference shown to private property rights by the 
State of Illinois not legally required, even the District of Columbia bill would 
 
24.  415 ILL. COMP. STAT. 5/17.12(ff) (emergency replacement); see also 415 ILL. 
COMP. STAT. 5/17.12(gg)(3) (planned replacement).  
25.  415 ILL. COMP. STAT. 5/17.12(jj). 
26.  415 ILL. COMP. STAT. 5/17.12(ff)(1)(D). 
27.  Green New Deal for a Lead-Free DC Amendment Act of 2022, H.R. 24-802 (D.C. 
2022). Advocates have proposed an alternative bill which, among other things, authorizes 
the occupant of the property to consent to the removal of the lead service line if the owner 
fails to respond to a request for access from the water company. See id. The proposed bill 
also requires the water company to provide residents with filters for potable water until the 
danger of leaded water has been abated.  
28.  § 6015(b). 
29.  §§ 6015(b)(d)(1)-(2).  
30.  § 6015(d)(3)(A). 

290 
BELMONT LAW REVIEW 
[Vol. 10: 284 
fail to take advantage of property doctrines which could allow a PWS to gain 
access to all or part of rental properties. 
II. 
PRACTICAL SOLUTIONS RECONSIDERED  
The accepted rationale underlying the Illinois statute is that entering 
a privately owned building without the consent of the property owner always 
constitutes an actionable trespass. In this article, I am not contesting that 
proposition when the building is both owned and occupied by the property 
owner. What I am contesting is the salience of that proposition when the 
property owner has rented all or part of the building to a tenant. In that case, 
as I explain below, other practical solutions are justifiable under various 
property law approaches. 
A. Some Tenants Have Property Right to Replace or Consent to 
Replacement of the Private-Side Service Line  
At common law, the landlord-tenant relationship can be described as 
a transfer by the landlord to the tenant of the present possessory interest in 
the property.31 When the tenancy ends, the landlord’s future possessory 
interest begins. Except as limited by the lease or by the doctrine of waste, the 
present possessory interests of a tenant are coextensive with the future 
possessory rights of the landlord. During the tenancy, therefore, a tenant 
owns the right to decide who can and cannot access the property. If a tenant 
who has possessory rights to a building agrees to allow the PWS to replace 
the private-side line, the owner of the building has no right to claim that a 
trespass occurred when the PWS entered the property to replace the private-
side line. 
Theoretically, a landlord may have a claim against a tenant for 
consenting to a change in the premises under the doctrine of waste. The risk 
of being liable for waste could persuade a tenant not to give consent to the 
PWS. In most situations, however, the likelihood of a tenant being held liable 
for waste approaches zero. 
The law of waste limits the possessory rights of a tenant. A tenant’s 
present right of possession traditionally did not include the right to do certain 
things that affect the future possessory interest of the landlord, including a 
tenant’s opportunity to make permanent changes to the property.32 A tenant, 
therefore, traditionally would have lacked  the right to consent to changes 
such as replacing the lead service line. Under the modern understanding of 
the law of waste, however, a change which increases the value of the land is 
“ameliorating waste” and is not actionable. Replacing the private-side lead 
service line should be seen as ameliorating because it improves the value of 
the property in at least two ways. First, replacement brings the property into 
 
31.  DALE A. WHITMAN ET AL., THE LAW OF PROPERTY 216–17 (4th ed. 2019). 
32.  Id. at 217–18.  

2023] 
LEAD AND LANDLORDS 
291 
compliance with the law in those states that require lead service lines to be 
replaced.33 Second, replacement protects the landlord from getting sued by 
occupants of the house who would otherwise risk being poisoned by the lead 
that contaminates drinking water coming from the private side of the service 
line.34 
While a court should agree that replacing a lead water line does not 
constitute waste, a tenant may want assurance that their landlord cannot 
undertake eviction anyway. Theoretically, the proposed D.C. statute 
addresses that problem by explicitly holding the tenant harmless for agreeing 
to a lead service line replacement.35 Even a court which is hostile to limiting 
the rights of a property owner is unlikely to give a landlord a remedy against 
a tenant who enjoys the protection of a statutory immunity to liability.  
What the proposed D.C. statute does not address, however, is the 
assumption that only a property owner controls access to the property. 
Because of that assumption, neither the proposed D.C. statute nor the Illinois 
statute empowers a tenant to give the PWS permission to replace the service 
line, despite the control that some tenants have under standard landlord-
tenant law. The D.C. proposed statute at least allows a court to overrule the 
landlord at the behest of a tenant who seeks an abatement order, but all 
tenants are treated the same, regardless of whether a particular tenant owns 
the necessary possessory interest.36 Under the Illinois statute, the tenant 
would have to live with the leaded pipe because the PWS is authorized to do 
a partial replacement when the property owner does not consent to the 
private-side replacement.37 Further, the EPA does not ban the partial 
replacement, although it does not allow Illinois to count the partial 
replacement toward its replacement numbers.38 
B. Landlord’s Duty to Maintain Includes Duty to Replace or 
Consent to Replacement of Private Side Lead Service Line  
A lease for an apartment in a multi-unit building, unlike a lease for 
the entire premises, conveys to each tenant a possessory interest in the leased 
apartment and access to any common area necessary for the use of the 
apartment, such as hallways, shared laundry space and the like.39 These 
 
33.  §§ 6015(b)(d)(1)-(2).  
34.  See Barbara Bezdek, Silence in the Court: Participation and Subordination of 
Poor Tenants' Voices in Legal Process, 20 HOFSTRA L. REV. 533, 534–36 (1992) (discussing 
tenants’ legal knowledge).  
35.  Green New Deal for a Lead-Free DC Amendment Act of 2022, H.R. 24-802 (D.C. 
2022). 
36.  See 415 ILL. COMP. STAT. 5/17.12 (2019).  
37.  See 40 C.F.R. § 141.84 (2021). 
38.  See National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule 
Revisions, 86 Fed. Reg. 4198-01, 4219 (Jan. 15, 2021). 
39.  Wynn ex rel. Wynn v. T.R.I.P Redevelopment Assocs., 296 A.D.2d 176, 178–79 
(N.Y. App. Div. 2002).  

292 
BELMONT LAW REVIEW 
[Vol. 10: 284 
common areas usually do not include areas where common utilities are 
located, such as the hook-up to the water line. Without a right of possession, 
none of the tenants would have a right to consent to a third-party such as the 
PWS to enter the building to replace the service line. That right remains with 
the landlord. The duty to maintain common areas also rests with the 
landlord.40 As understood under modern landlord-tenant law, then, the 
question is whether the duty to maintain includes the duty to replace or, at 
minimum, consent to the replacement of, a private-side lead water line that 
serves multiple tenants in a single building.  
The answer to the question seems clear. According to the 
Restatement, “[t]he landlord . . . is obligated to the tenant to keep the leased 
property in a condition that meets the requirements of governing health, 
safety, and housing codes . . . the landlord is obligated to the tenant to keep 
safe and in repair the areas remaining under his control that are maintained 
for the use and benefit of his tenants.”41  
Wherever lead service lines are prohibited, as in the Illinois statute 
and the D.C. proposal, a landlord probably violates a housing code relating 
to safety by not allowing the replacement of a lead service line. The 
landlord’s violation is also plain in jurisdictions where the obligation to 
maintain the premises is described as including “all cases where the leased 
premises are unfit for human habitation because of health or safety hazards, 
whether or not there is a housing code violation.”42 In either case, the 
landlord’s conduct results in the health hazard of lead in the drinking water 
when that hazard would be eliminated if the landlord consented to the 
replacement of the lead service line. Tenants are entitled to the abatement of 
such health hazards once the existence of the hazard is known.43  
The question remains as to whether the landlord’s breach of the duty 
to maintain with respect to the lead service line gives rise to a remedy that 
 
40.  RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF PROPERTY: LANDLORD AND TENANT § 5.5 cmt. d (AM. 
L. INST. 1977). (“d. Obligation to keep safe and in repair other areas in the control of the 
landlord and maintained for the use and benefit of the occupants. The landlord is also under 
an obligation to keep in repair certain areas in multiple housing units and in commercial 
buildings which provide services to the tenants but which are in the landlord’s control and to 
which access is denied to the tenants. Examples of these areas are furnace rooms, ventilator 
shafts, elevator shafts and spaces where pipes and electrical wiring are placed. Other examples 
are closets for the storage of cleaning implements and tools used to clean and repair the 
building. The rule of this section imposes an obligation on the landlord to keep in repair these 
areas under his control so that the tenants will not be deprived of services they are entitled to 
receive.”). 
41.  RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF PROPERTY: LANDLORD AND TENANT § 5.5(1-2) (AM. 
L. INST. 1977). 
42.  DALE A. WHITMAN ET AL., THE LAW OF PROPERTY 242 (4th ed. 2019).  
43.  See Shoked, supra note 5, 508–09 (various theories of property rights support 
imposing the duty to maintain on landlords, even when satisfying the duty deprives the 
landlord of freedom to manage her property as she wants and is costly, because landlord 
chooses to enter the market and voluntarily enters into a contract with the tenant that 
includes the warranty of habitability, and the tenant is dependent on the landlord to provide a 
safe living space in which the tenant can thrive). 

2023] 
LEAD AND LANDLORDS 
293 
modifies the usual rule that the landlord has control over the PWS’s right to 
replace the line. The warranty of habitability offers an indirect method to 
achieve the result, and it may prove helpful in the right circumstances. 
Since the failure to replace or allow replacement of the lead service 
line means that the water delivered to the leased premises is unsafe, a tenant 
can sue the landlord for the violation under the warranty of habitability. If 
the court agrees that the warranty has been violated, the court can, among 
other things, relieve the tenant of the duty to pay rent until the unsafe 
condition is abated. The same doctrine allows a tenant to defend against an 
action by the landlord for rent until the unsafe condition is abated. The order 
for abatement might not reduce the rent to zero, but having access to safe 
drinkable water is so important that the reduction should be substantial 
enough to give the landlord an incentive to act.44 
The warranty of habitability, however, is not an obvious source of 
law for solving the problem of a landlord failing to consent to the replacement 
of a lead service line. First, the warranty is usually invoked in cases where 
the tenant learns about the problem because of conditions experienced within 
the leased premises or the common areas of a multi-unit building. Typical 
examples include a broken toilet or a leaky roof, both of which are obvious 
to anyone inhabiting the premises. The tenant informs the landlord of the 
problem, which gives rise to the landlord’s duty to repair. Alternatively, the 
condition may be revealed by a government inspector who is checking for 
housing code problems. The landlord’s duty to repair arises once the landlord 
is informed of violations uncovered during the inspection. Finally, the 
landlord’s knowledge of the hazard may depend on whether the hazard is 
something the landlord knew or should have known about even in the 
absence of a specific complaint from a tenant or an inspector. A good 
example is the liability of a landlord for the lead poisoning of a child once 
the landlord is made aware that there is deteriorating paint in an older 
building in a place where lead paint is a common problem.45   
Private side lead service lines are not usually identified by either a 
tenant or a housing inspector. In fact, identifying lead service lines can be a 
challenge even for a local PWS.46 The PWS may have historical or other 
 
44.  Another way to give landlords incentives to protect tenants from leaded water 
could be found in cases imposing liability on landlords for harm to tenants exposed to lead. 
See Lead; Requirements for Disclosure of Known Lead-Based Paint and/or Lead-Based 
Paint Hazards in Housing, 61 Fed. Reg. 9064, 9064 (Mar. 6, 1996). This strategy was 
probably successful in helping to reduce the number of rental premises containing lead paint. 
Whether it will prove successful in the case of landlords allowing leaded water to continue 
to flow into rental premises is as yet unknown.    
45.  See Brown v. Dermer, 744 A.2d 47, 60–61 (Md. 2000). 
46.  Under the Revised Lead and Copper rules (LCRR), larger PWSs have a duty to 
inventory and make public information about lead service lines. See 40 C.F.R. § 141.84 
(2021); National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 86 
Fed. Reg. 4198-01, 4291 (Jan. 15, 2021). To assist with compliance, the EPA has issued 
guidance about how to conduct an inventory. See U.S. ENV’T PROT. AGENCY, GUIDANCE FOR 

294 
BELMONT LAW REVIEW 
[Vol. 10: 284 
information about where lead service lines exist and may publish a map or 
otherwise provide information about the issue to owners or residents.47 In a 
few places, the local government may attempt to inspect properties 
specifically for the purpose of disclosing lead service lines. Under the 
Revised Lead and Copper Rules, most PWSs will have a duty to provide 
information to help residents identify whether the property has a lead service 
line.48 For at least the next few years, however, lead service lines may exist 
for a long time before the problem is found or made known to landlords or 
tenants.  
No matter how the lead service line is identified, the duty to maintain 
should arise once the landlord knew or reasonably could have known that the 
service line contains lead, including when the landlord could have identified 
the line by undertaking an inspection. At the same moment, however, a 
second problem becomes visible. Usually, when the warranty of habitability 
is violated, the landlord can immediately undertake repairs. In the case of 
lead service lines, that situation is more complicated. If the PWS has replaced 
the public side of the water service line, the landlord can hire a plumber 
immediately to replace the water service line on the private side. Remedying 
the “partial” eliminates lead from the entire line. The same is not true, 
however, when the PWS has not yet replaced the public side of the water 
service line. In that case, replacing the private side may reduce some of the 
risk, but the replacement is still partial: water being delivered to the home 
comes through contaminated public side service lines. The landlord may 
have no way to change that immediately.49  
Until the public side service line is replaced, then, the question is 
whether the duty to maintain might include an obligation for the landlord to 
mitigate the risk in the interim. The District of Columbia bill correctly 
suggests that, from the moment when the private side service lines are 
identified as conveying lead until the moment when the service line is 
replaced, the landlord bears a duty to mitigate risks, which must be satisfied 
by ameliorative means, such as the provision of appropriate filters. 
Appropriate filtration can be a complex mix of selecting filters that do the 
job, paying for the filters, and properly replacing them as needed. Complying 
with the warranty of habitability should mean that the costs of acquiring and 
 
DEVELOPING AND MAINTAINING A SERVICE LINE INVENTORY, EPA 816-B-22-001 (2022) 
[hereinafter EPA 816-B-22-001]. 
47.  Identifying which properties have LSLs is so difficult that the EPA has committed 
itself to “pursue research to use data analytics and other methods to accelerate and improve 
the process of identifying LSLs” and to publish inventory development guidance. See 
Review of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and Copper Rule 
Revisions (LCRR), 86 Fed. Reg. 71574, 71582 (Dec. 17, 2021). 
48.  See 40 C.F.R. § 141.84 (2021). 
49.  Review of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR), 86 Fed. Reg. 71574, 71574 (Dec. 17, 2021). 

2023] 
LEAD AND LANDLORDS 
295 
maintaining appropriate filtration50 should fall on the landlord, just like the 
cost of appropriate filtration in a building’s HVAC system. 
Even where a tenant is empowered to require a landlord to replace or 
consent to the replacement of a lead water line, tenants are not entitled to use 
self-help. A judicial order is required, something most tenants are not likely 
to have the resources to invoke.51 During the litigation, further, tenants and 
their families may lack protection from drinking water delivered through 
lead-contaminated pipes. Finally, eviction is not impossible, depending on 
the duration of the lease. It is still preferable, therefore, for the PWS to be 
able to bypass the landlord altogether. The proposed D.C. statute addresses 
this concern by allowing the Attorney General to get involved in the judicial 
process to seek an order of abatement.52 The Illinois statute, by contrast, 
leaves the job to tenants.53 
C. Interpret the ownership interest in a rental property as not 
including the right to refuse access for the purpose of replacing 
the private side lead service line. 
While tenants have certain rights to demand that their landlord not 
impede the replacement of the lead service line, nothing would work better 
than to simply empower the PWS to access and replace the service line. The 
extent of a landlord’s property-based right to exclude the PWS from 
replacing a lead service line is less than plain.54 The right to exclude has been 
described as being at the heart of the rights that define property ownership.55 
At the same time, no property right is absolute.56 A court may be tempted to 
cabin the right to exclude in cases where the landlord’s exercise of a right to 
 
50.  Not every filter does the job. See National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: 
Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 86 Fed. Reg.  4198, 4241 (Jan. 15, 2021) (“EPA agreed 
with some of the commenters’ concerns and has included in the definition that a pitcher filter 
must be certified by an American National Standards Institute (ANSI) certifying body to 
reduce lead.”); David D. Mitchell, Preventing Toxic Lead Exposure Through Drinking 
Water Using Point-of-Use Filtration, 48 ENV’T. L. REP. NEWS & ANALYSIS 11074, 11076 
(2018) (discussing different filters). 
51.  Bezdek, supra note 34.  
52.  Green New Deal for a Lead-Free DC Amendment Act of 2022, H.R. 24-802 (D.C. 
2022).  
53.  415 ILL. COMP. STAT. 5/17.12 (2022); 765 ILL. COMP. STAT. 742/1 (2022). 
54.  The EPA, however, assumes that service lines are owned by the customer rather 
than the water system in many instances and that the customer has the legal authority to 
exclude the PWS unless the PWS owns the lateral line. See, e.g., Review of the National 
Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR), 86 Fed. 
Reg. 71574, 71574 (Dec. 17, 2021) (“Because lead in drinking water primarily results from 
leaching of lead from plumbing in homes and from lead service lines (lead pipes connecting 
homes to the water distribution system), and portions of lead service lines may be owned by 
the water system or homeowner, the drinking water rules intended to reduce the amount of 
lead in tap water have been complex and controversial.”) 
55.  Cedar Point Nursery v. Hassid, 141 S.Ct. 2063, 2072 (2021). 
56.  Id. at 2068. 

296 
BELMONT LAW REVIEW 
[Vol. 10: 284 
exclude the PWS places burdens on tenants more than on  landlords, and 
tenants are exposed to serious health issues affecting infants, children, and 
adults. Distinguishing between the clear points and the ambiguities, 
therefore, is important. 
It seems likely that courts would rule that the landlord’s property 
rights include the right to exclude the PWS from entering an apartment 
building to replace a lead service line.57 The question is less clear about the 
right to exclude the PWS from the portion of the line that extends from the 
exterior wall of the building to the boundary of the property.58 Further, the 
portion of the line which extends from the water main under a public street 
to the border of the property usually includes public property, such as part of 
the street, a sidewalk, or a treebox. The landlord may have maintenance 
duties over that area, such as removing snow, but the area is outside the deed 
description of the property which the landlord owns, which means the 
landlord has no property rights to exercise.59 
Professors Dana and Shoked aptly describe places similar to lateral 
service lines as “edges,” property where private and public interests 
“inevitably interact and where both must somehow be accommodated.”60 For 
example, despite having formal title to a portion of the land under which the 
lateral service line runs, the property owner has no say in where the PWS 
places the line, nor may the property owner block the PWS from connecting 
the building to the water line.61 The line may even be subject to an express 
or implied easement for public utilities, such as water, sewage, electricity, 
communication cables and telephone lines.62 
 
57.  Id. at 2072; see Julia D. Mahoney, Cedar Point Nursery and the End of the New 
Deal Settlement, 11 BRIGHAM-KANNER PROP. RTS. J. 1, 13 (2022). It is possible, however, 
that Cedar Point is limited to “recurring physical invasions imposed or authorized by the 
government – at least as to property closed to the public – are per se takings, however 
minimal the impact on the use and value of the property.” Cynthia Estlund, Showdown at 
Cedar Point: “Sole and Despotic Dominion” Gains Ground, 2021 SUP. CT. REV. 125, 137 
(2021). Since the PWS has to enter the building only once to replace the water line, and not 
on multiple occasions as contemplated under the regulation considered in Cedar Point, the 
entry might not be classified as a taking. At the same time, unlike the water line 
replacement, the entry considered in Cedar Point did not include any ongoing physical 
change to the property. The physical change, even though it only affects a pipe which is 
already in place in the building, appears to cross the line established in Loretto v. 
Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419, 439 (1982). 
58.  See EPA 816-B-22-001, supra note 46, at 2–4 (graphic representation of 
underground plumbing leading from a water main to the premise plumbing). 
59.  See Dana & Shoked, supra note 6, 797–98.  
60.  Id. at 754.  
61.  RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF PROPERTY (SERVITUDES) § 5.5(1-2) (AM. L. INST. 2000); 
see also District of Columbia v. Brooke, 214 U.S. 138, 148–49 (1909). 
62.  See Susan F. French, Highlights of The New Restatement (Third) Of Property: 
Servitudes, 35 REAL PROP. PROB. & TR. J. 225, 235 (2000); RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF 
PROPERTY (SERVITUDES) § 2.12 (AM. L. INST. 2000); Nichols v. City of Evansdale, 687 N.W.2d 
562, 569 (Iowa 2004); Devon-Aires Villas Homeowners Ass’n, No. 4., Inc. v. Americable 
Assocs., Ltd., 490 So.2d 60, 66 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1985). 

2023] 
LEAD AND LANDLORDS 
297 
Dana and Shocked argue that a sharing approach should govern this 
“edge” property, in the sense that the cost of replacing the private side line is 
properly placed on both the property owner and the PWS.63 If that’s true, it 
may also be true that the PWS should not be required to accede to a property 
owner’s denial of access to replace a lead pipe that traverses the edge 
property that is the responsibility of both the PWS and the property owner.  
Modulated rules of exclusion should govern in cases of edge 
properties, particularly in situations where the property owner has no 
reasonable expectation that they could exclude third parties.64 In the case of 
an apartment building where the landlord does not reside, numerous third 
parties such as tenants and their guests have the right to make use of the 
building. Landlords can even be denied access to leased premises without 
permission of the tenants under local law and common lease terms. Further, 
utilities commonly enter both leased and owner-occupied properties for the 
purpose of repairing and replacing materials that deliver utilities to the 
building. The only common area about which property owners are likely to 
have an expectation of privacy is inside the building in those areas under their 
control and not the control of a tenant.   
A modulation in the power to exclude is also appropriate where a 
property owner’s decision directly affects the health of occupants and the 
public health of the community. Denying access to the PWS, at least if no 
mitigation methods are used, means that tenants and their guests 
unnecessarily continue to risk lead poisoning. Denying access also means 
that the community will have to provide resources to care for people whose 
disability arises from lead poisoning that could have been averted by 
replacing lead service lines.65 
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has complicated the 
issue about who has the right to make decisions about replacing the portions 
of the lateral service line between the water main and the interior of the 
building. Beginning with the 2000 revisions of the Lead and Copper Rules,66 
the EPA has distinguished between the water main, which the EPA says is 
“owned” by the PWS, and the rest of the lateral line, which the EPA says is 
“owned” by the customer.67 The EPA adopted this bilateral distinction for a 
reason that has nothing to do with a landlord’s authority to preclude a PWS 
from accessing a lateral service line. Instead, the distinction is used to 
allocate the responsibility to pay for the replacement of lead pipes. The 
EPA’s goal is to ensure that PWSs bear financial responsibility only as to the 
 
63.  See Dana & Shoked, supra note 6, 800–01.  
64.  Id. at 785; see Parnotff v. Aquarion Water Co. of Conn., 204 A.3d 717, 731 
(Conn. App. Ct. 2018). 
65.  Can I Receive Social Security Benefits for Lead Poisoning? DAYES L. FIRM (Dec. 
9, 2019), https://www.dayeslawfirm.com/blog/ssd-for-lead-poisoning.html 
[https://perma.cc/D46B-NTBX].   
66.  Letter from Jennifer C. Chavez, Attorney, Earthjustice, to EPA (Nov. 11, 2014) 
(on file with author). 
67.  See 40 C.F.R. § 141.85 (2021). 

298 
BELMONT LAW REVIEW 
[Vol. 10: 284 
portions of the system over which PWS have uncontestable control: the 
mains. The EPA takes no position on whether a particular PWS also has 
property rights over some or all of the lateral service line. That is a question 
left to local law, and different jurisdictions take different positions. In those 
jurisdictions where “ownership” extends to the building, the PWS is charged 
under EPA rules with replacing the pipes up to the building. In those 
jurisdictions where “ownership” ends at the junction between the main and 
the lateral service line, the PWS is charged with replacing the pipes only of 
the main.68 
If the lateral service line is “edge” property, then the property owner 
may share with the PWS some responsibility for paying for replacing the 
lateral service line. Since replacement costs can be substantial, some property 
owners have opposed identifying themselves as owners. At the same time, 
property owners have not generally disclaimed the right as owners to 
preclude entry onto the land to replace the lines. If the area is seen as “edge” 
property, both claims can be accommodated. Replacement costs can be 
shared, which is what many jurisdictions have decided to do in recent years. 
At the same time, permission to enter the property can be assumed, at least 
where the PWS respects the needs of property owners in terms of restoring 
the property as necessary after a replacement.  
As a policy matter, this approach to the right of exclusion makes 
sense if the PWS effectively employs all reasonable means to remove barriers 
placed by a property owner, even under an edge theory, against access to the 
interior space in those buildings where the service line connection is inside 
the building. The problem is far from unsolvable, because a landlord’s right 
to exclude from the interior space can be eliminated with relative ease. First, 
the landlord can consent to the entry. This is what usually happens for a 
variety of reasons, including regulatory pressure, but only when the PWS 
reaches out to landlords to seek their consent.69 Alternatively, if the PWS is 
prepared to enter without consent, a landlord might seek an injunction or 
compensation as the result of the PWS entering without the landlord’s 
consent.70 Landlords have little incentive to do this, however, because the 
 
68.  See 40 C.F.R. § 141.84 (2021). 
69.  You’d think that would happen, but not so much from DCWater! DC WATER, DC 
WATER’S LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT PLAN 3 (June 2021), 
https://www.dcwater.com/sites/default/files/documents/lfdc_summary_6_7_21x.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/B26B-9EEF]. 
70.  Even when compensation for taking is likely to be trivial because there’s no 
interference with the use or value of the property, some owners will exercise their due 
process right to a hearing, at considerable cost to the government. See Estlund, supra note 
57, at 144–45. That scenario seems more likely when the owner’s use of a property is 
affected by the government action rather than, as in the case of replacing a lead service line 
in an apartment house, the direct impact in on tenants who can use the warranty of 
habitability to impose the cost of replacement, if any, on the landlord regardless of other 
government regulation. 

2023] 
LEAD AND LANDLORDS 
299 
damage award is likely to be significantly smaller than the cost of litigation.71 
The award will be small because the trespass is minimal.72 The PWS’s entry 
lasts for a brief time—usually less than a day.73 The work is not likely to 
cause much disruption to the building or leave a permanent scar. Further, 
replacing the line yields a benefit to the landlord because it reduces exposure 
to suits for harms suffered by residents and guests from ingesting lead in the 
water.74   
When a landlord’s resistance can be met only with condemnation of 
the right to exclude, the PWS should similarly prevail.75 Replacing lead 
service lines in rental properties serves the public health by reducing the risk 
that ingestion of water with lead will poison residents and guests.76 The risk 
is particularly great to infants and young children. As in the case of Flint, 
once infants and children are exposed to lead—even in small doses—they are 
likely to require special education and other public resources because of their 
injuries. The costs to the public can be substantial.   
The Illinois statute does not appear to contemplate condemnation 
when a landlord fails to consent; instead, it permits a partial replacement to 
be undertaken. In the proposed D.C. statute, on the other hand, the tenant or 
the Attorney General can seek an order of abatement. Although it is not 
explicit in the proposed statute, an order of abatement could be conditioned 
on the payment to the landlord for the condemnation of the landlord’s right 
to exclude for the limited time needed to enter the building as part of 
replacing the service line.   
Where a PWS adopts a policy of replacing private side water lines 
only with the consent of the property owner, the question remains about what 
kinds of incentives exist to maximize landlord cooperation. Reducing or 
eliminating the costs of replacement is probably the most effective carrot. 
Among the sticks is encouraging tenants to sue over the violation of the 
warranty of habitability, as described earlier. The proposed statute in the 
 
71.  The litigation may be for an injunction before the PWS commits a trespass, for 
damages for the trespass after it occurs, or for compensation for the taking of the right to 
exclude. If the landlord is awarded an injunction, the PWS can foreclose on it by paying 
compensation. See Cedar Point Nursery v. Hassid, 141 S.Ct. 2063, 2089 (2021) (Breyer, J., 
dissenting) (citing Knick v. Township of Scott, 139 S. Ct. 2162, 2179 (2019)). 
72.  See Estlund, supra note 57, at n. 102 (explaining that, in Loretto v. Teleprompter 
Manhattan CATV Corp., 446 N.E.2d 428 (N.Y. 1983), “[O]ne dollar was found to be ‘just 
compensation’ for any who challenged the mandatory cable installation.”); Jacque v. 
Steenberg Homes, Inc., 563 N.W.2d 154, 157 (Wis. 1997) (nominal damages awarded for 
trespass by truck which crossed plaintiff’s land without permission to deliver mobile home 
to another property). 
73.  U.S. ENV’T. PROT.AGENCY, STRATEGIES TO ACHIEVE FULL LEAD SERVICE LINE 
REPLACEMENT 34 (2019). 
74.  See Shoked, supra note 5. 
75.  See TaQuira Thompson, Restoring Control: Get Those Lead Pipes Out of Here, 8 
LSU J. OF ENERGY L. & RESOURCES 703, 726 (2020) (discussing condemnation of property). 
76.  Review of the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation: Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR), 86 Fed. Reg. 71574, 71574–75 (Dec. 17, 2021). 

300 
BELMONT LAW REVIEW 
[Vol. 10: 284 
District of Columbia amplifies the landlord’s incentive to consent by 
empowering the attorney general to participate in aid of the tenant’s action. 
Another stick is to impose regulatory consequences where a landlord fails to 
consent. For example, a landlord could be denied a license to rent the 
premises or do construction on the property, as in the proposed District of 
Columbia statute. 
CONCLUSION 
With enhanced funding from sources such as the Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs Act and the renewed focus of the Lead and Copper 
Rules, the stage is set for a national attack on lead service lines. There are 
situations, however, when the last mile can prove as problematic as the first. 
Leaving landlords in undisputed control of private side lead service lines 
means that some tenants will continue to risk lead poisoning from ingesting 
water provided by the local PWS. Given that older housing in poorer 
neighborhoods are the places most likely to have lead service lines, the most 
likely group of tenants harmed by a landlord’s control are the same people 
who have historically borne the greatest burden of exposure to lead and other 
environmental toxins: people of color who have low incomes and little 
wealth.77  
Recognizing the nature of the problem and finding effective and 
practical solutions is a matter of environmental justice. What I’ve tried to do 
in this article is explore how existing property law doctrines can and should 
be employed to make progress for tenants, many of whom will be people of 
color in low-income communities. Even more people can be protected from 
lead poisoning if these practical solutions are coupled with incentives and 
disincentives similar to those found in the statute which has been proposed 
in the District of Columbia. Further, PWAs need solutions such as these if 
they are to meet the requirements placed on larger systems by the EPA. 
Together, then, these approaches are likely to improve the lives of tenants, 
reduce delays for PWAs and impose costs which will be too great for most 
landlords to resist.  
 
77.  Letter from Laura Brion, Exec. Dir., Childhood Lead Action Project, Dwayne 
Keys, President, South Providence Neighborhood Association, Christopher Samih-Rotondo, 
Interim Dir., Direct Action for Rights and Equality, Amanda L. Reddy, Exec. Dir., National 
Center for Healthy Housing, and Tom Neltner, Senior Dir., Environmental Defense Fund to 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency, Lilian Dorka, Dir., 
External Civil Rights Compliance Office, United States Environmental Protection Agency 
(Jan. 5, 2022) (on file with author); see Review of the National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulation: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR), 86 Fed. Reg. 71574, 71575 (Dec. 17, 
2021).

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1350 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1
Perez, JuanB
From:
carlton.lassi@everyactioncustom.com on behalf of caroline pasti 
<carlton.lassi@everyactioncustom.com>
Sent:
Tuesday, December 19, 2023 2:29 PM
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET
Subject:
(Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) I support strong regulations to rapidly replace 100% of lead 
service lines and protect public health.
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open 
attachments or click on provided links. 
 
 
Dear Administrator Michael Regan, 
 
Thank you for your recently announced proposal to replace 100% of lead pipes for the vast majority of water systems by 
2037 and strictly limit partial replacements. Recognizing that there is no safe level of exposure to lead, EPA must adopt 
strong standards that help our nation address one of the biggest environmental injustices of our time—exposure to toxic 
lead pipes. That is why I’m writing to show my support. 
 
The numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed rule would bring—such as prioritizing 
replacements for those who are disproportionately impacted by lead and lowering the action level—are a strong step in 
the right direction. 
 
Please continue to engage with communities and adopt strong standards that address lead pipes in the most 
transparent, equitable, and expedited way possible. I encourage you to act with urgency to protect public health by 
finalizing the most ambitious rule possible by October 2024. 
 
I am also personally invested in this cause as I come from a historic town in Massachusetts and have grown up in a 
house with lead paint and many of the drinking water pipes at my university in rhode island tested positive for lead 
outside the healthy/maximum levels. I want my family and friends to be able to flourish and not be actively poisoned in 
their home and in their pursuits of higher education. 
 
Sincerely, 
Ms. caroline pasti 
9 Fair St  Newburyport, MA 01950‐2846 
carlton.lassi@gmail.com

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0880 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
KRISTEN ATHA   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Director 
 
 
 
 
Customer Service | Telephone (614) 645‐8276 | Fax (614) 645‐0222 | TDD (614) 645‐7188 
Power Division I 3500 Indianola Avenue I Columbus, OH 43214 I Telephone (614) 645‐8371 I Fax (614) 645‐7830 
Sewerage and Drainage | 1250 Fairwood Avenue | Columbus OH 43206 | Telephone (614) 645‐7175 | Fax (614) 645‐3801 
Water Administration | 910 Dublin Road Columbus OH | 43215 | Telephone (614) 645‐7020 | Fax (614) 645‐3993 
Director’s Office | 910 Dublin Road | Columbus OH 43215 | Telephone (614) 645‐6141 | Fax (614) 645‐8019 
columbus.gov 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
FILED VIA FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
Director Jennifer McLain 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water  
Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
 
Re:  
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) Proposed Rule 
Docket ID: EPA‐HQ‐OW‐2022‐0801 (December 6, 2023) 
 
Dear Director McLain: 
The City of Columbus, Department of Public Utilities, Division of Water (Columbus DPU) 
appreciates the opportunity to respond to EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI).  
As a preliminary matter, Columbus DPU asks for an immediate extension of the Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR) deadlines to the proposed LCRI deadlines.  Due to the announcement of LCRI 
upon the finalization of LCRR, utilities and states have had limited guidance and time to plan for LCRR 
with EPA guidance.  Public water systems need assurances that timeline deferrals are codified just in 
case LCRI is not finalized by October 2024.   
Columbus DPU’s drinking water plants serve over 220 square miles in the greater Columbus 
area.  The three drinking water plants delivered over 52 billion gallons of clean, safe drinking water last 
year, averaging 145 million gallons daily, to over 1.4 million residents.  Columbus DPU uses a complex 
multi‐barrier approach utilizing state of the art equipment and the latest treatment technologies to 
ensure all requirements of the Safe Drinking Water Act are continuously met.   
Columbus DPU fully supports efforts to protect public health by reducing exposure to lead in 
drinking water.  Columbus DPU has maintained an exceptionally low level of less than 2 ppb in our 
water system for at least two decades.  Columbus DPU is in compliance with the Lead Copper Rule 
(LCR) action level of 15 ppb and will be in compliance with the proposed LCRI action level of 10 ppb.  
This success is longstanding and is the result of an optimized corrosion control plan that we have had in 
place for over 40 years.  As an additional level of security against health effects of lead exposure, 
Columbus DPU also employs targeted public health protection.  Whenever a child is identified with 

 
February 5, 2024 
Columbus DPU – LCRI Public Comment  
Page 2 of 12 
 
elevated lead levels by our local health department, the child’s home tap water is tested for lead.  This 
targeted testing has confirmed the safety of our water system.   
In systems similar to Columbus DPU where lead is well controlled, the risk of lead exposure 
through drinking water is minimal.  However, under LCRI as proposed, Columbus DPU would be subject 
to the same 10‐year replacement schedule as systems with far greater risks for lead exposure.  Holding 
all public water systems to the same schedule regardless of health benefit will cause supply and labor 
costs to skyrocket as systems compete for the same resources to execute expedited service line 
replacements outside the normal capital planning and maintenance processes.  LCRI as proposed also 
contains a number of provisions affecting technical feasibility, including proper access to private 
property, and the legal and technical challenges associated with this access, calculation of replacement 
rates, and requirements for providing filters.  Finally, LCRI’s notification requirements are overly 
complex and confusing and should be streamlined and simplified to aid public water systems in their 
efforts to implement this massive regulation.   
I. 
AN ACROSS‐THE‐BOARD 10‐YEAR TIMELINE FOR SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT IS NOT 
FEASIBLE. 
Columbus DPU fully supports efforts to protect public health by reducing exposure to lead in 
drinking water, and agrees that all lead service lines should be replaced as quickly as feasible.  
However, to be feasible, the timeline for replacement must be supported by an adequate health 
benefit.  EPA over‐estimated the health benefit in its feasibility analysis when it applied the 10‐year 
simultaneous replacement rate for all water systems to water systems with optimal corrosion control.  
The risk of lead exposure in those populations is already extremely low; thus, the added health benefit 
is negligible.  Additionally, EPA’s analysis was flawed when it based feasibility on the fact that a few 
cities have accomplished 100% replacement in ten years or less.  Those programs are not comparable 
to the simultaneous nationwide replacement requirement of LCRI.  Those projects were also largely 
dependent on priority funding sources that will not be available to the bulk of utilities.  When re‐
examining feasibility, EPA analysis should include a potential risk‐based extension from 10 year to 20 
years as it would meet the Safe Drinking Water Act’s requirement for a treatment technique that 
“prevents known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible.”1   
A. For low‐risk utilities, a 10‐year replacement timeline produces little health benefit over a 
longer schedule. 
 
Columbus DPU requests that EPA allow qualifying utilities to extend their replacement 
schedule from 10 years to 20 years based on demonstrated low public health risk.  EPA has already 
recognized that some systems will need additional time to remove 100% of their lead service lines and 
provided two opportunities to extend the deadline, based solely on the quantity or proportion of lead 
 
1 Safe Drinking Water Act at 1412(b)(7)(A). 

 
February 5, 2024 
Columbus DPU – LCRI Public Comment  
Page 3 of 12 
 
service lines in a water system.  We propose that EPA expand the ability to obtain an extension, based 
on the risk of harm.  Specifically, Columbus DPU proposes that EPA offer an extended deadline for 
100% replacement for up to 20 years to public water systems that have demonstrated that the risk of 
lead exposure from drinking water is minimal, through continuous and optimal corrosion control and 
consistently low lead levels lead levels below the practical quantification limit (PQL).  Or, in the 
alternative, Columbus DPU requests the EPA allow states to issue waivers from the 10% down to 5% 
annual replacement based on historical 90th percentiles, sampling requirements, inventory satisfaction 
and economic components.  This will allow for the greatest nationwide public health benefit as 
resources can be made available for, and strategically focused on, public water systems with the most 
risk. 
A 10‐year replacement schedule is not feasible or justified for systems like DPU that have 
demonstrated consistently low risk for lead exposure.   In water systems with optimal corrosion 
control, an increased rate of replacement does not have a corresponding increase in health benefit.  
Communities served by water systems with successful corrosion control will not receive the health 
benefits cited by the proposed LCRI, despite the significant cost, because lead in drinking water is not a 
primary cause of elevated blood lead levels in their communities.   
Columbus DPU has an established agreement to work with our local health department to 
ensure that all potential sources of lead exposure, including water, are analyzed during lead poisoning 
investigations, and that the primary pathway of lead exposure is addressed.  The agreement between 
the departments has funded substantial lead poisoning investigation staff, support for interventions to 
lower blood lead levels among all children in Columbus with an elevated blood lead level, and provided 
general outreach to increase awareness among high‐risk residents.  In addition, homes where children 
reside with an elevated blood lead level above 10 ug/dL of blood that have lead paint hazards receive a 
public health order to remediate those hazards.  These homes receive lead hazard control work that 
makes them lead‐safe for future residents.  
 For the past seven years, water samples have been collected at each location involved in a lead 
poisoning investigation. Through December 2023, 816 samples were collected, only one was above the 
PQL of 5ug/L, and only nine were detectable above 1ug/L.  Ninety‐nine percent of the samples 
collected were non‐detect.  Columbus DPU is proud to say that in seven years of sampling, we have 
never had a case where our water caused elevated blood lead levels in our service area.  In Columbus, 
we can confidently say the primary cause of elevated blood lead levels is not our drinking water, but is 
most likely due to lead paint and dust.2  
 
2 This is true for Ohio as a whole.  Even though Ohio children have two times the national rate of lead exposure, Ohio 
Department of Health does not routinely test water because it is not necessary because most lead exposure is caused by 
lead‐based paint.  https://www.daytondailynews.com/local/ohio‐kids‐have‐lead‐in‐blood‐2x‐national‐rate‐what‐role‐do‐
lead‐pipes‐play/6ECJMIIW4FB3NLMHF2TTXVQGEE/.  

 
February 5, 2024 
Columbus DPU – LCRI Public Comment  
Page 4 of 12 
 
To require utilities to replace service lines at this accelerated rate imposes a significant cost to 
the community, and limits the flexibility of communities to address the primary cause of elevated 
blood lead levels in their area: lead paint.  In Columbus, we have 64,725 homes that are at a very high 
risk for lead paint, which is one of the primary pathways for lead exposure in our city.  On average, it 
costs $19,000 to remediate one home, which means to remediate every high‐risk home in Columbus 
would cost approximately the same amount as replacing every lead service line.  The main difference is 
that remediating lead paint would come with a significant health benefit to our community, unlike the 
replacement of lead service lines.  Communities must retain flexibility to prioritize funding programs 
based on health benefit, so that they can address the primary pathways of lead exposure and protect 
public health. 
B. Simultaneous replacement of all lead service lines within 10 years will increase costs 
exponentially for all systems. 
The requirement to have every public water system replace their service lines simultaneously in 
10 years is not feasible.  The result will be an artificially high demand for resources—locally, regionally, 
and nationally.  EPA acknowledges the demand but does not adequately account for how it will affect 
cost, supplies/labor, and funding overall, all of which inform feasibility.  At Columbus DPU, where lead 
is already well controlled, this schedule will require additional staff and increase our budget by 
hundreds of millions of dollars, without providing additional health benefit.  In some regions, there are 
simply not enough plumbers, engineers, and contractors.  Add to that the nationwide demand for 
supplies, such as copper, steel, ductile iron, asphalt, and concrete, and the result is skyrocketing costs.  
Those extra costs created by this sudden increase in demand will be borne by ratepayers.  EPA’s cost 
estimates will be outdated as soon as the rule is finalized and costs begin to rise.  Even with historic 
levels of federal grant funding, there is still far too little to cover the entire nation.   
Replacing the lead service lines in Columbus DPU’s system alone is estimated to cost over one 
billion dollars.3  Once we add expenses for extra staffing, equipment, sampling, filters, and notifications 
required under LCRI, we may spend up to 1.35 billion dollars in the next 10 years meeting the 
requirements of the regulation.  That does not include the significant increase in cost that is expected 
due to supply chain issues with labor and materials.  This estimate does include the cost of replacing 
private lead service lines because, as drafted, the LCRI requires utilities to take on this responsibility.  
Whether we ultimately cover the private replacements or recoup our expenses through assessments 
on homeowners, our utility will shoulder the burden of paying the full up‐front costs.  
 
 
3 Based on our current inventory, we could have up to 116,000 lead service lines in our system.  Using a conservative cost 
estimate of $7,500 per service line (from the main to the building) indexed with a low rate of inflation over the next 10 
years, the cost for service lines alone will be over 1 billion dollars. 

 
February 5, 2024 
Columbus DPU – LCRI Public Comment  
Page 5 of 12 
 
 
Large‐scale replacement programs also present additional complexities and challenges for 
public water systems.  As the lead service lines are replaced, the replacement projects must 
incorporate the work and cost to repave roads and replace mains.  There are existing budgeted capital 
and repair and replacement projects that must be abandoned or reworked to prioritize areas with lead 
service lines.  With the proposed replacement rate, public water systems will be unable to address 
other infrastructure or water quality priorities, such as water loss in areas without lead service lines.  
Working on private property presents legal and financial ramifications for damages that occur inside 
and outside of buildings during construction. 
C.  Increased utility costs drive up rates and decrease affordability. 
Municipal utilities do not make a profit and are funded exclusively by their ratepayers.  The 
across‐the‐board 10‐year requirement will burden the people that we are trying hardest to protect: the 
families already struggling to afford their water bills.  Nationwide, residential water bills have increased 
nearly 50% since 2010.4  In its affordability report this year, the US Department of Health and Human 
Services stated that in 1 in 20 households were disconnected from water services because of 
nonpayment in 2016, and in some cities, as many as 1 in 5 were disconnected.5  Disconnection erodes 
household stability through liens, eviction, economic hardship, and financial stress.6   Water insecurity 
disproportionately affects low‐income and BIPOC communities.7  This the same population that faces 
the greatest risk of lead exposure through lead paint and dust. 
Given the estimated cost, our utility is bracing for a double‐digit rate increase to meet the 
requirements of LCRI as drafted.  If we spread the billion‐dollar expenditure over 20 years instead of 10 
years, the annual cost becomes a smaller percentage of our budget.  It also allows our utility to 
incorporate replacements into currently budgeted work.  Over 20 years, the overall cost of 
replacement could be offset by 400 million dollars that has already been budgeted and accounted for 
in our rates.  But with only 10 years to absorb the impact, the offset is decreased by half.  In the same 
time frame, our utility will face the challenge of complying with the upcoming PFAS regulations.  To 
meet the proposed maximum contaminant level of 4 ppt for PFOA and PFOS, Columbus DPU will have 
to install hundreds of millions of dollars of treatment technology.  This additional regulatory financial 
burden will be on top of the LCRI expenditures.  
 
 
 
4 US Department of Health and Human Services’ Low‐Income Water Assistance Program LIHWAP) Implementation and 
Impact Report, Jan. 22, 2024, https://acfhhs.foleon.com/lihwap/impact‐report/water‐need‐in‐the‐us.  
5 Id.  
6 Id. 
7 Id. 

 
February 5, 2024 
Columbus DPU – LCRI Public Comment  
Page 6 of 12 
 
II. 
TECHNICAL ISSUES WITH LCRI ALSO IMPACT THE FEASIBILITY OF THE RULE. 
Beyond the unaccounted for inflated costs, budgetary constraints, and damaging effect on 
affordability, LCRI presents several technical concerns for feasibility.  As drafted, its requirements push 
public water systems on to and into private property farther than our authority allows, which could 
create legal liabilities and risk utility worker safety.  Provisions for calculating the rate of replacement, 
providing filters, and setting compliance deadlines should be amended to allow public water systems 
to implement replacement programs efficiently.  Feasibility begs for a prohibition of price gouging and 
a maximum stagnation time but not for a reduction of the timeline for public education or the inclusion 
of a trigger level.  Public water systems require the small and large tweaks below for LCRI to be 
feasible.  
a. Limit requirements to access private property. 
EPA must accept the restraints on public water systems and the limits of their authority to 
access private property.  Typically, municipal utilities cannot spend ratepayer dollars or do work on 
private property.  Public water systems also face difficulty replacing services in contract communities 
where the public water system does not have jurisdictional authority.  To meet the challenge of 
reducing lead exposure through drinking water, public water systems are stretching their authority by 
establishing that lead service lines are a nuisance and that an elevated lead level at one sample could 
affect the entire system.  But that authority is not absolute.  Public water systems cannot access or 
control pipes that run beyond the meter.  Therefore, Columbus DPU requests that EPA remove any 
requirement to address interior plumbing, or, in the alternative, provide clarification that there is no 
requirement to address interior plumbing. 
 
Additionally, Columbus DPU agrees with the comment by the Association of Metropolitan 
Water Agencies regarding the proposed tiering of sample sites.  Columbus DPU requests that EPA 
confirm that composition of premise plumbing is not required related to samples or to the inventory. 
b. Redefine “service line.” 
The authority of public water systems to access private property ends at the meter, and it is a 
regulatory overreach to require them to document the networks of our customers’ private distribution 
systems that exist beyond meters.  Public water systems will make every reasonable effort to replace 
lines to the building inlet, but in many instances, water leaves the meter and runs into mains on private 
property.  Clarification is needed regarding the use of "outlet" in the proposed definition “lead service 
line” in the proposed LCRI.  That will ensure that public water systems are not put in a position to 
document and replace private distribution networks to the extent that infringes on private property 
rights.  EPA should view “outlet” as the beginning of the distribution network that exists beyond the 
meter. 

 
February 5, 2024 
Columbus DPU – LCRI Public Comment  
Page 7 of 12 
 
Columbus DPU requests that EPA amend the definition of “service line” in the final LCRI to 
the following definition, which was also suggested by the American Water Works Association: 
“Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe which 
directly connects the community water system’s water main to the building inlet.  The 
term service lines do not include private water mains. Where a building is not present, the 
service line connects the water main to the outlet. Where a private main exists between 
the community water system main and a building inlet, associated service lines are not 
subject to subpart I.” (§ 141.2 of LCRI)  
c. Provide exception to ban of partial replacements for worker safety. 
Though rare, EPA must also recognize that entering private yard and homes can be dangerous.8  
Some residents can be combative or brandish weapons.  Some homes can be structurally unsound or 
contain harmful substances like mold, animal feces, or illicit drugs.  LCRI provides an exception to the 
prohibition on partial replacements when a homeowner refuses but it does not provide public water 
systems with an option for a partial when a home or business is unsafe to enter.  Columbus DPU 
requests that EPA provide an additional exemption to the ban on partials if worker safety is 
compromised. 
d. Allow verified non‐lead service lines to count towards 10% annual rate. 
As public water systems roll out their programs, the majority of replacements will be 
methodically planned to maximize efficiency and resources to meet the required rate of replacement.  
It is likely that public water systems will find some non‐lead service lines that were originally marked as 
lead, galvanized requiring replacement, or unknown in the inventory.  Those lines are factored into the 
required rate of replacement based on the entire inventory of lead, galvanized requiring replacement, 
and unknown.  Currently, the proposed LCRI does not give credit toward the required removal rate of 
checking those lines off the inventory as not requiring replacement.  The effect on public water 
systems is that the number of service lines that they have to replace that year will continue to grow 
through the year.  Public water systems have finite resources and cannot react in time to an end goal 
that continues to move farther away.  Columbus DPU requests that EPA count toward the required 
rate of replacement all service lines that were identified as lead, galvanized requiring replacement, 
or unknown and are then verified as non‐lead through the utilities’ replacement program. 
 
8 Due to increases in cases of assault and battery against public utility workers, in 2022 Idaho became the 16th state to pass 
enhanced criminal penalty laws specifically for protecting public utility workers, and Ohio and Georgia currently have 
similar bills pending in their legislatures. https://idahocapitalsun.com/2022/02/23/idahos‐public‐utilities‐report‐uptick‐in‐
worker‐assaults‐this‐bill‐would‐add‐penalties‐for‐it/; https://idahocapitalsun.com/2022/03/17/bill‐creating‐extra‐penalties‐
for‐assault‐of‐utility‐workers‐heading‐to‐gov‐littles‐desk/; https://ohiohouse.gov/news/republican/ohio‐house‐passes‐
utility‐worker‐protection‐act‐95107; https://metroatlantaceo.com/news/2024/02/utility‐worker‐protection‐act‐clears‐
georgia‐house‐committee/. 

 
February 5, 2024 
Columbus DPU – LCRI Public Comment  
Page 8 of 12 
 
e. Consider a more strategic filter requirement. 
Based on past experience, public water systems are concerned that sourcing of filters could 
become a bottleneck to meet the required rate of replacement.  Supply, quality, and price gouging are 
huge issues for replacements at this pace.  If a public water system cannot get the number of filters 
required in the proposed LCRI, it will become a limiting factor on removing lead service lines.  Thus, 
Columbus DPU requests that EPA narrow the requirement to distribute filters to instances when the 
filters actually are needed due to risk of lead exposure.   
There is minimal evidence that filters are needed if full replacement is completed and homes 
are adequately flushed.  Filters are also unnecessary for water meter replacements that do not involve 
cutting lines because this change out is not a disturbance.  Additionally, a three‐month supply of filters 
should be adequate for homes with disturbances, especially if all lead service lines were replaced and it 
is paired with flushing.  Finally, the requirement to provide filters to all customers within 60 days of 
repeated action level exceedances is unfeasible for most public water systems and impossible for 
many.  Filters should only be required to be provided to those customers with lead or galvanized 
service lines or who are downstream from lead service lines after multiple action level exceedances. 
f. Set timing of annual compliance tracking to year‐end. 
Many of the requirements in the proposed LCRI are based on an October 2027 compliance 
date.  For simplicity, Columbus DPU requests EPA establish compliance tracking dates based on 
calendar years instead of October to October.  This will correspond with the January 2028 start date 
for lead service line replacements, sampling, and school testing. 
g. Establish price gouging protections. 
The proposed LCRI will require utilities to mass purchase sampling supplies, curb boxes, copper, 
tools, and filters.  Companies that sell these products may take this as an opportunity to force pricing 
at higher rates.  Columbus DPU requests that EPA establish anti‐price‐gouging protections for utilities 
using these resources for lead work. 
h. Establish maximum stagnation time for samples. 
Columbus DPU requests that EPA set a maximum stagnation time of no more than 18 hours 
for all samples.  This will mirror the requirements for schools and daycares and allow for the rejection 
or invalidation of samples collected under abnormal operating conditions. 
 
 

 
February 5, 2024 
Columbus DPU – LCRI Public Comment  
Page 9 of 12 
 
i. Do not reduce the public education timeline. 
EPA indicated that it would like feedback on the feasibility of completing the required public 
education within 30 days of the end of the tap sampling period, instead of 60 days as proposed.  Public 
water systems cannot complete all public education within 30 days of the end of the tap sampling 
period, as samples may still be unanalyzed at this time.  Systems have until the final day of the 
monitoring period to sample, and then samples must be shipped and analyzed by a laboratory.  
Systems may not even know they have an action level exceedance until 45 days after the monitoring 
period depending on laboratory turnaround time.  Setting a requirement for delivery 30 days after the 
sample monitoring period creates an artificially compressed monitoring period due to analysis time.  
Columbus DPU recommends EPA set public education requirements that include ample time for 
analysis, results delivery, and then implementation by the public water system.  
j. Remove trigger level. 
Columbus DPU supports EPA’s decision to eliminate the trigger level.  The required notifications 
issued at the trigger level would have confused customers and ultimately undermined their faith in the 
safety of their water.  Additionally, as we comment below regarding notifications, the complexity of 
implementation should be considered and minimized.  This is a positive step forward. 
III. 
SIMPLER NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS WILL FACILITATE A MORE SUCCESSFUL 
IMPLEMENTATION OF LCRI. 
As public water systems contemplate how they plan to implement the regulation, they are 
already struggling with the complexity of the proposed LRCI especially as it relates to notifications.  The 
timing, delivery, and content requirements must reflect the realities of risk of harm, turnaround times, 
unreachable persons, and consumer confidence. 
a. Streamline required notifications.  
Columbus DPU requests that EPA streamline and index notifications based on risk of harm to 
human health.  LCRI contains many different types of notifications with different timelines, due dates, 
and people served.  There are 12 different "contacts" that are required to be notified at some point.  
To reduce the complexity of implementing LCRI, public water systems need consistency in these 
notifications that allows time for processing mechanisms and is indexed to the risk customers face.  
The same timeline could apply for customer‐initiated replacements, replacement follow‐up, and 
required sampling, but the delivery independently indexed for customer risk.  Here is an example of 
how it would work: 
 
 
 

 
February 5, 2024 
Columbus DPU – LCRI Public Comment  
Page 10 of 12 
 
Notification 
Timeline 
Samples results that are non‐detect 
30 days 
Sample results that are above PQL 
10 business days  
Sample results that are over the action level 
3 business days, and additional delivery methods 
 
Another example of a timeline that should be modified is the one‐day notification to the owner 
after replacement.  Once the occupant is supplied with filters and flushing guidance, there is no need 
for an additional notification to the owner the next day.  Instead, public water systems should be able 
to notify the people served by water as those individuals have the most risk.  If systems are required to 
notify the owner before restoring water service, it could result in significant delays to tenants receiving 
water since there are many absentee owners.  Additionally, it will become a major burden for the 
system to immediately sink resources to track them down. 
EPA should also determine the optimal quantity of notifications that is acceptable before a 
person is overwhelmed and disengaged.  Over‐notifying puts vital communications at risk of losing 
their effectiveness. 
b. Create notification delivery best practices for notifications. 
Often, public water systems have little contact information for their customers and the 
information they have is self‐selected by the customer.  It is usually limited to contact information for 
whomever pays the water bill.  The reality is that sometimes it is impossible to notify the owner and 
tenant.  Absentee owners are problematic for notifications, as are apartment buildings with one 
address and one service line.   
To set utilities up for success, Columbus DPU requests that EPA establish best practices for 
delivery of notifications instead of relying on overly‐prescriptive rules.  There are times when it 
makes more sense to notify a resident, like when the replacement is complete and it is time to restore 
water, and times when the utility must track down an owner, like when obtaining an agreement for 
replacement.  In furtherance of this request, Columbus DPU requests that EPA change as many 
notifications as possible to the address of “utility affiliated contacts.”  This will provide public water 
systems with flexibility to use the information that they have, instead of setting them up for failure.  
Systems will continue to do their best to ensure that everyone at risk is notified and protected without 
being subject to noncompliance due to unresponsive or unreliable landlords. 
c. Ensure consistent messaging to preserve consumer confidence in drinking water.  
Public water systems and EPA have a significant mutual interest in providing communities with 
treated, EPA‐regulated drinking water and ensuring they do not feel like they need to rely on bottled 
water.  Consumer confidence is absolutely key to both of us.  But some of the messaging required in 
the LCRI could jeopardize that confidence.   

 
February 5, 2024 
Columbus DPU – LCRI Public Comment  
Page 11 of 12 
 
Columbus DPU requests that EPA change the required consumer confidence report 
statement, "There is no safe level of lead in drinking water…" to "There is no known safe level of 
lead in drinking water."  Many health‐based standards exist for lead including several limits developed 
by the FDA and a 3.5 ug/L blood lead level by the CDC.  Additionally, nutrition has an impact on lead 
absorption when exposed.  Because replacing lead service lines does not eliminate lead in people's 
homes, repeating this statement creates panic and distrust of drinking water, and is in conflict with 
other health values that have been established for other programs.  
Columbus DPU also recommends editing the consumer confidence report language required 
in CFR 141.154.  The required health information is becoming so long that it is arduous for customers 
to read and is likely to be skipped.  Columbus DPU recommends removing the language regarding 
filters as it presents as a product endorsement, regardless of risk.  The recommendation that 
everyone should get a filter suggests that tap water is not safe and could erode consumer confidence.  
The language about the utility’s responsibility to replace is unnecessary and can be removed.  Also, 
references to removing lead “pipes” should be changed to lead “service lines” throughout to avoid 
any confusion about utilities removing interior plumbing. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The requested replacement deadline extension and technical amendments get public water 
systems closer to what is truly feasible and, if they are based on risk of harm, will be protective of 
public and environmental health.  Columbus DPU requests that EPA take the following steps to make 
LCRI feasible: 
 Immediately extend the LCRR deadlines to the proposed LCRI deadlines.  
 Allow qualifying utilities to extend their replacement schedule from 10 years to 20 years 
based on demonstrated low public health risk.   
 Remove any requirement to address interior plumbing, or, in the alternative, provide 
clarification that there is no requirement to address interior plumbing. 
 Confirm that composition of premise plumbing is not required related to samples or to 
the inventory. 
 Amend the definition of “service line” in the final LCRI to the AWWA recommended 
definition. 
 Provide an additional exemption to the ban on partials if worker safety is compromised. 
 Count toward the required rate of replacement all service lines that were identified as 
lead, galvanized requiring replacement, or unknown and are then verified as non‐lead 
through the utilities’ replacement program. 
 Narrow the requirement to distribute filters to instances when the filters actually are 
needed due to risk of lead exposure.   
 Establish compliance tracking dates based on calendar years instead of October to 
October. 

 
February 5, 2024 
Columbus DPU – LCRI Public Comment  
Page 12 of 12 
 
 Establish anti‐price‐gouging protections for utilities using these resources for lead work. 
 Set a maximum stagnation time of no more than 18 hours for all samples. 
 Set public education requirements that include ample time for analysis, results delivery, 
and then implementation by the public water system. 
 Streamline and index notifications based on risk of harm to human health.   
 Establish best practices for delivery of notifications instead of relying on overly‐
prescriptive rules. 
 Change as many notifications as possible to the address of “utility affiliated contacts.”   
 Change the required consumer confidence report statement, "There is no safe level of 
lead in drinking water…" to "There is no known safe level of lead in drinking water."  
 Edit the consumer confidence report language required in CFR 141.154.  Remove the 
language regarding filters as it presents as a product endorsement, regardless of risk.  
Change references to removing lead “pipes” to lead “service lines” throughout. 
The City of Columbus, Department of Public Utilities, Division of Water appreciates your 
consideration of these comments.  Should you have any questions, please contact me at 
jgnewsome@columbus.gov or call (614) 645‐7020.  
Sincerely,  
 
John G. Newsome, P.E. 
Administrator, Division of Water 
Columbus Department of Public Utilities  
jgnewsome@columbus.gov  
(614) 645‐7020 
 
Ecc:  
Alana Shockey, Columbus CDPU, Deputy Director  
 
Janean Weber, Columbus CDPU, Assistant Director 
 
Matthew Steele, Columbus CDPU, DOW Assistant Administrator 
Brian Haemmerle, P.E., Columbus CDPU, DOW Assistant Administrator

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0815 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
 
 
 
 
05 February 2024 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: Lead and Copper Rule Revision Improvements Comments 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
Comments conveyed via internet at  
https://www.regulations.gov/commenton/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
 
Dear Sir: 
 
The purpose of this correspondence is to provide comment on the Lead and Copper Rule Revision 
Improvements (LCRRI) (Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801) proposed by EPA. 
 
The City of Goose Creek serves approximately 40,628 residents through 12,042 accounts in Goose 
Creek, South Carolina, and have successfully managed lead levels in the public drinking water supply 
under our control for over three decades in accordance with the original Lead and Copper Rule.  We 
believe the most effective way to reduce and eliminate the public’s exposure to lead in drinking 
water is via corrosion control, as has been done nationwide for over three decades. 
 
EPA has shifted the emphasis of its rulemaking regarding lead in drinking water from managing it 
via water chemistry to physical removal.  We are concerned that a number of the proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Revision Improvements impose unnecessary costs on our customers, create a 
regulatory framework that is excessively difficult to administer, and provide minimal improvement 
to water quality in our community’s public drinking water supply.  
 
We recommend reconsideration and revision to the following provisions in the proposed LCRRI:  
 
1. Communication of sample results to customers 
a. 3-day notice of sample results via US Postal Service 
Requiring a utility to provide 3-day notice of sample results precludes the utility from 
being able to review the data for accuracy and completeness.  A 30 day period for 
notification to customers of sample results would be reasonable. 
b. 24 hour notice of sample results regarding action level exceedences 
Requiring a utility to contact a customer within 24 hours of learning of an action 
level exceedance is simply not feasible.  This notification should period should be 
10 days. 
2. Replacement of the customer’s privately owned service line between the meter and 
dwelling on private property. 
In South Carolina, in the vast majority of the cases, the service line between the meter and 
the dwelling is part of the privately owned household plumbing.  Utilities do not have the 

legal ability to unilaterally trespass on private property to perform construction on these 
lines.  Also, removal of service lines belonging to customers is an expenditure of public 
utility funds on private plumbing, which is inequitable to customers not receiving this 
benefit.  Utilities should only be responsible for notification to the customer of the 
conditions discovered during testing.  The removal and replacement of service lines 
owned by customers should be the customer’s responsibility pursued at a time of 
their choosing, not the utility’s responsibility.  
3. Arbitrary definition of lead “gooseneck” length 
We believe the arbitrarily chosen 2 foot defined maximum length of a lead “gooseneck” is 
ill-advised. The definition of the maximum length of a lead “gooseneck” should be 
eliminated from the LCRRI language. 
4. Elimination of the ability to invalidate a sample because of faulty sample collection 
The proposed LCRRI makes the sample collection process by homeowners (who have to be 
willing to voluntarily participate in the process) exceedingly complicated, and at the same 
time the LCRRI does not allow for the invalidation of samples that are not collected in a way 
that is consistent with the parameters of LCRRI. The ability of a utility to invalidate a 
sample that has been incorrectly collected should be explicitly stated in the LCRRI. 
5. Complexity of sample collection 
Customers will struggle to understand the process involved with First Liter collection and 
Fifth Liter Collection.  First Liter collection only, as has been accomplished 
successfully by volunteer customers for decades, should be the sample collection 
process used in the LCRRI. 
6. Inventory development in the absence of lead service lines – service lines of 
unknown material 
The LCRRI as it is currently written will cause undue concern among customers regarding 
unknown service line materials, particularly in systems where there are no lead service lines.  
The LCRRI creates an impossible situation when it requires 10% removal of lead service 
lines per year based on an inventory number of “unknowns” when none of the “unknowns” 
being removed are made of lead. 
7. Removal of all lead service lines in 10 years 
The removal of 10% of all lead service lines per year for 10 years is not feasible.  The LCRRI 
should be revised to allow a utility to provide the state regulatory agency a plan to address 
the eventual removal of all lead service lines.  The timing of the completion of the lead 
service line removal program should be determined at that level. 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide these comments to EPA, and thank you in advance for 
consideration of our recommendations. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
City of Goose Creek, SC 
 
 
Chuck Denson 
Director of Public Works

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0907 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 4th, 2024 
 
 
Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801,  
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
US Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
The NAACP State Conference of Michigan submits the following comments regarding the US 
Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”). The Michigan NAACP State 
Conference provides leadership for local branches, youth councils, and college chapters for 
environmental and climate justice needs in [insert state]. The NAACP and its Center for 
Environmental and Climate Justice have a longstanding interest in ensuring that issues of 
community engagement and environmental justice center Black communities and frontline 
communities most impacted, including communities in Detroit, Flint, Saginaw, Benton Harbor, 
and Grand Rapids.  
 
The Michigan NAACP State Conference applauds EPA for proposing stronger regulations to 
protect communities from lead in drinking water. Lead in drinking water has been a historically 
prevalent issue in Black communities, posing extreme risks to the health of young people, mothers, 
and their families. In Michigan estimates suggest that there are as many as 460 lead service lines, 
threatening families across our state with exposure to a potent and irreversible neurotoxin which 
even at low levels of exposure is linked to damage to the brain and nervous system, learning 
disabilities, shorter stature, impaired hearing, and harm to blood cells. In Michigan, we would 
derive up to $39 billion in public health cost savings from full lead service line replacement. 
 
Since 2015, Michigan has experienced multiple drinking water crises –notably, lead crises in Flint 
and Benton Harbor made national headlines. These types of crises in our state disproportionally 
impact Black communities, and we cannot simply sit back and continue to wait for crises to happen 
before we act. We need a proactive approach like that in the proposed LCR. 
 
For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong elements of the 
proposed LCRI such as the requirement for the removal of all lead service lines in ten years, the 
requirements for water systems to sample both the first and fifth liter of water passing through lead 
pipes and a lower action level; but also ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes which 
undermine their goals and ensure that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened. 
 

Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule does not leave 
black communities in Michigan behind: 
 
• Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it is a fundamental 
injustice that the communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed 40 or more years 
to fix this issue. 
 
• Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines: Removal can cost 
thousands of dollars, and putting the financial burden on impacted communities will result in 
mostly wealthy and white neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced. Removal and 
replacement do not make up major proportions of utility budgets, and utilities should be expected 
to maximize the use of available federal water infrastructure funds and other non-ratepayer sources 
of funds to prioritize solving this crisis. 
 
• Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who spend many hours there 
daily are not at risk of exposure: Black children face an increased risk of lead exposure when 
compared with white children. The proposal’s suggested testing program does not differ from past 
ineffective programs, and EPA should move towards incentivizing the installation of filters and 
protecting children. 
 
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components would allow for 
environmental injustice to persist. Black communities and frontline communities have long 
suffered from disinvestment and lack of resources. Past NAACP analysis has demonstrated that 
race, ethnicity, or language spoken had the strongest relationship to slow and inadequate 
enforcement of the SDWA of any sociodemographic characteristic analyzed. The final LCRI is a 
rare opportunity to make significant changes in the lives of millions of people in [state], and to 
provide a measure of environmental justice which these families are owed, and we encourage this 
administration to build on the progress made in the proposed rule by strengthening the final rule 
further. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Jeremy Orr, Esq. 
Chairperson, Environmental & Climate Justice 
The Michigan NAACP State Conference

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0731 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
www.blackmillennials4ﬂint.org | Facebook  | Instagram | Twi8er 
 
 
January 2, 2024 
 
 
 
Greetings U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
 
On behalf of Black Millennials 4 Flint, we applaud the preliminary proposed rules that are strong regarding lead 
service line replacement; however, there are aspects that require significant improvements.   
 
Here are some key areas that EPA should consider to make this rule the strongest in history:  
 
1) No level of lead in drinking water is safe. Even low levels of lead present risk of significant harm, but the current 
level of remediation should decrease to 5 ppb instead of 10 ppb. 
 
2) Require water utility providers to pay the full costs of removing the entire lead service line and EPA must enforce 
the fullest extent of regulatory power.   
 
3) Establish more long-term, non-competitive grants specifically earmarked for lead service line replacement as 
certain local and state agencies do not have enough funding (especially rural areas). Additionally, mandate filtering 
programs for the duration of the lead service line replacement process.  
 
4) Mandate water testing for lead in all public schools and childcare facilities and enforce water filtration with a 
level of remediation of at least 5 ppb.  
 
5) Establish safeguards for renters to ensure there is equitable access to lead service line replacement. 
 
6) Develop a national lead service line inventory where all cities and states report their respective inventory and 
progress as well as include in the EPA EJScreen Tool and the Climate Economic Justice Screening Tool (CJEST). 
 
 
Yours in Service,  
 
Black Millennials 4 Flint  
info@blackmillennials4flint.org

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0924 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
An equal opportunity employer. 
 
P r o t e c t i n g ,  M a i n t a i n i n g  a n d  I m p r o v i n g  t h e  H e a l t h  o f  A l l  M i n n e s o t a n s  
February 5, 2024 
Michael Goldberg 
Standards and Risk Management Division 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest 
Washington, DC 20460 
RE: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI), Docket ID EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
Dear Mr. Goldberg, 
The Minnesota Department of Health (MDH) is the primacy agency responsible for implementing 
Safe Drinking Water Act rule requirements in Minnesota. MDH is also a member of the Association 
of State Drinking Water Administrators (ASWDA) and supports the comments prepared by ASDWA 
on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) rule.  
In addition to the comments prepared by ASDWA, MDH is providing comment on several important 
areas of the rule that impact Minnesota. 
MDH appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the LCRI rule. This important rule will 
reshape the way water systems coordinate with states and EPA to reduce lead exposure to their 
customers. Please consider the enclosed comments and reach out to us if you have any questions 
or need clarification. 
Sincerely,  
Myra Kunas, MS 
Interim Assistant Commissioner 
PO Box 64975 
St. Paul, MN 55164-0975 
 
Enclosure  

P R O P O S E D  L E A D  A N D  C O P P E R  R U L E  I M R O V E M E N T S  D O C K E T  I D  E P A - H Q - O W - 2 0 2 2 - 0 8 0 1 - 0 0 3 6  
2 
 
Minnesota Department of Health (MDH) 
Comments 
EPA PROPOSED LEAD AND COPPER RULE IMPROVEMENTS (LCRI)  
Docket ID EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
Introduction  
MDH has implemented the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) since it was published in 1991, with 
minor revisions in 2000 and 2004, and short-term revisions in 2007. MDH staff work with water 
suppliers to ensure that systems across Minnesota meet the requirements of the LCR and LCRR, 
prepare for impending LCRI requirements and take action accordingly. MDH staff regularly 
assist water systems above and beyond existing rule requirements including helping them 
understand requirements regarding sampling, service line inventories, corrosion control, and 
water quality parameter monitoring.  In 2018, MDH also worked with stakeholders to evaluate 
the costs and benefits of eliminating lead service lines in Minnesota (see Lead in Minnesota 
Water Report at: 
https://www.health.state.mn.us/communities/environment/water/docs/leadreport.pdf ). In 
addition, MDH houses the state’s blood lead surveillance program and healthy homes programs 
which conduct lead assessments and work to reduce lead from all exposure sources.   
There is no safe level of lead. The goal of the LCR, LCRR, and LCRI is to reduce lead in drinking 
water through corrosion control and removal of lead service lines. Considerable progress has 
been made since the initial LCR, and many systems across Minnesota took action to utilize 
corrosion control and we have few exceedances in any given year. However, the science in 
understanding corrosion control and the risks for increased lead exposure due to source and 
treatment changes has improved significantly.   
Another goal of rule improvements is to reduce the regulatory burden for primacy agencies and 
water systems. The LCR, LCRR and now LCRI are the most complex SDWA rules to implement, 
and any changes will require significant training and technical assistance. Therefore, 
streamlining implementation is imperative so that the rule can be implemented and enforced 
effectively to protect public health. The LCRI, makes several improvements to the LCRR but 
there is still room for additional progress.  

P R O P O S E D  L E A D  A N D  C O P P E R  R U L E  I M R O V E M E N T S  D O C K E T  I D  E P A - H Q - O W - 2 0 2 2 - 0 8 0 1 - 0 0 3 6  
3 
 
Single Action Level vs. Action and Trigger Levels 
MDH appreciates that the LCRI simplified and removed the separate action and trigger levels by 
creating one lower action level of 10 ppb. If values lower than 10 ppb are considered by EPA, 
then laboratory and sampling limitations must also be evaluated. For example, 5 ppb is 
currently the practical quantitative limit, and 2 ppb is common as a laboratory reporting limit. 
In general, if dropping the action level below 10 ppb is an option EPA is considering, then 
laboratory and other practical constraints must be carefully assessed before a new level is 
chosen. Further, EPA should also look forward to what the selected action level will represent 
as a data tool for evaluating corrosion control efficacy once all lead service lines are removed. 
There may be a level of lead, as measured by sampling protocols of LCR/LCRR/LCRI, that is 
beyond ability of the public water systems to be able to make corrosion control treatment 
changes that will be effective without additional action from property owners to manage 
building water quality or remove building sources or lead. Premise plumbing is beyond the 
scope of control of community PWSs.  
Lead Service Line (LSL) Inventories and Lead Service Line 
Replacement (LSLR) 
MDH generally agrees with ASDWA’s comments concerning changes to the inventories and 
service line replacements. Most states and water systems have operated under the 
interpretation that inventory data components would remain relatively untouched during the 
LCRI proposal process due to the need to turn them in by October 16, 2024. It is imperative that 
any additional inventory fields such as lead service line connector be allowed to be reported 
during subsequent updates rather than delay initial inventories.  
Removing lead service lines, regardless of action level exceedance is an important step toward 
reducing lead in drinking water long term. MDH supports increased efforts to replace lead 
service lines but would recommend that EPA include timelines for completing identification of 
any unknown service lines. 
Tap Sampling  
MDH supports first draw, one-liter samples after a six-hour stagnation period for LCRR 
compliance tap sampling and 5th liter sampling at sites with a lead service line.  MDH also 
agrees with the proposal to use wide mouth bottles and prohibit pre-stagnation flushing. MDH 
recommends that a maximum stagnation time of 18 hours be implemented and that for 

P R O P O S E D  L E A D  A N D  C O P P E R  R U L E  I M R O V E M E N T S  D O C K E T  I D  E P A - H Q - O W - 2 0 2 2 - 0 8 0 1 - 0 0 3 6  
4 
 
samples found to have exceeded 18 hours stagnation, the result could be invalidated by the 
state and a resample allowed.  
It is important that regulators understand practical concerns in implementing the current rule 
and the proposed LCRR/LCRI. Operators in Minnesota have provided many examples of 
sampling for the lead and copper rule where: 
• Customers collect at the wrong location. 
• Customers collect after point of use treatment or filter. 
• Customers fail to collect and don’t notify the system until the last minute (causing 
potential monitoring and reporting concerns or frantic rush to find a replacement 
volunteer). 
• Customers sample after long vacations or after a house has been vacant for long periods 
of time. 
• Occupational hazards and liability concerns exist, such as when operators have to 
follow-up to a residence with a dog or a resident provides a bottle containing urine or 
another unknown liquid instead of the tap sample. 
• Considerations during public health emergencies such as a pandemic when getting 
access to homes and participation in sampling becomes a greater challenge. Alternate 
assessment methods such as distribution monitoring stations may be useful as a back- 
up.  
For nontransient noncommunity public water systems, application of sample site selection 
under the LCR has been challenging since the initial implementation of the rule, for reasons 
including limited number of sample sites in some cases and the presence of point-of-use 
treatment devices in others. The latter issue may become more prominent should point-of-use 
treatment option for small systems proceed under the LCRR/LCRI.  For these reasons, MDH 
requests that EPA use the opportunity presented by the LCRR to clarify expectations for lead 
and copper sampling at nontransient noncommunity public water systems. MDH recommends 
maintaining a separate set of tiers for nontransient noncommunity systems so that the tiering 
approach is more applicable to each system classification and plumbing structure. This will 
simplify data collection and reduce confusion for these systems. Treating nontransient 
noncommunity systems as miniature community systems is not appropriate for the reality of 
how these facilities operate. 
Point-of-Use Devices 
Point of use devices are proposed to be provided by public water systems to customers under 
several areas of the LCRR/LCRI.  Situations such as an action level exceedance or following a 

P R O P O S E D  L E A D  A N D  C O P P E R  R U L E  I M R O V E M E N T S  D O C K E T  I D  E P A - H Q - O W - 2 0 2 2 - 0 8 0 1 - 0 0 3 6  
5 
 
lead service line replacement both require PWS to distribute a POU device. It is imperative that 
EPA consider the practicality of this approach and build in reasonable alternatives when POU 
devices would not be practical for the customer. Some examples include: 
• Number and amount of POU devices: some locations such as schools or businesses may 
not be able to practically use a POU provided by a PWS in these situations. A school 
cannot practically operate using a pitcher filter. Providing these facilities with flushing 
and lead test following an ALE or service line replacement may be better alternatives. 
• Not all sites are high risk for lead and would need a POU device. Limiting distribution of 
POU devices to homes based on tier, service line material, and/or building age may help 
make these requirements to target those that most need help reducing lead exposure. 
Corrosion Control Treatment 
MDH recommends that the final LCRI provide flexibility for states to approve less expensive 
corrosion control treatment (CCT) study options that can be tailored to system specific issues, 
existing practices, sources of lead and constraints. States and systems need a toolbox of options 
to take action to address lead and corrosion concerns. It is important that the EPA provide 
guidance to help systems chose the correct tool for commonly occurring treatment 
considerations. The proposed LCRI promotes pipe loops exclusively and is not practicable or 
implementable on the timelines proposed. Guidance should be developed to assist states in 
determining the appropriate options and when to use other types of study.  Analogous system 
studies should also be able to be used since we have decades of data from systems and often 
systems may be able to demonstrate that their system is analogous (similar water quality, 
distribution), particularly for those systems exploring orthophosphate as a CCT choice. States in 
conjunction with EPA could develop templates for systems to use to determine when this 
approach may be appropriate. It is also important for options such as installation of filter 
devices be available for those small systems that own and operate their entire distribution 
system when it would not be practical to install effective CCT. EPA also must consider other 
laws and regulations that impact water and wastewater systems such as phosphate limits when 
considering CCT treatment. Corrosion control inhibitors often have diminishing returns and the 
amount of phosphate added to water for CCT may contribute significantly so some phosphate 
load in some locations. 
MDH agrees that systems with ALE be required to evaluate the effectiveness of their existing 
CCT but there needs to be more flexibility to deal with systems that have more complicated 
configurations. The proposed rule assumes simple system configuration, presence of lead 
service lines, and that the conditions at the treatment plant are representative of distribution 
conditions. The requirement for pipe loop studies is inconsistent with the urgency indicated by 

P R O P O S E D  L E A D  A N D  C O P P E R  R U L E  I M R O V E M E N T S  D O C K E T  I D  E P A - H Q - O W - 2 0 2 2 - 0 8 0 1 - 0 0 3 6  
6 
 
the 24-hour public notification requirement and pipe loop studies when done properly may 
take years to completely implement and gather results. 
MDH recommends that the final LCRI clarify requirements for large systems to provide optimal 
corrosion control treatment and clearly establish timelines for systems to meet these criteria 
when they move from a medium size to a large size system.  The final LCRI or implementation 
guidance documents should include a clear table or flow-chart for CCT and CCT study 
requirements by system size. The typical process that states use is that systems submit a 
proposed recommendation and the state reviews and approves it. To reflect this process the 
“state designates” language should be revised to the “state will review and approve” for both 
OCCT and OWQP. 
The intent of corrosion control is to provide systems with a proactive way to manage 
distribution water quality to prevent corrosion. EPA’s definition of corrosion control provides 
limited regulatory authority for primacy agencies to help water systems manage distribution 
water quality issues that may affect corrosion (such as nitrification, iron, manganese, 
distribution flushing programs, and managing biological activity within the distribution system). 
MDH recommends that EPA use the LCRI to promote a proactive verses reactive approach to 
distribution water quality as a whole. This water management planning approach would allow 
systems to consider simultaneous compliance with other distribution regulations and allow for 
a true optimization of water quality. Water systems should work with their primacy agencies to 
evaluate and plan for distribution expansion, population growth/reduction, new/changes to 
source water, treatment changes etc.  
Changes in Source or Treatment 
MDH recommends that the final LCRI include more detailed and specific information for 
systems and primacy agencies on the types of changes that require review and approval of the 
primacy agency. Including a matrix of common source and treatment changes and guidance on 
the type of additional study that the state should consider requiring would be invaluable when 
communicating with CWS about the potential impacts of these changes and help systems more 
adequately plan for corrosion control studies.  It is important to clarify the level of review 
needed so that appropriate actions can be taken by both primacy agencies and systems.  Since 
source and treatment changes were the main reasons for the highly publicized lead crises in 
Washington DC, and Flint, MI having these issues addressed clearly in rule is important.  
Some questions (note that this is not a comprehensive list) that need answers in the final LCRI 
or guidance (as appropriate) include: 

P R O P O S E D  L E A D  A N D  C O P P E R  R U L E  I M R O V E M E N T S  D O C K E T  I D  E P A - H Q - O W - 2 0 2 2 - 0 8 0 1 - 0 0 3 6  
7 
 
• When does bringing on a new source or well require re-evaluation? 
• When are pipe loop studies needed? 
• Do CCT studies need to include hydraulic modeling for consecutive systems? 
• How does a downstream water system demonstrate how a change from the wholesaler 
or upstream water system will impact them? 
• Will wholesalers and consecutive water systems both have to switch back to six-month 
monitoring after changes are made? 
Small System Flexibility  
MDH supports the concept of flexible options for small systems that are proposed in the LCRI 
Many small systems face technical, financial, and management challenges. While having more 
than one option for compliance provides welcome flexibility and choice for small systems, it 
should be noted that these additional options increase the tracking burden for states. 
MDH recommends the following: 
1. Small System Size: MDH recommends that these flexibilities apply to systems falling in 
the population range of 3,300 or fewer and those point-of-use (POU) devices apply only 
to systems serving 100 or fewer.  
2. POU Devices: It should be clear in the final LCRR under what conditions POU devices will 
be allowed and what requirements for installation, ownership, and maintenance of the 
devices will be so that systems have an adequate understanding of the implications of 
that option. It should also be clear in rule that the primacy agency has the final approval 
of the use of these devices as a compliance option. 
3. Replacement of Lead-Bearing Plumbing Option: MDH recommends that the option to 
replace lead-bearing plumbing that is currently being reserved for Non-Transient Non-
Community Water Systems (NTNCWS) also be included as an option for Community 
Water Systems (CWS) at the discretion of the primacy agency. This option may allow 
small community systems to commit resources to removing sources of lead rather than 
commit resources to maintaining POU devices in perpetuity.  In addition, allowing states 
to set a timeline for the replacement to be completed would allow state to customize 
the option so that systems can better plan and budget for the replacements. 
4. Action Plan: MDH recommends that EPA develop guidance for small systems and 
NTNCWS that exceed that action level to work with states to develop their required 
action plan. This will help empower primacy agencies to help systems develop realistic 
plans and reduce time wasted on non-viable alternatives. This action plan could also 
include other measures for reducing lead and copper relating to distribution 
management (optimizing existing chemical feeds, free ammonia, chlorine residuals, 

P R O P O S E D  L E A D  A N D  C O P P E R  R U L E  I M R O V E M E N T S  D O C K E T  I D  E P A - H Q - O W - 2 0 2 2 - 0 8 0 1 - 0 0 3 6  
8 
 
corrosion control residuals, water age. An action plan that includes these steps with 
corrosion control treatment (such as orthophosphate) as a last resort. 
5. Maintaining CCT:  MDH recommends that EPA reference language from §141.81 again 
in the “Lead Action Level Exceedance for Small Community Water Systems and Non-
Transient, Non-Community Water Systems” section emphasizing that small systems 
using the small system options under §141.93 and those which have treatment in place 
continue to operate and maintain optimal corrosion control treatment and meet any 
requirements that the state determines to be appropriate to ensure optimal corrosion 
control treatment is maintained. 
While the flexibilities in the proposal and those recommended here give systems more 
alternatives to reduce lead, small systems currently using CCT should not abandon those 
practices without approval from their state. Requiring approval will prevent systems from 
undermining their lead reduction efforts with CCT by moving to an alternative technique too 
quickly. 
Lead Testing in Schools and Childcares 
Minnesota is one of several states that already have requirements for schools and childcares to 
conduct ongoing testing for lead in drinking water. In Minnesota public and charter schools and 
child care centers must test all taps used for consumption once every 5 years. Starting in 2024, 
all testing data must begin to be reported to MDH and these facilities must remediate when 
lead is above 5 ppb. These requirements are much more stringent than the proposed 
requirements for water systems to test for lead in these facilities. 
MDH recommends that the testing proposed in the LCRI only be required if a state does not 
already have an ongoing lead testing program or that public water system testing in schools and 
childcares be limited to cases where there is an action level exceedance. 
Water quality in early care and educational facilities can be a challenge due to intermittent 
water usage patterns and ageing infrastructure. Rarely, is the public water system the 
source/cause of lead in the drinking water. EPA should work with other agencies to provide 
better guidance and if necessary, regulations regarding water management within their 
buildings to ensure maintenance of water quality.  

P R O P O S E D  L E A D  A N D  C O P P E R  R U L E  I M R O V E M E N T S  D O C K E T  I D  E P A - H Q - O W - 2 0 2 2 - 0 8 0 1 - 0 0 3 6  
9 
 
SDWIS Data and Tracking  
MDH shares the concerns expressed by ASDWA and others that data management implications 
of the LCRR and LCRI are significant – in terms of complexity and added workload for public 
water systems and state primacy programs. 
States need to have implementation guidance for data tracking and reporting to EPA well in 
advance of implementation requirements so that data requirements are clear and complete. To 
date, LCRR guidance and date entry instructions have not fully addressed LCRR concerns and 
with LCRR deadlines approaching for PWS it is imperative that states know exactly what and 
how they will need to report data to EPA. The data shared by EPA, states, and water systems 
regarding SDWA compliance should be able to be consistent, accurate, and easily accessible to 
everyone that needs it. 
Copper 
Copper corrosion is a problem in many water systems, but the LCR treats copper as an 
orphaned child. Sampling under the LCR does not target the worst-case situations for copper 
and because copper violations are only treated as treatment technique violation it is not 
treated with the same concern as other health-based issues. In addition, copper exceedances 
tend to point toward broader distribution management issues in the system (such as 
nitrification, free ammonia in the distribution system, biological activity, high dissolved oxygen, 
etc.) which may not be addressed by the current or proposed water quality parameter 
monitoring or corrosion control studies. Unless these issues are addressed, systems may not be 
clear on the needed actions to reduce copper exposure. The majority of the LCR, LCRR, and the 
proposed LCRI deal with lead specifically and leaves out actions to take to reduce copper 
exposure. MDH recommends that EPA use the rule revision as an opportunity to clarify 
expectations for copper, including improved/expanded corrosion control considerations, 
education, and outreach for residents. Ensuring that sites with copper plumbing are included 
when a part of the distribution sampling is an important part of preventing excess copper 
exposure to those at risk. Considerations for evaluating homes with high copper levels to 
determine the cause of an elevated level should also be considered.  Additionally, EPA should 
consider copper action levels – and re-assess education materials to provide information to the 
public on levels that contribute to acute copper concerns, chronic copper concerns, and 
concerns for special populations (those with Wilson’s disease and infants). 

P R O P O S E D  L E A D  A N D  C O P P E R  R U L E  I M R O V E M E N T S  D O C K E T  I D  E P A - H Q - O W - 2 0 2 2 - 0 8 0 1 - 0 0 3 6  
10 
 
Customer Notices and Educational Materials 
MDH supports ASDWA’s comments regarding streamlining customer education and public 
notice materials. There are many new documentation requirements for materials and timing 
may overlap with other system requirements. MDH encourages EPA to streamline these 
requirements so that public water systems can clearly finish one step before having to 
complete the notification requirement. Consolidating certification and documentation to 
improve and reduce reporting requirements would also be helpful. 
Many materials EPA is requesting that systems provide to customers could be provided as a 
template. MDH encourages EPA to provide translated and accessible templates for systems to 
use as that would more efficiently ensure states are able to easily review these documents and 
reduce the burden for all systems to try to produce their own. 
The most important component of customer notice related to lead and copper are helping 
people understand their risks if they consume water containing lead and copper. Education 
components of the LCR/LCRR and LCRI are related to action level exceedances. While systems 
use these the action level to base treatment decisions and other actions, the public need to be 
able to understand relative health risks so they can make informed choices on remediation. In 
an ideal world everyone would be able to remediate all sources of lead and other 
environmental hazards but realistically the public makes choices everyday regarding which 
things to prioritize about their health. Providing better guidance to the public about the relative 
exposure risks from lead and copper is imperative to getting buy-in to remove sources of lead 
from home plumbing and helping the general public understand how they can take action at 
home or work to maintain and improve their water quality.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0869 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024  
 
Ms. Jennifer McLain 
Director 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE: Proposed Rule: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements (LCRI), Docket ID: No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
Dear Ms. McLain, 
 
On behalf of the nation’s mayors, cities and counties we appreciate the opportunity to provide 
comments on the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Proposed National 
Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) to reduce lead 
in drinking water. The Biden Administration has set an ambitious goal, which the LCRI 
advances, of removing all lead service lines across the country. We support EPA’s efforts to 
accomplish this goal, and many local governments are already taking action to address lead 
service lines (LSLs) in their communities, but we have some concerns regarding affordability 
and implementation of the proposal. 
 
Collectively, our organizations represent the nation’s 3,069 counties, 19,000 cities and the 
mayors of the 1,400 largest cities throughout the United States. Local governments serve as co-
regulators in implementing and enforcing many federal laws with states, including Safe Drinking 
Water Act programs, and our members take these responsibilities seriously. Protecting the 
health, safety and welfare of residents is a top priority for local leaders.  
 
EPA first promulgated the Lead and Copper Rule in 1991 to reduce exposure to lead in drinking 
water and implementation of this rule over the last 30 years has resulted in major improvements 
in public health. Implementing the proposed LCRI will be an unprecedented and major local 
effort to achieve national public health goals. For these reasons, it is important that EPA 
establish a regulatory program that is clear, cost-efficient and implementable for all our 
communities.  
 
Specifically, we recommend the Agency:  
● Provide additional and direct funding to local governments to reduce the financial burden 
imposed by this otherwise unfunded mandate.  

● Provide maximum implementation flexibility for local governments in the form of longer 
and alternative replacement schedules for systems facing affordability barriers, systems 
with many LSLs or for systems demonstrating sufficient corrosion control treatment. 
● Clarify the definition of when a service line is “under the control” of the water system.  
 
LCRI Overarching Concerns and Recommendations  
Below, we outline our concerns with the feasibility of the proposed rule and provide 
recommendations to address these concerns to ensure that the limited financial resources of 
local governments are used as effectively as possible toward meeting this public health goal.  
 
1. Affordability and Equity  
EPA estimates the annual cost for public water systems (PWSs) to comply with the proposed 
LCRI is between $2.9 billion and $4.8 billion, with costs primarily associated with identifying and 
removing LSLs, installing water treatment technologies and providing filters to consumers.  
However, according to the American Water Works Association, the average cost for LSL 
replacement ranges between $4,000 and $7,000 but can be upwards of $10,000 to replace a 
single LSL.1 Given that EPA’s 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment 
estimates that there are approximately 9.2 million LSLs across the country, the total cost for LSL 
replacement alone is likely to be upwards of $90 to $100 billion. Additionally, it is important to 
note that EPA’s cost analysis is calculated across 35 years, even though the bulk of the costs 
will be required in the first 10 to 13 years after the rule is finalized, resulting in a likely inaccurate 
assessment of the impact the proposed rule will have on ratepayer affordability.  
 
Because of this, we are concerned that not only has the Agency underestimated the full cost of 
compliance, but also the fiscal capacity of local governments and ratepayers to afford these 
costs. This is a critical miscalculation given that local governments fund over 98 percent of all 
capital, operations and maintenance investment in drinking water and wastewater infrastructure 
in the United States, primarily through user fees and bonds. The most recent U.S. Census data 
shows that local governments spent over $148 billion on water and wastewater in 2021 alone, 
and spent over $2.38 trillion between 1993 and 2019, not adjusted for inflation.  
 
Local leaders appreciate the historic $15 billion provided in the bipartisan Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) to address lead in drinking water. However, this figure is well 
below the projected replacement cost of $90 to $100 billion and the majority of the $15 billion 
comes in the form of loans, which local governments must pay back. Further, because the 
funding is only available through FY2026, it is uncertain if local governments will even be able to 
use this funding to comply with the proposed LCRI. Moreover, current proposals for upcoming 
federal appropriation bills drastically reduce the amount of funds available to local governments 
through the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund as funding for earmarks is being pulled from 
 
1 Considerations when Costing Lead Service Line Identification and Replacement, American Water 
Works Association, November 2022. Available at: 
https://www.awwa.org/Portals/0/AWWA/ETS/Resources/Technical%20Reports/2022%2011%2029%2007
2%20CDM%20SL%20Identification%20and%20LSLR%20Costs.pdf  

the base funding of the State Revolving Fund programs, limiting the amount of funds available 
for LSL removal efforts.  
 
Unfortunately, the historic capital stimulus provided by Congress in the IIJA falls far short of the 
cost this proposed LCRI will impose on public water systems and affordability will continue to 
represent a major barrier to reaching the public health goals of the proposed rule.  
 
Recommendation: We urge the Administration and Congress to provide additional and direct 
federal funding to local governments. We also urge EPA to match compliance schedules with 
financial assistance where it is needed. 
 
A. Individual Burden and Environmental Justice Concerns  
Given that local governments will be forced to bear the brunt of costs to comply with the 
proposed rule, EPA must understand that a rise in water rates in communities across the 
nation is a near certainty. The steep cost for utilities to comply with the LCRI will be felt 
most intensely by low-income households and the small business community. 
 
Additionally, in order for local governments and water systems to comply with the 
proposed mandatory annual replacement rates, many will likely be forced to prioritize 
customers who are able to afford the estimated thousands of dollars required for LSL 
replacement. Given the absolute priority that is needed for LSL replacement in low-
income and environmental justice communities, this dichotomy could raise serious equity 
issues.  
 
Recommendation: We strongly urge the Agency to consider the financial impact this 
proposed regulation will have on individual consumers, particularly those in 
environmental justice and disadvantaged communities. Affordability challenges 
associated with an accelerated timeline and limited financial resources will force local 
governments to pass these costs onto community ratepayers. To help alleviate this, we 
recommend the Agency consider additional funding sources and longer replacement 
schedules.  
 
B. Competing Drinking Water Priorities  
We must also note that EPA is in the process of finalizing a host of other new regulations 
impacting public water systems. Specifically, we are concerned that, in addition to the 
LCRI requirements, the Agency’s rulemakings around new drinking water standards for 
PFAS and regulating PFAS under CERCLA and RCRA will create additional unfunded 
mandates that will be unaffordable for many communities. This is on top of ongoing 
investments PWSs are already making to upgrade aging infrastructure, safeguard 
systems against attacks, increase climate sustainability and resiliency and meet other 
requirements under the Safe Drinking Water Act and Clean Water Act. 
 
As mentioned above, local governments already face a water infrastructure needs gap, 
and these additional unfunded mandates will exacerbate affordability and equity 

concerns for the many fixed- and low-income households that already spend a 
disproportionate amount of their income on water bills.  
 
Recommendation: We urge EPA to take a holistic and integrated approach to drinking 
water regulations and consider the cumulative impacts that the rules and regulations will 
have on local governments in terms of cost and compliance and implementation 
timelines. 
 
2. Implementation Challenges   
Given the number of challenges associated with the proposed LCRI, including limited financial 
resources, equity and affordability concerns, and workforce and supply chain shortages, among 
others, flexibility will be critical to ensuring local communities are able to implement and comply 
with the proposed rule. The Agency should take such factors as the preponderance of LSLs in a 
community, local market conditions, issues around gaining authority to access private property, 
liability concerns and the use of water rate revenue to remove LSLs into consideration when 
working with local communities on the implementation of the proposed LCRI.  
 
Recommendation: We urge EPA to offer additional flexibilities, including extended compliance 
deadlines, to local governments and PWSs that are managing their own local logistical 
constraints, limited resources, and competing priorities. 
A.  Replacement Schedule  
The Agency’s LCRI proposal sets a compliance deadline of ten years to replace 100 
percent of LSLs (10 percent rolling average over three years), regardless of the system’s 
measured lead level. We support the proposal to build lead service line replacements 
into a community’s capital improvement plan, rather than as a reactionary measure 
through a Maximum Contaminant Level requirement or lead exceedance. While the 
proposal includes some flexibility for a longer replacement timeframe for a very limited 
number of scenarios, ultimately, this compliance schedule is unachievable for a vast 
majority of communities and water systems.  
 
The two eligibility criteria proposed in the LCRI where a system may receive a deferred 
replacement timeline are: (1) systems with a high proportion of LSLs relative to the total 
number of households served (0.039 replacements per household per year); and (2) 
systems who would have to replace more than 10,000 LSLs per year under the 
proposed ten-year timeframe. We appreciate the Agency’s acknowledgment that many 
possible factors can influence how many LSLs a city could remove in one year - 
including market conditions, labor shortages, and even seasonal changes. However, the 
Agency’s conclusion that removing up to 10,000 LSLs a year is “technically feasible” for 
the vast majority of systems likely downplays the impact that varying limitations have on 
the ability of communities and water systems to feasibly replace that many pipes in one 
year.  

Additionally, EPA’s proposal includes a requirement that States set a shorter deadline 
for an individual water system to complete LSL replacement where “feasible,” which is 
undefined. Although well-intended, local governments and public water systems are in 
the best position to appropriately assess local factors and circumstances that strongly 
impact a system’s ability to remove LSLs within a certain timeframe. At a minimum, EPA 
should require States to consult with local governments before a determination is made 
regarding shortening the replacement schedule.  
 
Recommendation: Eligibility criteria for longer replacement deadlines should be 
expanded to offer local governments a more realistic and fiscally appropriate timeframe 
to account for practical limitations. The Agency should also consider a simpler, 
alternative compliance pathway for systems that have either demonstrated sufficient 
corrosion control treatment or have few LSLs. This would better allow communities to 
allocate their resources where they are most required and ensure that systems with 
higher need are prioritized first. Additionally, we urge the Agency to either remove the 
requirement that States set more rapid compliance deadlines or clarify under which 
specific criteria this requirement would be triggered to avoid any sudden shifts in local 
planning and implementation efforts.  
Additionally, EPA should not require local governments to replace non-potable service 
lines if there are administrative safeguards in place to prevent potable use nor require 
local governments to replace service lines on abandoned property if there are local 
provisions in place to ensure replacement before use. This would simplify the 
replacement requirement and provide additional flexibility for communities. 
B. Private Side Replacement 
Replacing LSLs is often complicated because ownership of the service line is often split 
between the public water system and privately owned property. As such, the local 
government must obtain consent from the property owner to access and replace LSLs 
on the private side of the water line. While financial concerns represent one of the most 
critical barriers to receiving customer consent to access private-side LSLs, it is not the 
only one. Local governments may struggle to obtain consent for a variety of reasons, 
including community distrust, the physically disruptive process of removing LSLs, and 
reluctance to view LSL replacement as a priority. The cooperation of private residents to 
replace pipes will greatly impact, either negatively or positively, a local governments’ 
ability to complete 100 percent replacement in compliance with the LCRI.  
The Safe Drinking Water Act defines public water systems and delineates between 
portions of the distribution system that are under the control of the PWS and portions 
that are connected to the distribution system, but are not under the control of the PWS. 
While the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) equates “control” with 
“ownership,” the proposed LCRI redefines “control” to equate it to “access.”  

However, the proposed rule fails to define “access” and what having “legal, physical 
access” means for local governments and PWSs in terms of conducting LSL 
replacement on the private side. The definition of “access” is also a function of state and 
local law, which EPA recognizes. The lack of a clear definition of “access” in the LCRI, 
as well as differing definitions of “control,” creates implementation and feasibility 
challenges for communities. For example, does legal access equate to physical access? 
What happens if the water system has legal access, but the property owner still refuses 
to consent for LSL replacement? What does having access to private property mean in 
terms of legal liability and worker safety?  
Furthermore, the proposed LCRI outlines various activities PWSs must do to obtain or 
attempt to obtain necessary access for private-side replacement. For example, under the 
proposed rule PWSs will be required to identify any State or local laws impacting a 
system’s ability to conduct LSL replacement with the idea being that the identification of 
these laws will help the water system overcome the barriers. We understand that this 
provision is intended to make obtaining access more likely, however without additional 
clarity on the definitions of “control” and “access,” this provision further adds to the 
regulatory burden and creates implementation and feasibility challenges for 
communities.   
Recommendations: EPA should provide additional clarity around the definitions of 
“control” and “access” to provide more guidance to communities and PWSs around 
conducting LSL replacement on private property. Without this clarity, local governments 
should not be held responsible for failing to replace LSLs they do not have control over 
where it is not feasible to do so.   
Further, we recommend that EPA maintain its provision in the LCRI to not require local 
governments to cover the costs associated with the replacement of privately-owned 
service lines, but still retain the option to do so. While some local governments have 
been able to subsidize private-side replacement, there may be legal issues or state 
prohibitions on using ratepayer or capital funds for private-side replacements. 
C. Lead Service Line Inventory 
Under EPA’s LCRR water systems are required to provide an initial inventory of their 
LSLs by October 16, 2024. Under the proposed LCRI, all water systems will have to 
regularly update their inventory and create a publicly available service line replacement 
plan. For unknown service lines, EPA is proposing to require that water systems 
categorize the material of all unknown service lines by the system’s applicable deadline 
for completing mandatory full service line replacement (ten years for most systems).  
Recommendation: While local governments are making progress on completing their 
inventories, changes to the LCRI can help ease the regulatory burden of this 
requirement. For example, we urge EPA to allow communities to complete the inventory 

without having to include fire services and other non-potable service lines, as well as 
abandoned properties.   
3. Risk Communication  
We recommend taking a moderate approach to risk communication so as not to cause undue 
public alarm and concern. While public information and transparency is important, informing 
customers of the existence of lead pipes can potentially raise undo public alarm if no lead is 
leaching due to proper corrosion control. Therefore, risk communication should be targeted to 
customers where there is a specific concern. LSL notification can be complex for local 
governments, and a requirement to notify customers when there is uncertainty will only make 
this process more challenging. Specifically, a 24-hour notification timeframe when there is an 
action level exceedance is unrealistic. Moreover, a 24-hour notification is usually reserved for 
acute public health emergencies such as significant outbreaks of infectious diseases or 
bioterrorist attacks where there is the potential for human health to be immediately impacted. 
Effective risk communication may require longer than 24 hours to execute, as there may be 
various administrative issues to resolve, and several business days could elapse in some 
instances. 
 
Recommendation: We urge the Agency to encourage best efforts for rapid delivery and 
notification but allow for flexibility in its requirements. 
4. Small System Flexibility  
EPA’s LCRI proposes to change the eligibility threshold for small system flexibility from water 
systems serving 10,000 people down to 3,300 people. Small systems are particularly 
constrained in their financial and staff capacity, which impacts their ability to comply with federal 
regulations.  
 
Recommendation: We recommend the Agency maintain its previous eligibility threshold of 
10,000 persons in an effort to provide maximum flexibility for local governments and in 
particular, smaller communities. Additionally, EPA should ensure that small system flexibilities 
will be available in every state, since many of the flexibilities could depend on the state granting 
them. 
 
Due to the concerns listed above, we believe additional financial resources, expanded 
compliance schedules and maximum implementation flexibility would offer the most 
realistic approach for local governments to make significant progress toward reducing 
lead in drinking water and removing 100 percent lead pipes. We urge EPA to take a 
reasonable and rational approach to compliance that recognizes local obstacles and to 
be realistic when setting goals or standards under the LCRI. 
 
On behalf of the nation’s mayors, cities and counties, thank you for considering the local 
government perspective on this important issue. As the Agency finalizes the LCRI, we look 
forward to working with you to ensure a clear, cost-effective and implementable rule. If you have 
any questions, please contact us: Judy Sheahan (USCM) at 202-861-6775 or 
jsheahan@usmayors.org; Carolyn Berndt (NLC) at 202-626-3101 or Berndt@nlc.org; or Sarah 
Gimont (NACo) at 202-942-4254 or sgimont@naco.org. 

 
Sincerely, 
 
 
    
 
 
Tom Cochran  
 
        Clarence E. Anthony 
 
  Matthew D. Chase  
CEO and Executive Director         CEO and Executive Director 
  CEO and Executive Director                        
The U.S. Conference of Mayors     National League of Cities    
  National Association of Counties

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0971 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Comment letter on Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
February 5, 2024 
Michael Regan, Administrator 
Radhika Fox, Assistant Administrator, Office of Water 
Environmental Protection Agency 
 
Dear Administrator Regan and Assistant Administrator Fox, 
The Lead and Copper Rule Improvements released by the EPA take critical steps towards minimizing the 
presence of lead in drinking water across the country. However, there is no safe level of lead in drinking 
water, and we urge the EPA to further strengthen and expedite regulations that would protect the 22 
million Americans who receive their drinking water from lead service lines. 
From Chicago to Detroit to Cleveland, the Great Lakes region is home to urban and industrial centers 
with rich histories. While we admire the ingenuity, beauty, and culture of these major cities, they are 
deeply impacted by aging infrastructure that threatens the quality of drinking water and the health of 
communities. 
Out of the ten states in the country with the highest number of lead service lines, seven of them are 
Great Lakes states, and five of the Great Lakes states have exceeded the national average for the 
percent of children with lead blood levels above the Center for Disease Control’s former action level of 
5µg/dL. Lead exposure in children can harm their brains and nervous systems resulting in 
developmental, learning, and behavioral problems, while lead exposure in adults elevates risks for heart 
disease. The pervasiveness of lead service lines disproportionately impacts low-income households and 
communities of color, which are often already overburdened with other sources of pollution and from 
other lead hazards such as lead-based paint. 
Achieving 100% lead service line replacement within 10 years is a strong action that should be 
implemented across the country. Cities like Chicago should be held to the same standard; nearly 
400,000 lead service lines run through the city, heavily impacting low-income households and 
communities of color, and an analysis of residential water testing conducted between 2016-2021 found 
that one in 20 households tested exceeded the federal action levels for lead. Strong action must be 
taken to expedite the process to remove lead service lines in severely impacted communities. 
One of the limitations to this rule would place a disproportionate financial burden on impacted 
communities and result in Great Lakes cities like Chicago and Cleveland waiting decades to fully replace 
lead service lines, exposing several more generations to the health impacts of lead poisoning.  
The practice of splitting funding for lead service line replacement between utilities and water service 
customers places a financial burden on the communities that have already suffered the disproportionate 
impacts of lead service lines, from health complications to the costs of alternative water sources. We 

urge the EPA to follow the example of Michigan’s Lead and Copper Rule, and require public water 
utilities to cover the full costs of lead service replacement. 
In addition to lead service line replacement, there are additional protective steps that EPA should 
incorporate into the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements to minimize exposure to and effects of lead 
contamination. A Filter First policy is a key line of defense against lead poisoning, especially in schools 
and child care centers, and the EPA should match state policies such as Michigan’s and require the 
installation of filtered drinking water stations or filtered faucets designated for drinking water at those 
facilities.  
Finally, we applaud the progress of lowering the federal action limit from 15 parts per billion to 10 parts 
per billion. However, that adjustment alone will be insufficient in protecting people from the health 
impacts of lead exposure, and falls short of the standards set in Canada and recommendations by the EU 
for triggering action at 5 parts per billion. 
Please protect our communities from the hazards of lead contamination and take equitable and 
immediate action to get the lead out of our drinking water. 
Sincerely, 
Great Lakes Regional Organizations 
National Wildlife Federation – Great Lakes Regional Center 
Rebecca Meuninck, Ph.D. 
Executive Director 
Great Lakes Business Network  
Juliette King McAvoy and Bob Sutherland 
Co-Chairs  
Environmental Law & Policy Center  
Howard Learner 
Executive Director 
 
Council of the Great Lakes Region  
Lora Shrake 
Senior Program Director, Business & Sustainability 
 
Religious Coalition for the Great Lakes  
Irene Senn 
Coordinator 
Michigan Organizations 
 
Ecology Center  
Melissa Cooper Sargent  
Environmental Health Advocate  

DLEAD: Detroit Lead Parent Advocacy Group/Wayne State University 
Mary Sue Schottenfels  
Staff Consultant  
Learning Disabilities Association of Michigan  
Amy Barto, M.Ed. 
 
President  
Healthy Homes Coalition of West Michigan  
Samika Douglas  
Community Organizer 
Michigan League of Conservation Voters Education Fund &  
Michigan League of Conservation Voters 
Bentley Johnson 
Federal Government Affairs Director 
Sierra Club  
Erma Leaphart  
Great Lakes Organizer  
 
For Love of Water (FLOW) 
Liz Kirkwood 
Executive Director 
 
Groundwork Center for Resilient Communities  
Ashley Rudzinski 
Climate & Environment Program Director 
 
Tip of the Mitt Watershed Council  
Jennifer McKay 
Chief Policy and Government Affairs Director 
Huron River Watershed Council 
Rebecca Esselman 
Executive Director 
Citizens' Resistance at Fermi Two (CRAFT) 
Jessie Collins 
Co-Chair 
Ohio Organizations 
Ohio Healthy Homes Network  
Fred Strahorn  
Executive Director 
Cleveland Water Alliance  
Bryan Stubbs 
President & Executive Director  

Learning Disabilities Association of Ohio   
Holly Roe 
President  
 
  
 
Wisconsin Organizations 
Milwaukee Water Commons  
Brenda Coley 
 
Co-Executive Director
Milwaukee Riverkeeper 
Cheryl Nenn 
Riverkeeper 
 
Learning Disabilities Association of Wisconsin 
Diane Sixel  
President  
Sisters of St Francis of Assisi  
Jill Haberman 
Justice and Peace Animator 
Minnesota Organizations 
Clean Water Action  
Chloe Kintop  
Zero Waste Specialist 
Learning Disabilities Association of Minnesota  
Martha Moriarty 
President  
Roots Return Heritage Farm LLC  
Lori Cox 
Owner/Operator 
 
 
New York Organizations 
Environmental Advocates NY  
Rob Hayes 
 
Director of Clean Water  
Learning Disabilities Association of New York 
Katherine Cappella 
President 
Save The River Upper St Lawrence Riverkeeper  
John Peach 
Executive Director and Upper St. Lawrence Riverkeeper  
 

Pennsylvania Organizations 
Women for a Healthy Environment  
Michelle Naccarati-Chapkis 
 
Executive Director 
 
PennFuture 
Jenny Tompkins   
Campaign Manager for Clean Water Advocacy  
Illinois Organizations 
Learning Disabilities Association of Illinois  
Bev Johns 
President 
Holy Spirit Missionary Sisters  
Sr. Rose Therese Nolta 
Justice and Peace Coordinator  
Prairie Rivers Network 
Maggie Bruns 
Executive Director 
  
 
Indiana Organizations 
Learning Disabilities Association of Indiana  
Patty Useem  
President  
Save the Dunes  
Harshini Ratnayaka 
Advocacy Coordinator  
 
 
 
 
 
National and Additional State Organizations 
Learning Disabilities Association of America  
Tracy Gregoire 
Healthy Children Project Director 
Able Differently  
Dr. Louis Allen 
President 
Learning Disabilities Association of Alabama  
Tamara Massey 
President 
Learning Disabilities Association of Arkansas  
Brittany Franklin 
Healthy Children Project Coordinator 

California Safe Schools  
Robina Suwol 
Executive Director 
Learning Disabilities Association of California  
Dr. EunMi Cho 
President   
Learning Disabilities Association of Connecticut  
Gregg French 
President 
Learning Disabilities Association of Delaware 
Fern Goldstein 
President 
Learning Disabilities Association of Florida  
Cathy Einhorn 
President 
Learning Disabilities Association of Georgia   
Carolyn Kingsley  
Healthy Children Project Coordinator  
Learning Disabilities Association of Iowa  
Vicki Goshon 
Healthy Children Project Coordinator  
Learning Disabilities Association of Maine  
Barbara Melnick 
Board Secretary 
Learning Disabilities Association of Maryland  
Kelly Tanzi 
President 
Learning Disabilities Association of Nebraska  
Clarice Jackson 
President 
Learning Disabilities Association of New Jersey 
Sollie Pinkston 
Healthy Children Project Coordinator 
Learning Disabilities Association of North Carolina  
JoAnna Barnes 
President 

Learning Disabilities Association of Oklahoma 
Holly Hunt 
Healthy Children Project Coordinator 
Learning Disabilities Association of Pennsylvania  
Alex Moulton 
Healthy Children Project Coordinator  
Learning Disabilities Association of South Carolina  
Dr Analisa Smith 
President 
Learning Disabilities Association of Texas  
Pam Smith  
Healthy Children Project Coordinator 
Learning Disabilities Association of Utah  
Gaylia Tanner 
Board Secretary 
Learning Disabilities Association of Virginia   
Mitch Beres 
President

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0943 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Proposed LCRI Comments 
The City of St. Cloud (City) appreciates Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) 
engagement with stakeholders prior to finalizing the Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI). The City recognizes the improved communication, public 
education and reduction in lead exposure that this proposed rule would help to 
achieve. The City would like to specifically comment on the proposed service line 
replacement requirements.  
 
The proposed LCRI requires municipalities to replace all lead, galvanized requiring 
replacement, and unknown service lines within 10 years, but not to exceed 10,000 
replacements per year, at a rate of 10% each year. This timeline is aggressive and is a 
major cause of concern for the City for several reasons:  
 
1. While funding is available, it is structured as a reimbursement from the State.  
This means that the City has to maintain an available cash balance to cover 
the cost of replacements prior to receiving the reimbursement.  Using the City’s 
current service line inventory, the City would be required to use approximately 
10% of its’ Water Treatment operating budget to complete the required 
replacements. This will inhibit the City’s ability to complete other work, 
including maintenance and replacement of critical infrastructure to include 
towers, booster stations, mains, and hydrants, and reduce the funds available 
for emergencies and improvements. 
 
2. With all municipalities facing the same requirement, the availability of skilled 
workers to complete the replacements is a concern. The City is concerned 
about not meeting the required replacement rate due to the unavailability of 
qualified contractors.  
 
3. The current funding structure requires the City to pay for the service line 
replacement prior to receiving the reimbursement from the State. The City 
owns no part of the service line; the customer owns from the meter to the main. 
The City would be completing the agreement with and paying the contractor 
for work that is not the property of the City. This is a liability concern for the City.  
 
The City would encourage EPA and States to channel funding directly to service line 
owners, whether that is the municipality or the property owner. The owner should be the 
one completing the service contracts to have the replacement completed.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0799 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 2, 2024 
 
The Honorable Radhika Fox 
Assistant Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Submitted via https://www.regulations.gov 
 
RE: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
Docket #: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Dear Assistant Administrator Fox: 
 
The Missouri Department of Natural Resources (department) recognizes the considerable effort the  
U. S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has taken to develop the proposed rule, National 
Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements. The proposal is a 
substantial undertaking, and it will have a significant impact on public water systems, state primacy 
agencies, and public health. We recognize the importance of our shared responsibility to protect public 
health and appreciate the opportunity to provide comments on the proposal. Please find the 
department’s comments and recommendations for improvement of the proposed rule outlined below in 
the order which the rule text occurs in 40 CFR Part 141. 
 
40 CFR § 141.2 Definitions – The definition for “connector” is a “pipe not exceeding two feet in 
length.” This will eliminate connectors in Missouri because we have no connectors that short. All 
connectors that have been visually identified have been well over two feet, especially pigtails. Two 
feet is very short, and even goosenecks in Missouri exceed this length. The department recommends 
the maximum length segment within the definition of “connector” be changed to four or five feet in 
length. This length is much more common and realistic. Also, clarification is needed for connectors 
longer than the defined length and if they will be included in the definition of a lead service line when 
found. 
 
40 CFR § 141.2 Definitions – The definitions for small and medium size systems have been reversed 
from the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR). Small system flexibilities were cited as up to 
10,000 population in the LCRR and have been changed in the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
(LCRI) to 3,300 population, but the other citations for small systems in the LCRI have changed from 
3,300 to 10,000. This makes things very confusing for states and water systems. The definitions for 
small systems should be the same for all parts of the LCRI to eliminate this confusion. The department 
recommends that the small system population be identified as less than or equal to 3,300. 
 
40 CFR § 141.81(a)(1)(ii) – The option of letting the states determine if a large system needs to re-
optimize Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) if they exceed the Practical Quantitation Limit (PQL) of 
5ug/L should remain unchanged. Requiring large water systems to re-optimize if they exceed the PQL 
in every instance at this low lead level is unnecessary and should remain the decision of the state to 

Assistant Administrator Radhika Fox 
Page 2 
 
 
either re-optimize or not on a case-by-case basis. Leaving the citation in the LCRI as proposed allows 
states the discretion to make the determination to re-optimize. 
 
40 CFR § 141.81(a)(1)(iii) – The LCRI requires large systems without CCT to complete steps and 
install Optimal Corrosion Control Treatment (OCCT). The existing Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) 
already requires all large water systems (except those who previously met the (b)(3) requirements 
under the LCR) and water systems that newly meet the large water system criteria to install CCT. So, 
there should be very few, if any, large systems that don’t already have OCCT installed and have 
Optimal Water Quality Parameters (OWQPs) determined. For water systems that increase population 
to greater than or equal to 50,001, the LCRI appears to allow these new large water systems to install 
CCT only if they exceed the PQL or copper action level, according to 40 CFR § 141.81(a)(1)(iii). All 
large water systems should install CCT and then follow the large system requirements of 40 CFR § 
141.81(a)(1). 
 
40 CFR § 141.81(a) and (b) – The department recommends the language of this section be revised to 
give states the discretion to determine re-optimization of CCT when the PQL or action level is 
exceeded. 
 
40 CFR § 141.81 –There is little or no experience in cities or states in performing or reviewing pipe-
rigs as required under step one of 40 CFR § 141.81(e). The department recommends removing pipe 
rigs from the Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) study requirements because of the lack of 
experience and the disturbance of harvesting the pipe. Harvested pipe will not keep the same 
characteristics it had before the harvest and may not respond to CCT options being considered in a test 
rig the same as in the real distribution system. 
 
40 CFR § 141.82(j)(1)(ii)(B) – The rule requires OCCT to be reviewed as part of the sanitary survey 
process. In Missouri, OCCT evaluations are performed by state review engineers and not during a 
sanitary survey. Review engineers evaluate if a new site better assesses the effectiveness of CCT, not 
inspectors on site during a sanitary survey. The department recommends the language be revised to not 
require this review to occur during sanitary survey. 
 
40 CFR § 141.84 – Connectors were not a part of the initial lead service line inventory. Including 
them now will cause water systems to re-evaluate service lines that have already been determined for a 
connector identification. Missouri requests that the rule be modified to track and replace connectors 
when found during normal operations. 
 
40 CFR § 141.84(d)(5)(iv) – States should not be required to shorten water system deadlines for 
replacement of lead and Galvanized Requiring Replacement (GRR) service lines. The rate is set by the 
number of lead and GRR lines in the inventory, but the number most likely will not be known until 
several updates to the inventory are completed. This makes determination difficult because the true 
number of lead and GRR service lines have not yet been determined. By using a smaller number of 
known lead or GRR service lines for determining the deadline, the deadline will be shortened too 
much to be realistically achieved after more identifications are made. The water system could still be 
identifying service lines that need replacing after the shortened deadline passes. 
 
40 CFR § 141.84(g) – The rule allows partial replacements in emergency situations and establishes 
mitigation requirements in 141.84(h) that systems must implement when emergencies occur. Since 
mitigation requirements for partial replacements are already included in the LCRI, the department 
recommends that water systems be allowed to replace their own portion of the service line and follow 

Assistant Administrator Radhika Fox 
Page 3 
 
 
the same mitigation efforts found in 141.84(h), when a customer refuses to replace their side of the line 
for other types of non-emergency repairs such as planned water main replacement. Water main 
replacement projects will disturb the lead or GRR service lines owned by the water system, causing a 
need to perform mitigation activities anyway, so allowing the systems to proceed with replacing their 
part of the service line when they are discovered during planned or unplanned work should be allowed 
in those situations where the customer refuses to replace their part of the line. The mitigation 
requirements for emergencies should be equally protective for non-emergency activities, and allowing 
the partial replacements will allow the system to address the part of the service line that they are 
responsible for.  
 
40 CFR § 141.85(a)(1) – The proposed rule states that Public Notice (PN) and Public Education (PE) 
materials must include language exactly as written, but 141.85(a)(1)(vii) has language for including a 
website for the water system. Some small water systems don’t have a website or even a computer. 
These systems include small water districts, subdivisions, and mobile home parks that will be unable 
to comply with this requirement. The department recommends revising the language to make the 
reference to a website applicable to only systems that have a website.   
 
40 CFR § 141.85(b)(2) – The current LCR and LCRR each have a PE requirement for 60 days after 
the end of the tap sampling period. This timeframe should remain unchanged in the LCRI. With the 
new requirements for the public notification for an action level exceedance to be completed in 24 
hours and to include health effect language and instructions on how to reduce lead in drinking water 
that are very similar to the PE requirements, the PE requirements are now an appropriate follow-up to 
the 24-hour notification and should be kept at the 60-day requirement. 
 
40 CFR § 141.85(c)(1-2) – As a state required to provide laboratory services to water systems by state 
law, supplemental sampling will cause increased costs to the laboratory and decrease laboratory 
capacity. When our water systems have provided supplemental sampling services in the past in 
response to a customer request, they have had to use a separate laboratory and their own funding to 
pay for this cost. Since supplemental sampling is part of the new rule, it would place the responsibility 
back on the state to provide this laboratory analysis, as it will now be sampling required of the system. 
Our state laboratory is set up to provide compliance sampling for determining compliance with 90th 
percentiles, but not to provide analysis to any customer of a water system who may request it. 
Analyzing these additional samples would be a burden to the state, as it would be difficult for the 
department to estimate the number of samples we would receive each year, and the level of staffing 
necessary to maintain our laboratory capacity. The department recommends the EPA revise the 
language to require systems to offer to collect samples but to not require them to analyze or pay for the 
cost of the samples. 
 
40 CFR § 141.85(d)(2) – The three-day requirement for sample result notification in the LCRI is too 
burdensome. It is an arbitrary timeframe. Results notification to customers in three days are for sample 
results below the new action level of 10ug/L. Thirty days has been appropriate in the LCR/LCRR. 
Samples above the action level require 24-hour notification for the customer collecting the sample, 
which is appropriate for this type of sample result. Keeping the 30-day requirement, as found in the 
LCR and LCRR, is still an appropriate timeframe for notification of sample results below the action 
level. 
 
40 CFR § 141.85(j)(2) – Requiring pitcher filters to be provided to all customers and not just the 
customers with LSL, GRR, and unknown service lines is an expense that can be avoided. Filters 

Assistant Administrator Radhika Fox 
Page 4 
 
 
should be provided to targeted customers who have LSL, GRR, or unknown service lines. Customers 
with non-lead service lines should not need them. 
 
40 CFR § 141.86(b)(1) – Keeping the minimum stagnation period at six hours is good, but a 
maximum stagnation period should the added. This period should be 18 hours as found in the Three Ts 
Guidance. To solve the possible abuse of this maximum period, the chain of custody completed by the 
customer could have the stagnation time included. The water system could review the time and decide 
if the stagnation period is over the 18-hour limit and have the sample replaced before returning 
samples to the lab for analysis. This would solve the issue of having customers collect samples from 
taps that get no usage, or from a tap immediately after a week or more vacation. 
 
40 CFR § 141.86 – In general, the provisions for water systems with lead, GRR, or unknown service 
connections to return to standard monitoring (six-month sampling) will create lab capacity issues, as 
well as supply issues for the required bottle types. Missouri has used wide-mouth, one-liter bottles for 
well over ten years. We mentioned to the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
(ASDWA) LCRR workgroup where these bottles could be found so that systems could sample using 
the new criteria of the LCRR before the compliance date of the rule to avoid going to standard 
monitoring under that rule. This resulted in a shortage of the bottles and Missouri had to back order 
bottles several times after mentioning it. This demonstrated a serious lack of availability of the correct-
type of one-liter bottles. This will happen again for the LCRI requirements and water systems will not 
be able to comply with the rule because of the lack of availability of the proper bottle type. School and 
childcare facility sampling will also have a huge effect on lab capacity, but not bottle type since they 
will use 250ml bottles. 
 
To help curb laboratory capacity and bottle issues, staggering the implementation of the LCRI 
sampling requirements, as was done in the original LCR, is appropriate. Staggering can also occur 
through a different requirement than found in the LCR, for example by having large systems sample in 
year one, then medium systems in year two, and small systems in year three. Having almost all water 
systems begin standard monitoring in the same year will cause a huge monetary cost to our sampling 
budgets. Missouri is required to provide laboratory services to our water systems by state law. We 
currently sample about a third of our water systems each year. This is done to reduce the burden on the 
lab and spread out the cost. Sampling all systems in the same year for two monitoring periods and for 
an increased number of samples will cause a significant cost and capacity problem. We will likely 
have to contract out the work to address this increased volume of samples which will further increase 
the costs. This will be a hardship on the state to implement. 
 
40 CFR § 141.86(b)(1) – Acidification of samples after collection. The rule has always allowed 
acidification up to 14 days after collection, but this period could be increased. Lab techs and lab 
directors have stated that no matter how long a sample sits, all lead and copper adhering to the sides of 
the bottle will resolubilize in the required 18-hour period (found in EPA method 200.8). Nitric acid is 
added for two reasons, to preserve the sample and to resolubilize metals before analysis can begin. If 
EPA were to change the 14-day requirement to allow up to 30 days, it would provide greater flexibility 
to public water systems. Public water systems often try to have all their samples collected before 
submitting them for analysis. When individual customers are slow to return their samples, this can 
result in the need to have samples that were submitted by customers at an earlier date recollected due 
to being over the 14-day limit. 
 
40 CFR § 141.86(d)(2)(i) – Water systems that reduce to annual monitoring after two six-month 
monitoring periods should begin annual monitoring at the reduced number of samples, not remain on 

Assistant Administrator Radhika Fox 
Page 5 
 
 
the standard number of samples as required in the proposed rule. Making this change, will help 
systems and states like Missouri who provide analytical services for water systems with lab capacity 
issues and associated costs. Missouri recommends keeping the annual monitoring requirements at the 
reduced number of samples. 
 
40 CFR § 141.87(b)(1)(i) – Wording in the rule indicates Table 5. The Table is labeled Table 1. The 
wording of the rule should be updated to change the reference to Table 1. 
 
40 CFR § 141.90(a)(1)(i) –With the new tier definitions in the LCRI, water systems now need to 
update their sample site plans/pools. The LCRI also requires systems to submit changes to these plans 
prior to sampling in the next tap sampling period. Changes to sampling sites occur regularly during the 
next tap sampling period’s sampling activities. Access to sample sites on the plan can change due to 
death, health issues, vacations, fires, weather damages, etc. without notice. Water systems are 
coordinating with private citizens to collect the samples and cannot always depend on them collecting 
samples when it needs to be done. These changes are discovered during the sampling effort and not 
before, requiring changes to be made. Water systems plan on using the same sites over and over under 
the current rule and will continue to do so until a change is required by such things as LSL 
replacement in the new rule. The LCRI also continues to have the procedure for reporting changes to 
the sample pool/site plan that occur during sampling included in 40 CFR § 141.90(a)(2)(v). For these 
reasons, requiring submittal of these plans just adds additional burden to the rule without a 
corresponding benefit. 
 
The department recommends the rule be updated to require systems to submit updates to the sampling 
plan once the sampling is completed with site changes reported as required by 40 CFR § 
141.90(a)(2)(v). This includes requirements to identify any site that was not sampled during previous 
monitoring periods and to provide an explanation of why the sites have changed. This updated plan 
can show the sites as a group that have changed during the current tap monitoring period, along with 
those that haven’t, and to report those sites expected to be used the next time sampling is required. It 
can be checked with the site changes submitted as required above and checked with the service line 
inventory to determine if the sites used met the tier requirements. The reason for this comment is that 
most changes to the plan won’t be known until sampling begins. Submitting an updated plan that will 
be accurate for a very short amount of time just before the tap sampling period begins doesn’t mean a 
lot. Best laid plans will change when sampling begins because systems cannot predict everything that 
can go wrong with site access. 
 
40 CFR § 141.90(a)(2) – Reporting within the first 10 days following the end of each tap sampling 
period is not possible for lead and copper tap samples. As a state required to provide laboratory 
services by state law, samples collected during the last weeks or days of a sampling period cannot be 
shipped, preserved, analyzed, QAQC processed, signed off on, and reported, all within 10 days. The 
time associated with preparing results, delivery packets, and mailing time to the water system also 
must be accounted for in this short timeframe. The department normally receives our final sample 
results for a reduced monitoring tap sampling period 1.5 months after the end of the sampling period. 
This reporting requirement is possible for Water Quality Parameters (WQPs) since the current LCR 
requires reporting January 10 and July 10 for WQPs according to the end of the monitoring period. 
The department recommends that EPA change the citation in the LCRI from “sampling period” to the 
LCRI definition of “tap monitoring period.” 
 
If this citation is not corrected, the tap sampling period will be compressed, causing an increase in 
costs, laboratory capacity issues, and the loss of the entire month of September for lead and copper tap 

Assistant Administrator Radhika Fox 
Page 6 
 
 
sampling. In our experience, it takes 1.5 months to have all samples analyzed and reported for the 
annual, triennial, and nine year reduced monitoring periods each year (June 1 through September 30). 
Backing up from October 10th, the last date samples could be submitted would be around August 20th 
of each year. Also, September is when Missouri samples our schools, because classes resume, and 
water is again being used. Sample results are then more reflective of the water being consumed. 
 
History: The definition has changed from the LCR “monitoring period” to the LCRR pre-publication 
version “monitoring period” to the Final LCRR version “tap sampling monitoring period” to the 
proposed LCRI version which changed the citation and terminology, to 40 CFR § 141.90(a)(2) and 
“tap sampling period” respectively. 
 
The end of a monitoring period and the end of a sampling period are two different things, and the rule 
requirement has changed from 10 days following the end of each applicable “monitoring period,” 
which meant every six months, annually, three years, or nine years, to “tap sampling period,” which 
means 10 days after the last day samples can be collected. 
 
40 CFR § 141.90(a)(2)(i) – Please see the comment immediately above about Lead and Copper tap 
samples, because the response is also applicable to 1st and 5th liter sample results notification. The 
department recommends that EPA remove the 10 days after the end of the tap sampling period 
requirement for lead and copper tap sampling and return it to the requirements found in the 
LCR/LCRR, which under the LCRI is defined as the “Tap Monitoring Period.” 
 
40 CFR § 141.90(a)(2)(ii) – The LCRI states that the water system can collect a replacement sample 
20 days after the state invalidates a sample, but it also states that documentation for each tap water lead 
and copper sample for which the water system requests invalidation be submitted within 10 days after 
the end of the tap sampling period. Our state laboratory cannot have all samples that are collected by 
the end of the tap sampling period, September 30, analyzed and reported by October 10th. Therefore, 
invalidations cannot be requested by the proposed date in the rule because not all sample results will 
have been reported. The department recommends EPA remove the requirement for requesting an 
invalidation within 10 days after the end of the tap sampling period and replace it with a requirement 
that invalidations be requested within 10 days after receipt of their sample results. 
 
40 CFR § 141.90(a)(2)(iii) – This part of the LCRI requires the water system to notify the state in 
advance that they intend to comply with the rule. This notification seems unnecessary and adds burden 
to the rule, because it is already prescriptive in what the system must do to comply with 40 CFR § 
141.86(h)(3). The department recommends this reporting requirement be removed from the rule.  
 
40 CFR § 141.90(a)(2)(iv), 40 CFR § 141.90(h)(1), and 40 CFR § 142.15(c)(4)(iii)(A - C) – As 
mentioned above, if the results are not yet reported, the 90th percentile cannot be calculated. Missouri 
calculates most of the 90th percentiles for our water systems. If samples are collected at the end of the 
tap sampling period, including the last day, they cannot be shipped, preserved, analyzed, QAQC 
processed, signed off on, and reported by October 10th or 15th. For samples collected in September, 
Missouri cannot generate a 90th percentile and provide the results to the water system in 15 days. This 
requirement is too strict and causes implementation issues when systems sample late in the tap 
sampling period. Changing it to 60 days after the end of the tap monitoring period will fix this issue. 
 
40 CFR § 141.90 – General Comment. There are now 24 certification requirements in the LCRI. And 
although some certifications in the LCRR were changed to a requirement that the “water system must 
demonstrate,” this is effectively still a certification requirement. If those are counted, the total number 

Assistant Administrator Radhika Fox 
Page 7 
of certifications goes up to 26. Most are in 40 CFR § 141.90, but one certification is in 40 CFR § 
141.86(h). Overall, the rule has gotten more complex with these revisions, not less. To reduce the 
complexity of the rule, EPA should evaluate how to reduce the number of certifications that systems 
are required to complete and that states will need to track. 
40 CFR § 141.92 – The State of Missouri has used Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation 
(WIIN) grant funding to sample for lead at childcare facilities. Some of this sampling occurred prior to 
January 1, 2021, which is the date established in the proposed LCRI for using this data to acquire a 
waiver from sampling at childcare facilities. The department recommends EPA revise the rule to 
change this date, so that any sampling that was completed under the WIIN grants could be used to 
obtain a waiver from additional sampling. This will allow the state to save resources that would need 
to be dedicated to this effort, even though this sampling was completed already using the WIIN grant 
funds. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on this proposed rule. The department looks 
forward to continuing to work with the EPA to improve the protection of public health and the 
implementation of the national primary drinking water regulations. If you have any questions 
regarding these comments, please contact David Lamb, Public Drinking Water Branch Chief, at P.O. 
Box 176, Jefferson City, MO 65101, by email at david.lamb@dnr.mo.gov, or by telephone at  
573-751-1300.
Sincerely, 
WATER PROTECTION PROGRAM 
John Hoke 
Director

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0773 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
5301 Wisconsin Avenue, NW, 
Suite 800
                                                                                                                      
Washington, DC 20015
                                                                                                                      
202-362-0041
   
www.odonoghuelaw.com
January 24, 2024
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (Mail Code 4601)
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460
Submitted to: NDWAC@epa.gov
Re: EPA Notice re Meeting of the National Drinking Water Advisory Council  
         FRL–11622–01–OW
Dear Sir or Madam: 
The following comments are submitted in the above-referenced matter on behalf of the 373,000 
members of the United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipe Fitting 
Industry of the United States and Canada, AFL-CIO (United Association or UA).  These comments are 
offered for consideration of the National Drinking Water Advisory Council’s (Council) for its January 
31, 2024 meeting on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule (Rule).
I. POLICY CONTEXT & OVERVIEW
Given the dramatic rise to water quality threats in both our nation’s water infrastructure and indoor 
premise piping systems, the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) recently proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule (Rule) is a matter of critical importance to public health and safety. We, therefore, 
appreciate this opportunity to share our comments with the Council on these issues as it prepares to 
provide advice and recommendations to the EPAs’ Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water. 
At the outset, we would like to stress that the United Association is the leading trade union
representing workers performing construction, remediation and maintenance on premise 
piping systems and one of the leading trades representing workers on water infrastructure 
systems, especially water and wastewater treatment plants.  Our comments on the proposed 
rule on the following core recommendations that we submit are essential to developing more 
effective federal water policy in these areas: 
Ensure Complete Replacement of Lead Service Lines
Make Lead-Free Schools a National Priority
Promote Interim Treatment Pending Full Remediation 
Requiring Good Skill Standards on EPA-Assisted Projects
Promote Quality Control AND Positive Community Impact 

2
II. Ensure Complete Replacement of Lead Service Lines
In recent years it has been discovered that one of the greatest sources of lead contamination in 
drinking water comes from the lead service lines (LSLs), which are the pipelines that connect 
water mains in water supply systems to homes and buildings.  Because there is no safe level of 
lead in drinking water, addressing the threat from LSLs should be a top priority.  President Biden 
and Vice President Harris share this concern and have vowed to ensure that their administration 
will take action to ensure that every lead service line in the nation is replaced within the next 
decade.  
Fortunately, Congress and President Biden have taken major steps to make this commitment a 
reality.  The 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act authorized $50 billion in EPA 
funding to strengthen the nation’s drinking water and wastewater systems, $15 billion of which 
has been allocated to the LSL Replacement Program.1  
We appreciate that while quite substantial, this funding may not be sufficient to fund all the work 
needed to replace all LSLs across the country.  Therefore, we encourage the EPA to continue to 
promote its multi-faceted strategy to complete this mission, including its efforts to encouraging 
states and municipalities to raise additional funding for these projects.2
It would also be helpful for the EPA to track, identify and disseminate best practice information 
on state and local funding, as well as the use of new fees, special assessments and other funding 
streams to meet these crucial funding needs.  We also applaud and strong support the EPAs 
efforts to prioritize disadvantaged communities when awarding grants for LSL programs as 
populations in these areas do not have the resources to address this urgent public health threat. 
This initiative should continue to be promoted, along with assistance from state and municipal 
government as an ongoing commitment under the administration Environmental Justice policy.  
As discussed below, when these efforts are combined with the appropriate craft labor contracting 
policies, investments in LSL replacement programs could provide valuable training and 
employment opportunities for affected communities. 
III. Make Lead-Free Schools a National Priority
The EPA is well versed on the fact that children face the greatest risk from lead exposure, 
underscoring the need for making lead-free schools another key priority.  Lead is an extremely 
toxic, especially for young children as even low levels of exposure can result in lower IQs, learning 
disabilities and impaired hearing of children.  Further, lead poisoning in children create as long-
term health effects and irreversible learning disabilities and pose major challenges for educators. 
                                               
1 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, Pub. L. No. 117-58, 135 Stat. 429 (2021).
2 EPA, Strategies to Achieve Full Lead Service Line Replacement, October 2019 EPA 810-R-19-00, pp. 25-27;  see also pp. 
29-30, strategies_to_achieve_full_lead_service_line_replacement_10_09_19.pdf (epa.gov) (last visited Jan. 24, 2024). 
  

3
It is, therefore, highly disturbing that—even though it has been almost ten years since the water 
crisis in Flint, MI which put a spotlight on water quality—and yet we are still seeing one new 
research report highlighting dangerous persistent lead levels in America’s schools.3 This is a sad 
reality for one of the most prosperous nations on earth. For these reasons, the new and copper 
lead rule should ensure improved water quality monitoring and testing in schools and daycare 
centers, mandate adequate prevention and remediation efforts, and impose a stricter action 
levels for these facilities per the recommendations of the American Academy of Pediatrics.4   
We recognize that the Administration and the EPA are making determined efforts to address 
these challenges, critically by securing substantial funding under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law 
to address the threats in schools particularly.5 We also strongly support the agency’s 3Ts Toolkit: 
Training, Testing and Taking Action for Reducing Lead and submit this initiative should be 
substantially expanded and funded with additional resources to reach all school districts across 
the nations, prioritizing economically disadvantaged communities that lack the resources to 
correct these unacceptable conditions.6
IV. Promote Interim Treatment Pending Full Remediation 
Insofar as full abatement of lead threats throughout the country, including all service lines and 
school systems, will take considerable time, we recommend that the new rule facilitate plans to 
ensure that appropriate water filters are installed in taps used for cooking or drinking water.  
These devices are relatively quick and inexpensive to install and offer vital interim assistance in 
preventing lead contamination.  The EPA should also establish a preference under the BIL grant 
programs for school districts committed to installing filters. 
V. Requiring Good Skill Standards on EPA-Assisted Projects 
      Promote Quality Control AND Positive Community Impact 
We also applaud the Administration’s commitment to create high-road, family-sustaining jobs 
through its lead service line initiative and other water infrastructure programs.  This policy is well 
founded as it will help protect federal investments in these projects, promote successful project 
delivery and ensure substantial community benefits in affected local communities.   
                                               
3 See e.g., Tolly Taylor, WBLA TV, I-Team exclusive: Data shows many school districts haven't fixed elevated levels of lead 
in water (May 11, 2023)(testing for school districts across Maryland showing continuously showing dangerous lead levels 
in water systems in violation of legal EPA standards  ), Exclusive: Schools still have elevated levels of lead in water 
(wbaltv.com) (last visited Nov. 8, 2023).
4 Prevention of Childhood Lead Toxicity, American Academy of Pediatrics, Council on Environmental Health, Pediatrics, Vol. 
138,  (July 2016), Issue 1, Prevention of Childhood Lead Toxicity | Pediatrics | American Academy of Pediatrics (aap.org)
(last visited Nov. 8, 2023).
5 EPA, Biden-Harris Administration Announces $58 million to Reduce Lead in Schools and Childcare Facilities Through 
Investing in America Agenda (July 24 2023), Biden-Harris Administration Announces $58 million to Reduce Lead in Schools 
and Childcare Facilities Through Investing in America Agenda | US EPA (last visited Nov. 8, 2023). 
6 See, Lead Service Line Replacement Collaborative, Child Care Facilities and Schools (last visited Nov. 8, 
2023) citing 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water | US EPA.

4
In this regard, it should be recognized that incorporating the contracting and labor policies in EPA 
water quality grant programs pay substantial dividends in several ways.  First, the work in 
question for these programs will often involve highly skilled, complex work, which means have 
qualified contractors and craft persons on these jobs is essential.  The failure to do effectively 
jeopardizes the whole mission.  Clearly, this is not an area where projects should be blindly 
awarded to the low bidder with little or no regard for qualifications, could lead to defective and 
substandard work and unsafe water systems.
Second, the failure to ensure proper qualification will create very real risks of the crucial 
investments being made by the EPA will be wasted.   As noted above, the nation is fiercely 
struggling to secure adequate funding for the vast amount of work that is needed in the water 
policy arena.  Thus, we need to make every effort to ensure the success of these projects to 
continue to maintain public support for these programs because even with massive funding 
assistance recently provided by Congress, addition funding is needed to fully rebuild 
infrastructure, make schools safe and assist  property owners in gaining water quality assurance.  
Third, it is an interesting and compelling fact that when the right contracting and labor policy 
tools are used—maximum community benefits are achieved because they produce the most 
valuable training and employment opportunities available—in addition to ensuring proper 
qualifications and protecting taxpayer investments.   
For these reasons, we submit the new rule should require that all contractors and subcontractors 
used to perform EPA-assisted construction work should be required to verify: (a) strict compliance 
with Davis-Bacon prevailing wage rates; and (b) participate in bona fide registered apprenticeship 
programs for all crafts or trades they employ. 
In addition, a policy should also be established that allows both of these requirements, as well as 
related reporting obligations, to be waived for any projects that are fully covered by Project Labor 
Agreements (PLAs).   Such a waiver makes perfect sense as it is well recognized  that PLAs 
effecticley secure prevailing wage and apprenticeship benefits for construction projects, while 
also providing many other substantial benefits. including those relating to safety.   
In evaluating these recommendations, the EPA should recognize that prevailing wage standards, 
apprenticeship requirements and PLAs have all been fully embraced by the Biden-Harris 
Administration in federal procurement and grant programs.  This is due to the fact that they are 
highly effective due to their ability to promote safe, timely, cost-effective construction and create 
valuable employment and training opportunities in local communities, which is precisely why that 
are being utilized by several other federal agencies, including the Departments of Energy, 
Commerce and Treasury for various types of capital facility programs.  
The community benefits, which the EPA should also promote are also highly significant.  Indeed, a 
study by the UA and Environmental Entrepreneurs shows that replacing all the lead pipes in the 
country will create 56,080 jobs annually for 10 years, which includes 26,900 direct jobs in 

5
construction, plus, another 13,600 jobs from the materials and equipment supply chain.7
With the right approach, the agency can ensure that these are good jobs with good training and 
other valuable benefits, including healthcare and pensions.   All of these policies will compliment 
and help ensure the success of EPA mission on ensure our nation’s water quality and levering 
major investments to help local communities. 
VI. Conclusion
We’re sure that the EPA agrees: every American has a right to safe drinking water.  No one should 
have to worry that the simple act of taking a drink of water from their kitchen faucet or school 
fountain will create a serious risk to their health.   The new Lead and Copper Rule EPA is essential for 
addressing existing threats and ensuring America maintains safe water quality.  We hope the 
recommendations set forth above assist the agency’s efforts in this initiative.  
Respectfully,
      /s/
Gerard. M. Waites, Esq. 
                                               
7 Environmental Entrepreneurs and United Association of Union Plumbers and Pipefitters, Getting the Lead Out: 
Employment & Economic Impacts of Lead Service Line Replacement (August 3, 2021), https://e2.org/reports/
economic-impacts-of-lead-service-line-replacement/ (last visited Nov. 8, 2023).

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0758 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Public Comment Submission on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and 
Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
  
January 19, 2024   
 
For more information, contact:  
 
Megan Wolff, PhD MPH, Health Policy Director, Beyond Plastics, meganwolff2@bennington.edu 
Judith Enck, President of Beyond Plastics and Former EPA Regional Administrator, 
JudithEnck@Bennington.edu. 
  
The U.S. EPA’s proposal to require water systems to replace lead service lines is excellent news 
for the health of children and adults nationwide. Lead is a neurotoxin, and there is no safe level 
of exposure. Unless the EPA provides guidance on suitable replacement materials for lead 
pipes, however, newly laid infrastructure can easily repeat the harms of the past by swapping 
out one suite of toxic hazards for another. This is particularly true for plastic piping, such as 
polyvinyl chloride, which will undoubtedly be considered as a replacement due to its low price 
point. However, the cost of the replacement pipe is modest compared to the overall cost of the 
project and should not be a driver in this important decision. PVC and other plastic pipes are 
petrochemical products made from a mix of chemicals and fossil fuels, many of which are 
known toxicants with the capacity to leach into drinking water. As with lead, this comes with its 
own serious health concerns, which should be addressed as part of the LCRI. 
  
After an extensive review of the scientific literature, Beyond Plastics issued a report in April 
2023 titled “The Perils of PVC Plastic Pipes.” Based on the findings of this report, Beyond 
Plastics strongly recommends that the LCRI include detailed guidance on the hazards of PVC 
and other plastics as replacement water pipes, and consider safer alternatives, such as recycled 
copper and stainless steel pipes.  
 
Plastic pipes present risk because they release more contaminants into drinking water than 
unlined metal pipes do. Copper, which has a high thermal rating, is particularly resistant to 
corrosion and was recently used in New York City and Newark, NJ, to replace lead service lines. 
 

 
2 
The EPA’s only safety requirement for pipes and other plumbing materials is that they are free 
of lead. Even so, lead compounds are a common stabilizer used in PVC, so much so that they 
represent nearly 50% of total stabilizers used in PVC applications.1 Why would we replace lead 
pipes with pipes that contain lead?  
 
Time, too, is of the essence. While the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvement requires 
lead service lines be replaced within 10 years, this will leave many families with toxic lead in 
their water for years during the rules implementa`on and line replacement, while ci`es 
currently eligible for `meline extensions such as Chicago will be without lead-free water for as 
many as 40 years.2 The proposed LCRI does require water systems with consistently high levels 
of lead to make available to customers ﬁlters cer`ﬁed to remove lead from water.3 However, 
this language must be strengthened with the following measures to ensure expedient access to 
clean drinking water. EPA must require water systems to fund the purchase and distribu`on of 
ﬁlters to customers while also providing educa`on materials and training on ﬁlter eﬃcacy and 
maintenance. Proper distribu`on and educa`on is cri`cal to ensuring customers can access, 
trust, and properly use their ﬁlter, as seen in Denver, Colorado where, with advanced 
distribu`on and educa`on measures, the city achieved 80% ﬁlter adop`on rates.4 The EPA must 
also minimize the period families must wait for a ﬁlter by reducing the `me and number of lead 
level exceedances required to cons`tute “consistently high levels of lead” and expedite ﬁlter 
program implementa`on. A “ﬁlter ﬁrst” approach will ensure families have access to clean, safe 
drinking water in the many years to come as the LCRI is implemented and lead service lines are 
replaced.  
 
Communities need to understand the potential health risks associated with different water pipe 
materials so that they do not select alternatives that turn out to be just as bad, if not worse, as 
the original option.  EPA needs to weigh in on this.  
  
 
PVC and CPVC Piping 
  
Polyvinyl chloride is a rigid, durable plastic manufactured from the raw material vinyl chloride. 
It is used in construction for pipe, doors, siding, and windows, as well as in plumbing. Because it 
does not withstand high temperatures, plumbers use a chlorinated alternative, CPVC, for hot 
water lines. PVC pipes now account for the majority of new water and sanitary installations,5 
but they are not fully regulated and have never been tested for drinking water safety by any 
government agency.  
 

 
3 
No matter what they are made of, all pipes can leach their constituent materials to some 
extent, and the constituent materials of PVC pipes are particularly hazardous to human health. 
The base material of PVC and CPVC is vinyl chloride, a chemical that has been linked to 
increased risk of liver, brain, and lung cancers, as well as lymphoma and leukemia, according to 
the National Institute of Health.6 The International Agency for Research on Cancer first declared 
the chemical to be a carcinogen in 1974.7 In response, the Consumer Product Safety 
Commission banned its use as an aerosol in consumer products,8 while the Food and Drug 
Administration banned its use in cosmetics. The EPA, too, raised serious concerns about the 
health impacts of vinyl chloride — concerns that assisted the passage of the Toxic Substances 
Control Act (TSCA) 1976.9 Despite the existing evidence of harm, the EPA fell short of adding 
vinyl chloride to the list of chemicals governed by the act, though in December 2023, the 
agency placed it on a short list of high-priority chemicals for reconsideration. 
  
A second – and all too familiar – chemical of concern in PVC pipes is PFAS, the family of per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances known as “forever chemicals.” The hazards of PFAS are significant 
enough that the EPA recently reduced the tolerable exposure by more than a thousandfold. 
PFAS, too, has a tendency to leach out of primary materials. 
 
Modes of Chemical Contamination 
  
Scientists point to three well-documented ways in which plastic pipes can deposit their 
chemical contents into drinking water. 
  
The first is ordinary leaching — that is, the release of chemicals into water during everyday 
contact and use. Despite industry claims about the chemical inertia of PVC and CPVC, leaching is 
an intrinsic feature of all plastic materials, and leaching of hazardous materials from these pipes 
has in fact been documented in numerous independent studies.10 Migrating compounds 
include dozens of dangerous chemicals, among them known carcinogens11 and endocrine 
disruptors.12 Because these studies are undertaken by academic and other autonomous 
research facilities, however, they do not fall under consideration by the EPA, which looks 
instead to an industry-supported third party, the NSF/ANSI 61, for product testing and 
certification. The connection of NSF/ANSI 61 to industry support is itself problematic, but more 
so are the standards of evaluation that the organization uses to determine safety. Testing of 
PVC pipes is done over a short period of time (20 or so days), which does not account for slow 
but ordinary leaching, nor does it take into consideration the potential for longer-term, chronic 
exposure to chemicals from the pipes.13 
  

 
4 
It is important to recognize that the potential for chemical leaching from PVC pipes is increased 
by the presence of chlorinated water. Many municipalities use chlorine to disinfect drinking 
water, and it is a molecule well-known to liberate other chemicals from PVC and other plastics. 
As Dr. Jane Muncke, the chief scientific officer at the Food Packaging Forum, has stated, “When 
you have pipes made of PVC and you use chlorination to disinfect your drinking water, you’ll 
have a lot of chlorinated chemicals floating around in your drinking water.”14  
 
The second mode of chemical contamination is permeation, which occurs when underground 
pollutants, such as gasoline, seep from soils or groundwater through the walls of plastic pipes. 
The EPA is cognizant of this risk to water pipes and in 2002 published a summary that identified 
more than 100 incidents of contamination brought on by permeation, including some in 
residential areas. The summary identified the highly toxic chemicals benzene, vinyl chloride, and 
methylene chloride in concentration above the EPA’s maximum contaminant levels. All of the 
incidents occurred with plastic pipes; metal pipes did not show these effects.15 
  
The third mechanism for contamination is high heat, or “thermal decomposition.” The 
intolerance of PVC to heat is well-known (heat distortion begins to occur above 140 degrees 
Fahrenheit) and gave rise to the use of CPVC for hot water plumbing. Nevertheless, both forms 
are combustible and can burn or melt in fires, unlike metal pipes. 
  
This is of increasing concern in a world subject to rising temperatures and an increased rate of 
wildfires. As of December 7, the United States had experienced 53,685 fires in 2023, burning 
nearly 2.61 million acres. Many of these fires took place outside of the arid west.16 Studies of 
the impact of fires on water supplies are disquieting. A review of 24 water distribution systems 
contaminated by chemicals due to wildfires between 2017 and 2020 demonstrated the 
distribution of dozens of volatile organic compounds. Ten of these were above short- or long-
term drinking water limits, most notably benzene and vinyl chloride itself.17 All of the 10 are 
potentially or definitively linked with different types of cancer. 
  
Despite these hazards, few U.S. municipalities have considered the threat of wildfires in water 
system pipe material selection decisions,18 and no national plans exist to prevent or remediate 
water system contamination in response to such events. 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Plastic pipes are unregulated. Nevertheless, there is ample evidence that PVC and CPVC can 
release toxic chemicals into drinking water, including endocrine disruptors and carcinogens. 

 
5 
  
The EPA’s proposal to require water systems to replace lead service lines is excellent and long 
overdue, as is the financial assistance available from the federal government through the IRA. 
To avoid replacing one toxic material (lead) with another, Beyond Plastics urges the EPA to 
provide guidance to municipalities on the hazards of PVC and other plastics as replacement 
water pipes. Safer alternatives, such as recycled copper and stainless steel, are not significantly 
more expensive than plastic given the high cost of digging up and reinstalling water lines. For 
most municipalities, this is a capital project that cannot be undertaken more than once in many 
decades. For the sake of human and environmental health, it should be undertaken with the 
best possible care and counsel. 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
1 Lloyd, R. (2022). Replacing Lead Water Pipes with Plas<c Could Raise New Safety Issues. Scien&ﬁc American. PVC 
Forum. Lead Stabilizers.  
2 United States Environmental Protec<on Agency - Oﬃce of Ground Water and Drinking Water. (2024) Proposed 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, Washington D.C. 
3 United States Environmental Protec<on Agency - Oﬃce of Ground Water and Drinking Water. (2024) Proposed 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, Washington D.C.  
4 Wilking C, Nink E, Cradock AL. (2002). “Case Study Brief: Denver Water Filter Program,” Preven<on Research 
Center on Nutri<on and Physical Ac<vity at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston MA.  
5 Walker, B. (2011). North America’s Cinderella Pipe story: A look at PVC pipes’ climb to the top. Journal of ASTM 
International, 8(7), 1-11. 
6 National Cancer Institute. Vinyl Chloride.  
7 Cogliano, V. J., Baan, R., Straif, K., Grosse, Y., Lauby-Secretan, B., El Ghissassi, F., ... & Wild, C. P. (2011). Preventable 
exposures associated with human cancers. Journal of the Na&onal Cancer Ins&tute, 103(24), 1827-1839. 
8 United States Consumer Product Safety Commission (1974). CPSC Ban on Vinyl Chloride in Aerosols.  
9 EPA News Release (2023). EPA Begins Process to Priori<ze Five Chemicals for Risk Evalua<on Under Toxic 
Substances Control Act. 
10 Phillips, R., Whelton, A. J., & Eckelman, M. J. (2021). Incorporating use phase chemical leaching and water quality 
testing for life cycle toxicity assessment of cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) piping. Science of The Total 
Environment, 782, 146374; Walter, R. K., Lin, P. H., Edwards, M., & Richardson, R. E. (2011). Investigation of factors 
affecting the accumulation of vinyl chloride in polyvinyl chloride piping used in drinking water distribution systems. 
Water research, 45(8), 2607-2615. Stern, B. R., & Lagos, G. (2008). Are there health risks from the migration of 
chemical substances from plastic pipes into drinking water? A review. Human and Ecological Risk Assessment, 
14(4), 753-779. 
11 Adams, W. A., Xu, Y., Little, J. C., Fristachi, A. F., Rice, G. E., & Impellitteri, C. A. (2011). Predicting the migration 
rate of dialkyl organotins from PVC pipe into water. Environmental science & technology, 45(16), 6902-6907. 

 
6 
 
12 Liu, Z. H., Yin, H., & Dang, Z. (2017). Do estrogenic compounds in drinking water migrating from plastic pipe 
distribution system pose adverse effects to human? An analysis of scientific literature. Environmental Science and 
Pollution Research, 24, 2126-2134 
13 Megan Wilcox, “The Perils of PVC Plastic Pipes,” Beyond Plastics, April 2023. 
14 Megan Wilcox, “The Perils of PVC Plastic Pipes,” Beyond Plastics, April 2023. 
15 United States Environmental Protection Agency – Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water. (2002). 
Permeation and Leaching, Washington, D.C. 
16 National Interagency Fire Center. 
17 Whelton, A. J., Seidel, C., Wham, B. P., Fischer, E. C., Isaacson, K., Jankowski, C., ... & Ley, C. (2023). The Marshall 
Fire: Scientific and policy needs for water system disaster response. AWWA Water Science, 5(1), e1318. 
18 Fischer, E. C., Wham, B. P., & Metz, A. (2022). Contaminant Migration from Polymer Pipes to Drinking Water 
under High Temperature Wildfire Exposure. In Lifelines 2022 (pp. 666-676).

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0741 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Jessica Cajigas‐Smith <JCajigas‐Smith@tighebond.com>  
Sent: Wednesday, December 6, 2023 2:52 PM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Subject: Questions from the LCRI webinar 
 
 
I just attended the LCRI webinar and I have some questions that I was not able to ask. 
 
1. Is the lead service line replacement plan still required to be submitted by the deadline of 
October 16, 2024? 
2. The rule only allows full replacement, except in certain emergency situations a partial 
replacement is allowed.  But I assume this is for situations were BOTH sides of a service line are 
lead.  Some examples,  
a. if the system’s side is copper, but the customer’s side is lead, the only portion of the 
service line that must be replace is the customer's side, correct?   
b. If the system’s side used to be lead, but is now copper, and the customer’s side is 
galvanized steel, then the only portion that needs to be replaced is the customer’s side, 
correct? 
c. If the system’s side is lead and the customer’s side is copper, then only the system’s side 
needs to be replaced, correct? 
3. Is it still true that a public water system that does not own the customer’s side of a service line is 
under no obligation to PAY for the replacement of the customer’s side?  The webinar presenter 
spoke about “under the control” and “access” and “making 4 attempts”, etc.  My understanding 
of the LCRR was that the system needs to include info in their replacement plan that could help 
customers pay for their side of a replacement, but the system doesn’t have to pay for it.  A 
system can choose to pay for it if they want/have the money, they can provide a list of funding 
sources or grants that customers can try to get to pay for their side, maybe they can work with 
local contractors to get a set price for customer replacements if the customers want to use that 
company, but again, the system does not have to pay to replace any service lines that they don’t 
own, correct? 
 
Thank you for your help. 
 
Jessica 
 
Jessica Cajigas-Smith 
Tighe & Bond | One University Avenue, Suite 100 | Westwood, MA 02090 
o. 781.708.9855 | m. 978.930.3777 
www.tighebond.com | Follow us on:  Twitter  Facebook  LinkedIn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0908 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
 
A Proposed Rule by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency on 12/06/2023 
 
Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
February 4, 2024 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan and Assistant Administrator Fox 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
 
 
I write to you today to urge you to go further in addressing lead in our water. As you know, no 
level of lead in drinking water is safe. Lead exposure in children can harm their brains and nervous 
systems resulting in developmental, learning, and behavioral problems. I see first-hand the life-
long impact on behavior and development among lead-poisoned children in my own community 
in Milwaukee. I hear from parents who fear for the futures of their children and are struggling to 
address the impact of lead on their families. 
 
My community, Milwaukee, is also one of the most impacted in Wisconsin. We have some of the 
highest numbers of lead lines in the state of Wisconsin.  
 
The impact of lead service lines disproportionately hurts low-income households and communities 
of color. These are communities that are already living in polluted areas and who face dangers 
from lead paint in their homes, dirty air in their cities, and now, dirty water. We have suffered the 
most, and we will continue to suffer the effects of lead long after the pipes have been replaced. 
My community needs your help to have a future. 
 
I applaud your decision to demand complete replacement of lead lines in ten years. But this is not 
enough. I urge the U.S. EPA to strengthen this rule, and help protect my community, by: 
 
• 
Requiring that local water systems replace the entire service line (utility side and 
customer-side lead lines) and pay for this full replacement.  EPA must close the “access 
loophole” in the current proposed rule. In the absence of complete replacement and full 
funding, the lowest-income customers, whether they are homeowners or renters in multifamily 
housing, will be disproportionately impacted. Don’t make these families choose between their 
savings and their health. 
 
• 
Encouraging frequent tap testing and full public disclosure. Testing should be available for all 
taps. Full public disclosure should be required when lead is found in any school or childcare 
centers. EPA must incentivize water system utilities to install filters certified to remove lead in 
these facilities for immediate protection, as opportunities to replace lead pipes are secured. 
The regulations have already failed our children once; we cannot let it happen again. 

 
• 
Requiring lead pipe replacements be of high quality, built to last a generation. Lead pipes 
should be replaced with copper pipes, or polypropylene pipes when copper is not feasible, 
with lead-free joint materials. 
 
Lead exposure through drinking water is one of the most solvable health crises of our time. With 
stronger regulations and more funding, this administration can make unprecedented progress on 
this issue and achieve their goal of removing all lead service lines in ten years. 
 
I urge EPA to implement the changes suggested above when developing the final rule and finalize 
them as expeditiously as possible to protect our communities from the hazards of lead 
contamination. We need your help to guarantee our children and our families are free from lead. 
Please ensure that we are not left behind. 
 
Sincerely, 
Huda Alkaff 
Founder and Director 
Wisconsin Green Muslims 
 
Wisconsin Green Muslims is a grassroots environmental justice group formed in 2005 connecting 
faith, environmental justice, sustainability, and healing through education and service.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0953 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0857 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0822 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan  
Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.  
Washington, D.C. 20460  
 
Re: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan,  
 
The Center for American Progress (CAP) is submitting these comments in response to 
the proposed rulemaking on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and 
Copper: Improvements. CAP – an independent, nonpartisan policy institute dedicated 
to improving the lives of all Americans – is committed to advancing policies that 
strengthen health, promote equity, and tackle environmental and racial injustice.  
 
We commend the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) efforts to remove and fully 
replace all lead service lines (LSLs) within 10 years, including by prohibiting partial LSL 
replacement in most cases. The proposed improvements to the National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper will drive progress by adding critical 
regulatory authority to the financial investments made through the Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), the largest investment in clean drinking water in the 
nation’s history.1 While ambitious, the goal is critical to protecting the health of the 
estimated 22 million people across the nation who are exposed to lead in drinking 
water, who are disproportionately people of color and people from low-income 
households.2 There is no safe level of lead exposure at any age, but exposure is 
particularly dangerous for young children who are at a vulnerable stage of brain and 
biological development. Though implementation will be costly, the benefits far exceed 
the costs. According to the EPA’s analysis, costs are estimated at $2.1 to $3.6 billion a 
year, while benefits are estimated at $37 billion solely in annual U.S. health care cost 
savings.3 
 
1 United States Environmental Protection Agency, Water Infrastructure Investments, available at 
https://www.epa.gov/infrastructure/water-infrastructure-investments.  
2 National Resources Defense Council, “How Exactly Does Lead Exposure Harm the Brain?” September 
28, 2023, available at https://www.nrdc.org/stories/how-exactly-does-lead-exposure-harm-brain. 
3National Resources Defense Council, “Getting the Lead Out: Removing Lead Pipes Would Yield 
Hundreds of Billions of Dollars in Health Benefits,” October 25, 2023, available at 
https://www.nrdc.org/resources/getting-lead-out-removing-lead-pipes-would-yield-hundreds-billions-
dollars-health.  

 
 
 
In addition to expediting the removal of LSLs, we applaud that the proposed rule offers 
further protections through its provisions to increase requirements around water 
testing, LSL inventories, and communication with communities about lead exposure 
risks.  
 
The proposed rule takes important steps to protect vulnerable communities from lead 
health risks. However, we urge the EPA to consider the following opportunities to 
strengthen the rule, issues that we elaborate on in a recent CAP publication:4  
 
1. Address private-side LSL replacement costs 
Full LSL replacements are essential to protecting community health, as partial 
replacements are ineffective at reducing overall lead exposure and can sometimes 
inadvertently exacerbate the problem by dislodging lead from remaining LSLs and lead 
connectors. We support the proposed rule’s inclusion of a requirement for water 
systems to conduct full LSL replacements, including the portion of LSLs that fall on 
private property, between the curb box and water meter.5 However, the proposed rule 
does not include a requirement for water systems to cover the cost of replacing the 
portion of LSLs that fall on private property. Requiring property owners to bear any part 
of the costs of an LSL replacement presents a barrier to efficiently conducting full LSL 
replacements. Even when shared with the city or water system, these financial burdens 
can be cost prohibitive for low-income homeowners. Uncertainties about whether cities 
and water systems have the authority to work on private property may also undermine 
efforts to complete widespread and efficient replacements. State and local laws and 
water tariff agreements vary widely in how they impact water systems’ access to 
conducting full LSL replacement work, and permission is often needed from the 
property owner. Additionally, many remaining LSLs service properties that are 
occupied by renters, and replacement projects often require coordinating with the 
property owners, who may be unresponsive or difficult to reach. 
 
The EPA should create resources to share success stories and guidance for building 
trust with communities to carry out replacement projects, addressing the costs of 
private-side replacements, and overcoming other barriers to conducting full LSL 
replacements. The EPA may also consider a requirement for systems to cover the full 
cost of replacement at no cost to the customer. Newark, New Jersey, for instance, has 
received attention for reducing lead exposure by using public bonds to fund the 
portions of LSL replacements that occur on private property. The city also passed an 
ordinance permitting the replacement of lines on private property without the 
 
4 Jill Rosenthal, Allie Schneider, Hailey Gibbs, and Mariam Rashid, “How Federal Investments in Safe 
Drinking Water Infrastructure Are Improving Public Health,” Center for American Progress, February 5, 
2024, available at https://www.americanprogress.org/article/how-federal-investments-in-safe-drinking-
water-infrastructure-are-improving-public-health/. 
5 United States Environmental Protection Agency, Planning and Conducting Lead Service Line 
Replacement, available at https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/planning-and-conducting-
lead-service-line-replacement.  

 
 
homeowners’ permission.6  Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, has used a combination of grant 
and state funding to conduct full LSL replacements across the city at no cost to the 
customer,7 and Milwaukee, Wisconsin, has recently eliminated the private-side cost 
share for full LSL replacements, which previously required customers to pay 
approximately $1,600.8  
 
2. Reduce the allowable lead action level to below five parts per billion 
The proposal to reduce the allowable lead action level from 15 parts per billion, set in 
1991, to 10 parts per billion, is a welcome improvement; however, with no safe level of 
lead exposure in drinking water, CAP urges the EPA to lower the acceptable level to 
between zero and 5 parts per billion, as recommended by public health advocates, 
including the American Academy of Pediatrics.9 As the EPA knows, there is no safe 
level of lead exposure – with young children particularly developmentally and 
biologically vulnerable to the health consequences of lead exposure –  and the Agency 
has a responsibility to notify and educate the public on health risks that they may be 
experiencing through their water supply. Moreover, national standards have historically 
allowed for lead contamination in faucets, fountains, and other plumbing in schools and 
child care facilities. Taking stricter action besides more frequent testing by lowering the 
action level to between zero and 5 parts per billion would create a lower trigger point at 
which water systems are required to inform the public and take actions to reduce lead 
exposure, such as adjusting corrosion control treatment, alongside ongoing work to 
replace all lead pipes. A lower action level, determined by a health-based limit on lead 
exposure, would ensure that customers are informed about lower but still dangerous 
lead levels and have access to water filters to help protect their health while they are 
still waiting for LSL replacement to occur.  
 
3. Enhance communication about community health risks  
The current rule includes important new and expanded requirements for water systems 
to notify and communicate with the public about lead health risks. We encourage the 
EPA to require that water systems also share LSL inventories with the public so that 
community members can better understand their exposure risks. We also strongly 
encourage that all lead-related communication with the public include materials in 
multiple languages, be written at a 6th-grade reading level, be widely distributed, 
including at community gathering spaces (e.g., libraries, schools, community centers) 
 
6 Sophia Campbell and David Wessel, “What would it cost to replace all the nation’s lead water pipes?” 
Brookings Institution, May 13, 2021, available at https://www.brookings.edu/articles/what-would-it-cost-to-
replace-all-the-nations-lead-water-pipes.  
7 PGH2O, “Lead Line Replacement Programs,” available at https://www.pgh2o.com/projects-
maintenance/lead-line-replacement-programs, last accessed January 2024. 
8 MTMJ-TV Milwaukee, “Proposed Milwaukee ordinance change would eliminate homeowner cost for lead 
service line removal,” December 8, 2023, available at https://www.tmj4.com/news/local-news/proposed-
milwaukee-ordinance-change-would-eliminate-homeowner-cost-for-lead-service-line-removal. 
9 American Academy of Pediatrics Council on Environmental Health, “Prevention of Childhood Lead 
Toxicity,” Pediatrics 2016;38(1):e20161493, available at 
https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/138/1/e20161493/52600/Prevention-of-Childhood-Lead-
Toxicity.  

 
 
and be tailored to the needs of different populations. The EPA also should encourage 
municipalities to prioritize communications about lead risks and lead pipe removal for 
elementary schools and child care setting administrators, as well as prioritize the 
distribution and installation of certified lead-free water filters for those settings. These 
should be done in alignment with the recommendation of the American Academy of 
Pediatrics that water in schools should not exceed lead concentrations of 1 part per 
billion.10 The EPA also should encourage water systems to collaborate with local public 
health departments, medical providers, community-based organizations, and others to 
ensure that outreach and resources reach critical community members and partners to 
maximize impact. 
 
4. Support water systems in accessing existing funds for LSL replacement 
projects 
Some water systems may be unaware of the existing funding sources to support LSL 
replacement projects. This is especially problematic considering that some states and 
communities have taken an ambitious approach to LSL removal have encountered 
workforce shortages that have hindered their speed of removal. In many areas, 
previous short-term investments that covered one- or two-year-long projects were 
insufficient in order to grow and invest in the workforce through sustained higher 
compensation. IIJA investments, both for lead replacement projects and apprenticeship 
programs, may support the training, hiring, and retention of qualified workers, including 
contractors and plumbers. These investments may have positive ramifications for local 
economies, in addition to expediting LSL replacement project timelines and promoting 
public health. We recommend that the EPA invest in outreach, especially to agencies 
and water systems serving smaller rural communities and communities of color that are 
most exposed to LSLs and provide guidance for water systems to access these funds. 
 
The proposed rulemaking on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead 
and Copper: Improvements is a significant and ambitious step toward improving health 
and equity.  
 
We appreciate your consideration of these recommendations to improve the proposed 
rulemaking and to protect community and population-level health more 
comprehensively. If you have any questions about the aforementioned research, 
analysis, or recommendations, please reach out to Laura Rodriguez, Vice President for 
Government Affairs, at lrodriguez@americanprogress.org  
 
Sincerely, 
Jill Rosenthal, MPH, Director of Public Health Policy 
Hailey Gibbs, PhD, Senior Policy Analyst, Early Childhood Policy 
Allie Schneider, Policy Analyst, Early Childhood Policy 
Mariam Rashid, PhD, MPH, Associate Director, Racial Equity and Justice 
 
10 Ibid.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0787 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 1, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
Re:    Comments by the National Association of Water Companies (NAWC) on  
          EPA National Primary Drinking Water Proposed Regulations for Lead and Copper    
Improvements; Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801.   
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
  
The National Association of Water Companies (NAWC) and its members are 
pleased to offer this comment letter regarding the agency’s proposed National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulation rule published in the Federal Register on December 6, 
2023, and referred to as the Lead and Cooper Rule Improvements (LCRI).  NAWC 
supports EPA’s action to address the health risk posed by the presence of lead in 
drinking water supplies.  NAWC further supports EPA’s commitment in the proposed 
rule to improving public health and reducing lead exposures in drinking water by 
requiring the replacement of all lead service lines regardless of the lead levels 
occurring in taps.   While NAWC generally supports EPA’s approach, we believe that 
several important adjustments are necessary as discussed below to make 
implementation of the rule feasible for water systems. 
 
NAWC members work daily to protect families and communities across the 
nation from possible risks in our water supplies, including lead.  While the public 
health benefits of the proposed rule are paramount, EPA must carefully tailor its 
approach to reducing the levels of lead in water supplies without imposing 
unnecessary costs and restrictions on communities. The costs and the impacts of 
reducing the presence of lead in the water supply will be substantial and will place a 
heavy burden on communities, households, and customers at a time when other new 
regulatory measures addressing contaminations such as PFAS will be adding to their 
financial burden. 
 
NAWC urges EPA to ensure this rulemaking and other actions related to 
removing contaminants from the water supply treat all water and wastewater systems  
equally regardless of whether the systems are publicly or privately owned or operated.  
All water and wastewater providers should have equal access to all federal and state 
funding related to treating removing lead from the water supply.  

 
2 
 
 
About NAWC  
 
 
            NAWC represents regulated water and wastewater companies, as well as those 
engaging in partnerships with municipal utilities.  NAWC members provide 73 million 
Americans with safe and reliable water service and have an exceptional record of 
compliance with federal and state health and environmental regulations. Ensuring this 
high standard of quality requires extraordinary amounts of capital investment. NAWC 
estimates that its 10 largest members alone are collectively investing $3.9 billion each 
year in their water and wastewater systems.  
 
Providing affordable, safe, clean water to the customer is a high priority for 
NAWC’s members.  Toward that end, a 2018 study published in the Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences confirmed that investor-owned water companies have a 
more consistent record of delivering high-quality water that meets or surpasses 
federal standards than their municipal counterparts.1  NAWC is proud of that record 
and its members will continue to lead in delivering the highest attainable compliance 
results.   NAWC works with its members to adopt a public commitment beyond 
compliance to proactively protecting the public health of its members’ customers.  
 
Comments 
 
1. EPA must extend compliance deadlines under the Lead and Copper Rule 
Revisions (LCRR) by at least one year so water systems have clarity in 
requirements and due dates. 
 
An extended deadline under the LCRR is necessary because water systems are 
currently investing time and resources into programs that may be delayed or revised 
by the LCRI. Water systems need to focus on inventory now and defer focus on the 
other aspects of the LCRR, which are proposed to be delayed under the LCRI, until a 
later date. As such, the EPA should delay the LCRR compliance dates one year while the 
LCRI is finalized. 
 
 
2. NAWC members support EPA’s approach to replace all lead service lines and 
certain galvanized service lines within 10 years of the LCRI compliance date 
and recognize that mandatory replacement of all lines is preferred over an 
approach relying on certain triggers to require replacement.    
             
 
1   See article, February 12, 2018 (https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1719805115) 

 
3 
 
While NAWC members are committed to EPA’s general approach, the LCRI must 
include flexibility to account for factors and challenges beyond the control of water 
systems that may delay implementation despite the best efforts of water systems.  
Affordability issues, challenges related to work force availability, and supply chain 
problems are just some of the logistical challenges that will make timely 
implementation unachievable in some instances.  As EPA has recognized, the proposed 
rule sets an aggressive schedule for completing a massive national project that will 
impose high costs on communities and customers adding to other financial burdens.  
EPA should review the proposed criteria for communities struggling with these issues 
and establish a process to provide extensions of time to come into compliance in 
appropriate circumstances.   
 
3. The proposal to require water systems to replace service lines “under the control of 
the water system” should be changed to “owned by the water system or where the 
property owner or customer with the authority to do so has granted access.” 
 
EPA’s proposal to require water systems to replace service lines “under the control of 
water systems” is vague and subject to different interpretations.  EPA states that it intends to 
treat a line as under the control of a water system “whenever a water system has adequate 
access” to conduct replacement but declines to delineate the prerequisites or elements of 
access.  (88 Fed. Reg. 84920).  “Adequate access” is too vague a standard and regulated parties 
need a clearer and predictable standard regarding access.  NAWC proposes that the standard 
for determining which lines are to be replaced should be when the lines are “owned by the 
water system or when the property owner or customer with the authority to do so has granted 
access.”  This standard is clear, predictable and allows the regulated parties to understand the 
regulatory requirements.  This also avoids potential safety and liability concerns related to 
water systems access to customer service lines without the customer’s consent. 
 
4. The service line replacement rate requiring ten percent (10%) of service lines of 
unknown composition is not feasible due to the expected large number of lines of 
unknown composition.  An approach that separates replacement from identification 
and requires progress on both concurrently would be more appropriate. 
 
EPA’s proposed approach is to identify and replace service lines of unknown 
composition in parallel with the replacement of known service lines.  (88 Fed. Reg. 84934).  
Implementing these activities simultaneously will place a burden on water systems and 
further stretch limited labor and material resources, whereas focusing on each category 
individually would allow water systems to set realistic and achievable goals for replacement 
and at the same time reduce the number of unknown service lines. 
 

 
4 
 
5. The proposed rule should recognize its impact on the technical, managerial, and 
financial capacity of smaller water systems and encourage consolidation of water 
systems where appropriate.   
           
The additional requirements and obligations that this proposed rule will place on 
smaller systems means that they will need even more technical, managerial, and financial 
expertise to comply with the LCRI.  These burdens will be even more pronounced when 
considering combining burdensome existing requirements with the anticipated requirements 
of new regulations such as PFAS.   Small water systems that are not able to show that they have 
the sustainable capacity to meet the regulatory requirements should be encouraged to explore 
alternative compliance strategies such as regionalization and the LCRI should recognize and 
encourage these options.  
 
6. EPA’s must provide greater flexibility on sampling options and delivery of sample 
results. 
 
Lead sampling under LCRI relies heavily on homeowners or residents to achieve the 
goals of the proposed approach.  The only method currently allowed under the LCRI requires 
that the homeowner or resident fill five (5) one-liter bottles and maintain them in a certain 
order, which will almost certainly lead to some confusion and inaccurate results.  EPA needs to 
consider other approaches for the tap sampling such as requiring the use of a timed approach 
for sampling.   
 
Water systems should be required to provide results to their customers after sampling 
has been completed. Only results over the lead action level should be required to be delivered 
quickly and three (3) business days would be appropriate.  All other sample results should be 
delivered within 30 days. 
 
EPA also needs to define the following terms: customer; consumer; resident; and non-
owner resident – and be careful in their use.  The LCRI should not require notification to an 
owner of a property since water systems may not have that information. 
 
7. EPA’s proposed approach should recognize the limits of the authority of private 
water companies to carry out replacement programs and inventories in some 
instances when local authorities refuse to provide access. 
 
Because private water companies do not own or manage the streets where their water 
mains are located, they may be prevented by local laws or authorities from conducting the 
actions required under the LCRI.  EPA must recognize this issue and state its intention not to 
penalize private water companies when those companies are prevented by local governments 

 
5 
 
from taking actions to comply with the LCRI.  For the same reason, EPA’s proposal to add 
connectors to the inventory requirement is problematic because some communities will not 
permit private water companies to dig up streets to determine whether connectors are 
present. 
 
Conclusion 
 
 
NAWC and its members appreciate EPA’s efforts to protect public health and 
the environment from the harmful impacts of lead in drinking water that poses a risk 
to many individuals.  We support EPA’s proposal requiring the replacement of all lead 
service lines regardless of the lead levels occurring in taps but urge EPA to consider 
NAWC’s comments to ensure that the agency produces a rule that is protective, feasible 
and affordable.   
 
 
Please feel free to contact me at (267) 291-7765. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
                                                                                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Robert Powelson

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1093 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
409 3rd Street SW / MC 3110 / Washington, DC 20416 
Ph 202-205-6533 / advocacy.sba.gov 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
VIA ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION 
 
The Honorable Michael Regan  
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency   
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
(LCRI), Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801. 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
On December 6, 2023, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published a proposed 
rule entitled National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
(LCRI).1 This letter constitutes the Office of Advocacy’s (Advocacy) public comments on the 
proposed rule. 
 
The Office of Advocacy is concerned about the costs the proposed rule will impose on both 
small water systems and other small entities. Additionally, the rule does not allow small entities 
enough time to comply with its requirements. Finally, the costs of the rule may be passed on to 
ratepayers, including those from disadvantaged communities who will be least able to absorb the 
increased financial burden. 
I. Background 
A. The Office of Advocacy 
Congress established the Office of Advocacy under Pub. L. 94-305 to represent the views of 
small entities before federal agencies and Congress. Advocacy is an independent office within 
the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) that seeks to ensure small business concerns are 
heard in the federal regulatory process. Advocacy also works to ensure that regulations do not 
unduly inhibit the ability of small entities to compete, innovate, or comply with federal laws. The 
views expressed by Advocacy do not necessarily reflect the views of the SBA or the 
Administration.  
 
1 88 Fed. Reg. 84878 (Dec. 6, 2023). 

 
- 2 - 
 
The Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA),2 as amended by the Small Business Regulatory 
Enforcement Fairness Act (SBREFA),3 gives small entities a voice in the rulemaking process. 
For all rules that are expected to have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of 
small entities, the RFA requires federal agencies to assess the impact of the proposed rule on 
small entities and to consider less burdensome alternatives.4 Additionally, section 609 of the 
RFA requires the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, and the Environmental Protection Agency to conduct special outreach efforts 
through a review panel.5 The panel must carefully consider the views of the impacted small 
entities, assess the impact of the proposed rule on small entities, and consider less burdensome 
alternatives for small entities.6 If a rule will not have a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities, agencies may certify the rule.7 The agency must provide a 
statement of factual basis that adequately supports its certification.8 
 
The Small Business Jobs Act of 2010 requires agencies to give every appropriate consideration 
to comments provided by Advocacy.9 The agency must include a response to these written 
comments in any explanation or discussion accompanying the final rule’s publication in the 
Federal Register, unless the agency certifies that the public interest is not served by doing so.10 
 
Advocacy’s comments are consistent with Congressional intent underlying the RFA, that 
“[w]hen adopting regulations to protect the health, safety, and economic welfare of the nation, 
federal agencies should seek to achieve statutory goals as effectively and efficiently as possible 
without imposing unnecessary burdens on the public.”11 
B. The Proposed Rule 
The proposed rule revises the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) for lead 
and copper under the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA). Specifically, it requires water systems 
to replace lead service lines (LSL) within 10 years, remove the lead trigger level, reduce the lead 
action level to 0.010 mg/L, and strengthen tap sampling procedures. The proposed rule also 
addresses the following areas: corrosion control treatment, public education and consumer 
awareness, requirements for small systems, and sampling in schools and childcare facilities. 
Additionally, the EPA aims to address potential disproportionate impacts of lead in drinking 
water in communities through proposed lead service line replacement and public education. 
 
 
2 Pub. L. No. 96-354, 94 Stat. 1164 (1980) (codified at 5 U.S.C. §§ 601-612). 
3 Pub. L. No. 104-121, tit. II, 110 Stat. 857 (1996) (codified in scattered sections of 5 U.S.C. §§601-612). 
4 5 U.S.C. § 603. 
5 Id. § 609. 
6 Id. 
7 Id. § 605(b). 
8 Id. 
9 Small Business Jobs Act of 2010, Pub. L. No. 111-240, §1601, 214 Stat. 2551 (codified at 5 U.S.C. § 604). 
10 Id. 
11 Regulatory Flexibility Act, Pub. L. No. 96-354, 94 Stat. 1164 (1980) (codified at 5 U.S.C. §§ 601-612). 

 
- 3 - 
The EPA convened a Small Business Advocacy Review (SBAR) Panel to obtain advice and 
recommendations from small entity representatives (SERs) that would be subject to the rule’s 
requirements.12  
II. Advocacy’s Small Business Concerns 
Advocacy held a roundtable to discuss the proposed rule on January 9, 2024, with presentations 
from the EPA and the American Water Works Association (AWWA). Additionally, Advocacy 
attended the EPA’s January 16, 2024, virtual public hearing on the proposed LCRI. The 
proposed rule will impact small entities, including small water systems, as well as those who are 
served by them. Under the RFA, the EPA is required to minimize the impact of the LCRI on 
small entities.13 TheEPA states the LCRI as written will have annual costs of more than one 
percent of revenue for between 81.4 and 82.8 percent of small community water systems 
(CWS).14   
 
Additionally, small water systems face several challenges, as outlined by the Association of State 
Drinking Water Administrators (ASDWA), which will impact their ability to comply with the 
LCRI. These challenges include: 
 
• A lack of capable full-time operators and reliance on volunteer board members from the 
community that have a limited understanding of how to run the water system and meet 
health-based standards and requirements. 
• The inability to pay back loans, as small systems are often challenged by the lack of 
political support to take on loans. Small systems also often lack debt capacity to qualify 
for loans. 
• Population decline and competing demands for basic community needs that rank higher 
than paying rates for drinking water.15 
 
Advocacy is concerned about the lack of available federal funding for small water systems to 
comply with the proposed LCRI requirements. If sufficient federal funding is not available, the 
LCRI’s costs could be passed down to disadvantaged communities and small entities who 
depend on the impacted small water systems. Advocacy is further concerned that the LCRI’s 
proposed timeline of ten years for the replacement of all LSLs is unachievable for small water 
systems. Additionally, small entities have identified compliance issues with the LCRI, 
particularly in terms of gaining access to private homes and obtaining reliable water samples 
from the public.   
 
12 U.S. ENV’T PROT. AGENCY, PANEL REPORT OF THE SMALL BUSINESS ADVOCACY REVIEW PANEL ON EPA’S 
PLANNED PROPOSED RULE LEAD AND COPPER RULE IMPROVEMENTS (LCRI) NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER 
REGULATION 29 (May 31, 2023), https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-12/lcri-sbar-panel-report-final-
508.pdf. 
13 5 U.S.C. § 603. 
14 88 Fed. Reg. 85041 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
15 Association of State Drinking Water Administrators White Paper on “State Drinking Water Program Challenges 
and Best Practices: Small and Disadvantaged Water System Funding and Assistance” August 2022, p. 3-4. 
Available at: ASDWA-White-Paper-Small-and-Disadvantaged-Water-System-Funding-and-Assistance-FINAL-
080822.pdf. 

 
- 4 - 
A. Small water systems lack the required funding to comply with the LCRI. 
The EPA included both a low-cost and a high-cost scenario for total monetized annual costs to 
small systems. Under the low-cost scenario, the costs were between $490 and $554 million 
annually while the high-cost scenario showed costs between $666 and $757 million annually.16 
In consultations with small entities as well as during testimony at the EPA’s January 16 virtual 
public hearing, concerns were expressed that actual costs of the rule may be greater than the 
EPA’s estimates.  
1. Federal funding sources cited by EPA will not be sufficient to cover the LCRI’s 
costs. 
The EPA has pointed to various sources of federal funding to help cover the cost of the proposed 
LCRI, including the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund (DWSRF), as well as the Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law (BIL)/Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA).17 However, at the 
January 9, 2024, Advocacy LCRI roundtable, concerns were expressed that these sources of 
funding would not be enough to cover the proposal’s compliance costs. Similar concerns were 
echoed by small entity representatives during the SBAR panel process as well as at the EPA’s 
January 16, 2024, virtual public hearing.  
 
Specifically, the American Public Works Association (APWA) noted that existing federal 
funding sources are “insufficient” to meet the cost of the proposed LCRI. They cited factors such 
as inflation, rising cost projections, permitting delays, and added expenses from revised Davis-
Bacon and Buy America regulations.18 During the SBAR process, small entity representatives 
explained that if the EPA’s replacement estimate of 10 million lead service lines is correct “and 
the average cost of replacement is $5,000 then replacing all lead service lines in the nation would 
total $50 billion-more than three times the IIJA funds allocated for lead service line identification 
and replacement.”19 An estimate of $12,000 per line was also quoted in the final SBAR report.20 
Additionally, at the EPA’s January 16, 2024, virtual public hearing, numerous public sector 
representatives voiced concern about the availability of necessary funding to comply with the 
LCRI. 
2. Small entities will encounter obstacles to accessing the federal funds which are 
available for LCRI compliance. 
In addition to concerns about the overall amount of federal funding to assist with LCRI 
compliance, Advocacy is also concerned with the ability of small water systems to access these 
 
16 88 Fed. Reg. 85,041 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
17 Id. at 84,903-84,904. 
18 See Am. Pub. Works Ass’n, Comment Letter on Proposed Rule for National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
for Lead and Copper Improvements (LCRI) (Jan. 9, 2024), https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-
2022-0801-0735. 
19 See Am. Water Works Ass’n, Comments to SBAR Panel National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead 
and Copper Improvements (LCRI), B-13,  https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-
0045/attachment_3.pdf (last visited Feb. 1, 2024). 
20 U.S. ENV’T PROT. AGENCY, PANEL REPORT OF THE SMALL BUSINESS ADVOCACY REVIEW PANEL ON EPA’S 
PLANNED PROPOSED RULE LEAD AND COPPER RULE IMPROVEMENTS (LCRI) NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER 
REGULATION 28 (May 31, 2023), https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-12/lcri-sbar-panel-report-final-
508.pdf.  

 
- 5 - 
funds. Small water systems do not have large staffs and often do not have personnel dedicated to 
grant applications or federal funding issues. Hiring someone to help in these areas is an 
additional expense which small systems often are unable to afford. As one SER noted during the 
SBAR panel, small systems needing funding often “have only 2 employees, one inside city hall 
and one outside city hall.”21 
 
EPA also points to DWSRF to help water systems implement the LCRI.22 ASDWA has asserted 
that small systems often times cannot access these funds: “[t]he total amount of the DWSRF 
used by the smallest public water systems (PWSs) serving populations of less than 10,001 over 
the past 25 years is significantly less in percentages and dollars than the amount used by PWSs 
serving larger populations. In addition, more than 80% of the PWSs in the U.S. serve populations 
of less than 501 people and have used less than 4% of the total DWSRF assistance over the past 
25 years.”23 Thus, the majority of DWSRF funds have traditionally not been reaching small 
systems and cannot be relied upon for assisting with LCRI compliance. 
3. The federal funds cited by the EPA are needed not only for LCRI compliance, 
but also for compliance with multiple upcoming EPA regulations impacting 
small water systems. 
Many of the funding sources cited by the EPA are not exclusively for LCRI compliance, but for 
water infrastructure needs in general including maintenance, capital costs, and compliance with 
existing regulatory requirements. At the same time the EPA is promulgating the LCRI, the 
agency is also working multiple other regulations which will have financial impacts on these 
same water systems. These include drinking water standards for per-and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances in drinking water (PFAS)24 and designation of PFAS as hazardous substances under 
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA).25  
 
Small systems will be impacted by both proposed regulations. They will need to monitor and 
comply with upcoming PFAS drinking water standards and could be exposed to liability if PFAS 
is designated as a hazardous substance under CERCLA. To fulfill their obligations under these 
regulations, small systems will need to utilize the same funding sources EPA is directing them 
towards for LCRI compliance. Advocacy is concerned the funds will not be enough to help small 
systems comply with just the LCRI. When these other forthcoming regulations are considered, 
small systems will face even greater financial obligations. 
 
21 See Kan. Rural Water Ass’n, Comments to SBAR Panel National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead 
and Copper Improvements (LCRI), B-5, https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-
0045/attachment_3.pdf (last visited Feb. 1, 2024). 
22 88 Fed. Reg. 84,903-04 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
23 Ass’n of State Drinking Water Adm’r, State Drinking Water Program Challenges and Best Practices: Small and 
Disadvantaged Water System Funding and Assistance, 6 (Aug. 2022), https://www.asdwa.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/08/ASDWA-White-Paper-Small-and-Disadvantaged-Water-System-Funding-and-Assistance-
FINAL-080822.pdf.  
24 88 Fed. Reg. 18,638 (Mar. 29, 2023). 
25 87 Fed. Reg. 54,415 (Sept. 6, 2022). 

 
- 6 - 
4. When small systems do not have adequate funds to meet regulatory obligations, 
costs will be passed on to the communities they serve. 
A recurring theme at the EPA’s January 16, 2024, virtual public hearing was a desire by many 
parties to have water systems pay for expenses associated with the LCRI and not pass those 
increased costs to individual ratepayers. However, representatives from the state and local levels 
testified that this was simply not possible. If water systems, regardless of their size, do not have 
the money to comply with the LCRI, the burden will have to be passed on to the communities in 
which they operate. During its environmental justice analysis, the EPA properly focused on the 
exposure of disadvantaged communities to lead in drinking water. The agency did not, however, 
consider the ability of these disadvantaged communities, many of whom are served by small 
water systems, to absorb the expense they will have to endure to comply with the LCRI.  
 
The Illinois Municipal League illustrated this problem, noting “[c]urrent funding sources for 
CWS rely largely on loans that will have to be repaid in some form. In order to ensure CWS are 
able to afford the cost of replacing lead service lines, direct grants must be provided as the 
primary funding source. Inadequate funding coupled with the accelerated timeline in the 
proposed LCRI will force CWS to pass the costs of lead service line replacement to local 
residents.”26 
 
This burden will be exacerbated in areas served by small water systems. Small water systems 
generally serve areas with fewer people spread over a larger distance. Individuals in these areas 
will face larger rate increases to pay for LCRI compliance because there will be fewer ratepayers 
on which to spread the impact. As noted by the National Conference of State Legislators, 
“[b]ecause small systems have comparably fewer ratepayers, rates for some small, disadvantaged 
communities often exceed levels considered affordable.”27  
 
Advocacy recommends the EPA revise its cost estimates for the LCRI to account for the 
aforementioned concerns voiced by small water systems and others impacted by this regulation. 
Additionally, the agency should further analyze the availability of funding to small entities in 
light not only of the LCRI’s requirements but also those of forthcoming regulations which will 
require small systems to draw on the same funding sources. The EPA should also revise its 
environmental justice analysis to include the impacts of any rate increases cause by the proposed 
LCRI on disadvantaged communities. 
B. The LCRI’s 10-year replacement deadline is not realistic for small water systems. 
The LCRI requires “100% lead pipe replacement within 10 years.”28 This timeline will be very 
difficult for small systems to meet. The state of Illinois, which is already implementing an 
aggressive program to replace LSLs, stated during the EPA’s January 16 virtual public hearing, 
 
26 See Ill. Mun. League, Comment Letter on Proposed Rule on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for 
Lead and Copper Improvements (LCRI), 2 (Dec. 15, 2023), https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-
2022-0801-0719. 
27 See Nat’l Conf. of State Legislatures, State Policy Options for Small and Rural Wayer Systems (Nov. 23, 2022), 
https://www.ncsl.org/environment-and-natural-resources/state-policy-options-for-small-and-rural-water-systems.  
28 See U.S. ENV’L PROT. AGENCY, FACT SHEET: EPA’S PROPOSED LEAD AND COPPER RULE IMPROVEMENTS 1, (Nov. 
2023), https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-11/lcri-fact-sheet-for-the-public_final.pdf.  

 
- 7 - 
that the LCRI’s 10-year deadline is “impossible.” The Illinois Municipal League further 
described the LCRI’s timeline as “unrealistic and not feasible, not to mention likely impossible 
given the lack of skilled labor to complete the necessary work within such a short timeframe.”29  
 
The LCRI’s timeline unrealistic and counter-productive to existing LSL replacement efforts. The 
State of Illinois has already begun a program to replace LSLs with realistic deadlines of 2042 at 
the earliest and 2077 at the latest.30 As explained by the Illinois Municipal League: “[t]he 10-
year timeline in the proposed LCRI will only exacerbate funding shortfall issues CWS face in 
Illinois as they begin the process of lead service line replacement… Inadequate funding coupled 
with the accelerated timeline in the proposed LCRI will force CWS to pass the costs of lead 
service line replacement to local residents. As a result, the proposed LCRI would have a severely 
negative impact on every community in Illinois and every taxpayer.”31  
 
Under the RFA, the EPA is required to examine whether alternative timetables or requirements 
would be appropriate to help small systems comply with the LCRI.32 If states with existing LSL 
replacement programs are not able to meet the LCRI’s deadlines, small systems cannot be 
expected to fare any better. Advocacy recommends EPA revise and extend the deadlines in the 
LCRI to allow small systems more time to comply with its requirements. 
C. Small systems will experience compliance issues when implementing the LCRI. 
In addition to funding and timing issues, small systems have voiced concern to Advocacy on 
multiple other aspects of LCRI compliance. Small entities were particularly concerned with 
replacing LSLs on private property. Specifically, difficulties were anticipated in gaining access 
to private residences to complete LSL replacements. This is especially true in rural areas where 
one small system can serve homes spread out over a large geographic area. 
 
Small entities also expressed concern with the LCRI’s change in sampling procedures from first-
liter sampling to first-and-fifth liter sampling. During the SBAR panel, one of the participants 
described existing difficulties in obtaining compliance with present first-liter requirements. 
Adding a fifth liter requirement will make public compliance more complex and expensive as 
well as lead to less reliable results from individuals who are confused by the new process. 
 
Advocacy recommends the EPA work with small entities to ensure they have access to both the 
resources and personnel necessary to overcome compliance issues with new LCRI requirements.  
III.  
Conclusion 
Advocacy is concerned with the availability of funding necessary to meet the LCRI’s compliance 
and that the proposed rule’s 10-year timeline will be impossible for small systems to meet. 
Advocacy is additionally concerned with the ability of small entities to comply with multiple 
aspects of the LCRI. Advocacy recommends that reasonable alternatives be designed to lessen 
 
29 See Illinois Mun. League, supra note 24, at 2. 
30 Id. at 1. 
31 Id. at 2. 
32 5 U.S.C. § 603.  

 
- 8 - 
the impact on small entities with particular attention to the needs of small water systems, both 
from a financial and a compliance point of view.  
  
If you have any questions or require additional information, please contact me or Assistant Chief 
Counsel Nick Goldstein at (202) 772-6948 or by email at nick.goldstein@sba.gov. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
/s/ 
Major L. Clark, III 
Deputy Chief Counsel 
Office of Advocacy 
U.S. Small Business Administration 
 
 
/s/ 
Nick Goldstein 
Assistant Chief Counsel  
Office of Advocacy 
U.S. Small Business Administration 
 
 
 
Copy to: 
The Honorable Richard L. Revesz, Administrator   
 
 
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs   
 
 
Office of Management and Budget

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0859 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Tony Evers 
Governor 
 
DIVISION OF PUBLIC HEALTH 
 
1 WEST WILSON STREET 
PO BOX 2659 
MADISON WI  53701-2659 
Kirsten L. Johnson 
Secretary 
 
State of Wisconsin 
Telephone: 608-266-1251 
Fax: 608-267-2832 
TTY: 711 or 800-947-3529 
Department of Health Services 
 
www.dhs.wisconsin.gov 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
Jennifer McLain, Director 
Office of Groundwater and Drinking Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Subject: Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements (EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
 
Dear Dr. McLain, 
 
On behalf of the Wisconsin Department of Health Services (WDHS), I am pleased to submit 
comments on the EPA National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI). As Wisconsin’s lead public health agency, WDHS works tirelessly to 
address environmental health issues impacting our residents. We appreciate EPA’s actions to 
update and strengthen the Federal Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) to decrease lead exposure in 
drinking water. The Wisconsin Public Service Commission reported in 2022 that Wisconsin has 
174,637 utility-side service lines that contain lead or galvanized material, and 181,918 customer-
side service lines that contain lead or galvanized material. We know that no safe blood lead level 
has been identified. Therefore, a comprehensive and sustained response is needed to eliminate all 
known sources of environmental lead exposure. We appreciate that the LCRI requires a stronger 
engagement between water systems and public health agencies, which have a shared 
responsibility to address lead exposure. WDHS provides these comments based on our 
experience and expertise in contributing to the state’s safe drinking water programs, regulations, 
and policies related to the control of lead.  
 
Here are our specific comments: 
 
 EPA should revise the definition of “child care facility”. WDHS recommends that the 
LCRI’s definition for “child care facility” is revised to be inclusive of home-based child 
cares; child cares co-located in other facilities, such as an elementary or secondary 
school; and to include both licensed and certified facilities. The definition of “full 
plumbing replacement” should be revised to include any property with a full lead service 
line (LSL) replacement as well as all interior plumbing, including all drinking water 
faucets, fountains, and bottle fillers. 
 
 EPA needs to ensure that the equitable implementation of the LCRI reach all impacted 
populations. WDHS recommends that the LCRI explicitly state that outreach and 
communication efforts shall utilize plain and accessible language and that materials shall 
be translated into all appropriate languages based on the populations served by the 
community water systems (CWS). Consumers with limited English proficiency should be 

 
 
offered translated materials and should not be required to seek out these materials, as this 
presents an extra barrier to access.  
 
 When providing options for CWS to do public education, WDHS recommends the LCRI 
emphasize outreach strategies that incorporate equity considerations and will reach 
diverse populations. For example, a CWS could promote a “community event” by adding 
in specific language that attract attendees that are representative of the population(s) they 
serve. Additionally, the list of organizations to be contacted for community outreach and 
communication should include temporary and emergency housing facilities to ensure that 
unhoused populations are reached. Finally, EPA should consider clarifying how 
electronic transmission coverage will be measured so that there is no inequity if the CWS 
opts to solely use this type of communication. 
 
 WDHS recommends that the LCRI direct CWS to communicate to consumers specific 
actions they can take to reduce lead in drinking water before and after the replacement of 
a LSL. EPA should require CWS to provide information on how to clean faucet aerators 
and how frequently this action should be taken. The CWS’s communication to consumers 
should also include information on how to safely prepare baby formula without access to 
filtered drinking water. 
 
 EPA should clarify that public education and outreach conducted by CWS must be 
completed during months when schools and child care facilities are operational. CWS 
should consult school district calendars to inform the timing of these efforts. Lead in 
water monitoring is required for elementary schools and child care facilities, although 
these entities can opt out of monitoring.  Secondary schools must opt in to monitoring, 
but these settings are often used to host afterschool programming and events for the 
greater community. WDHS recommends that to adequately protect public health, 
secondary schools should be included in the water monitoring requirement for CWS.  
 
 EPA should establish requirements for monitoring actions and outreach that are 
consistent between schools, child care facilities, and property owners.  
o Specifically, EPA should clarify how testing requirements would apply for 
situations with co-located facilities (i.e., a child care operating in an elementary or 
secondary school). Also, EPA should clarify that, in co-location situations, testing 
for the child care must take place in fixtures that are used daily by the child care, 
especially for food preparation and drinking water.  
o EPA should develop testing prioritization for schools and child cares that are 
based on risk factors, such as lead poisoning rates among children under 6, 
density of low-income households, and facilities served by a known LSL.  
o As it stands, a school or child care facility may be considered non-responsive by 
the CWS after two separate outreach attempts to contact the facility. To ensure a 
higher response rate, WDHS recommends the EPA apply the “reasonable 
attempt” standard used in 141.84 (d)(3)(i) as the outreach protocol to schools and 
child care facilities. This would require that a CWS attempt at least four times to 

 
 
engage a school or child care facility using at least two different methods of 
communication before they are considered non-responsive. 
 
 WDHS believes that the lead sampling protocol for schools and child care facilities can 
be strengthened if EPA updates the protocols to match their current 3Ts water testing 
guidance, including matching the number, timing, and location of samples taken.  
 
o Presently, the LCRI only requires water samples to be collected as “first draw” 
samples. First-draw samples, however, only provide information about the quality 
of the water within the sampled water outlet, which means that the water sampling 
result can be impacted by the water outlet’s lead content. As such, first draw 
samples do not provide meaningful information about the quality of the 
community water supply. If significant information is to be gathered about the 
community water supply, a fifth liter sampling requirement should be used for 
schools and child care facilities, as this will capture the state of drinking water 
from a service line and can identify lead contamination coming from the 
community water supply.  
o If the current protocols are kept in place, the EPA should instruct CWS to exclude 
water outlets installed after 2014 from their sampling protocol. That is, CWS 
should not focus their sampling efforts on new construction and should instead 
take their samples from older areas of a building. Additionally, the EPA should 
clarify that a water bottle filler that is not connected to a drinking water fountain 
should be considered a drinking water fountain for schools and child cares. 
o Finally, we believe that a CWS can be waived from testing in schools or child 
cares that have participated in a “State or local law or program…”. EPA should 
clarify “or program” to include only those programs that are managed or 
authorized by a government agency. 
 
Reducing lead in drinking water is an essential element in WDHS’s efforts to eliminate 
environmental lead exposure. We thank EPA for the opportunity to strengthen the LCRI.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Mark A. Werner, PhD 
Director, Bureau of Environmental and Occupational Health

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0811 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Hannah Reed
Graduate Student, University of Colorado
Master of the Environment
4001 Discovery Drive
Boulder, CO 80309-0397
Hannah.reed-1@colorado.edu
February 2, 2023
Submitted via https://www.regulations.gov/
Re: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements
Document ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036
To Whom it May Concern,
I am writing to express my support for the proposed drinking water improvements 
outlined in the new proposed regulations from the EPA. The comprehensive changes outlined 
specifically targeting lead service line elimination, equitable implementation, and enhanced 
public awareness, are crucial steps towards ensuring the safety of our drinking water. 
The proposal to eliminate all lead service lines (LSLs) and certain galvanized service 
lines within 10 years is commendable. This proactive approach aligns with the urgent need to 
protect vulnerable populations, such as children and pregnant individuals, from the severe health 
impacts associated with lead exposure. I endorse the emphasis on equitable service line 
replacement, encouraging water systems to prioritize lower-income and underserved 
neighborhoods. 
The reduction in the lead action level to 0.010 mg/L, elimination of the lead trigger level, 
and streamlined tap sampling protocol demonstrate a commitment to simplifying the rule and 
ensuring timely intervention by water systems. These measures not only enhance the 
effectiveness of corrosion control treatment but also contribute to a more transparent and 
accessible framework for public health protection. 
In conclusion, I support the EPA’s efforts to strengthen the regulations governing lead 
and copper in drinking water. The proposed rule reflects a commitment to public health, 
equitable implementation, and proactive measures to reduce lead exposure. I encourage 
continued collaboration with stakeholders, states, and tribes to refine and implement these 
improvements effectively. 
Thank you for your dedication to ensuring the safety of our nation’s drinking water.
Sincerely,
Hannah Reed

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0870 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
EPA Docket Center
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
Re: Proposed Rule, Environmental Protection Agency, “National Primary Drinking Water
Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI),” Docket ID No.
EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801
120Water appreciates the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s efforts to revise the Lead and
Copper Rule and respectfully submits the following comments related to the Lead and Copper
Rule Improvements (LCRI) Proposal.
1) Inventory Validation Requirements when States have existing similar policies
EPA is proposing to require all water systems to validate the accuracy of a subset of
non-lead service lines in their inventory no later than three years before either the 10-year
deadline or the deferred deadline for the mandatory service line replacement (e.g., year 7
for systems with a 10-year deadline) or by an earlier deadline established by the State.
These requirements would also apply to water systems that have all non-lead lines in
their LCRI inventory that were identified by a method other than 1) review of records
listed in the rule or 2) two-point visual inspection. The proposed validation tests the
reliability of the water system’s inventory and provides systems, States, and consumers
with additional confidence in the accuracy of the inventory.
Water systems have already started implementing statistical/predictive method policies,
developed by some states, that allow water systems to formally classify the material of
all/many of their “unknown” service line materials by verifying a subset of “unknown”
lines. These state policies generally have different requirements for systems that have
found evidence of Lead or Galvanized Requiring Replacement Service Lines during their
initial verification work vs systems that have not found evidence of LSLs or GRR during
their initial review. Many of these policies use a verification method identical to EPA’s
validation requirements for “non-lead” service lines (e.g. verifying a random subset of
lines from the “unknown” validation pool). Currently, a water system could adhere to their
120Water | info@120water.com | 250 South Elm St. Zionsville, IN 46077

state predictive/statistical methods by verifying a subset on the “unknown”validation
pool and then conduct an identical assessment for the “non-lead” verification pool.
Additional clarification and guidance on this issue is needed to ensure water systems
and states understand how EPA’s validation requirements should be utilized when
States have similar validation policies.
2) Two-point visual inspection for service line validation
EPA is proposing to exclude “non-lead” service lines from the validation pool if they were
identified by either 1) Records or 2) two-point visual inspection. Additionally, random
“non-lead” service lines in the validation pool must be validated by conducting visual
inspection at a minimum of two points along the service line exterior. EPA “Inventory
Validation Requirements” fact sheet describes two-point inspections as:
“The validation pool consists of service lines that are classified as non-lead (e.g.,
plastic or copper) in your inventory, except those identified as non-lead through a
review of records listed in the rule or a two-point visual inspection. For example, a
service line that was identified as copper based on a one-point visual inspection at
the meter pit would be part of your validation pool. However, if this service line
material was also visually inspected at another point, such as inside the home, or
the line was also verified by reviewing a record (e.g., construction as-built record or
tap card), it would not be in your validation pool.”
And
“The next step is to validate that the service lines identified in Step 3 are non-lead
by conducting visual inspection at a minimum of two points along the service line
exterior. For example, visual inspection of the service line could be conducted by
excavation (such as potholing), viewing the service line material in the meter pit or
stop box, or viewing the service line entering the building. If you have already
conducted a one-point visual inspection, then one additional visual inspection at a
different point along the line is all that is required. Where ownership of the service
line is shared, the water system must visually inspect both portions of the service
line.”
The current EPA language describing the two-point verification is not clear. As written, it
could be interpreted that a property with a meter pit in the front yard, that also
represents the property line demarcation, would not be allowed to count as a two-point
verification if both sides of the service line (customer and utility) were clearly visible. If
this is EPA’s intended interpretation then it does not align with common practice as
detailed in many State inventory guidance resources for service line verification
120Water | info@120water.com | 250 South Elm St. Zionsville, IN 46077

requirements where both sides of the service line could be identified from the meter pit if
a confident determination was able to be made. Please consider adding additional
language in the fact sheet related to the definitions of two-point verifications as this
has implications for both excluding service lines from the validation pool and
verifications for service lines that are in the validation pool.
3) Transition from LCR to LCRI
EPA intends to transition directly from the LCR to the LCRI, with the exception of several
LCRR requirements that water systems will need to comply with on October 16, 2024.
Water systems will not be required to comply with LCRI requirements until sometime
later in 2027. Until then, water systems should continue to comply with the LCR.
Electronic references on EPA websites do not provide links to the LCR Federal Register.
Instead links are provided to the LCRR and LCRI proposal. Since water systems will
primarily need to comply with the LCR until October 2027 it would be helpful to provide a
link to the LCR federal register in the event that systems would like to reference the
actual LCR requirements.
4) Service Line Replacements “under the control of the water system”, partial LSL/GRR
service line replacements, and property owner consent
EPA is proposing to require water systems to fully replace lead and GRR service lines
that are under the water system’s control within 10 years, with limited exceptions. There
is still confusion regarding the variety of situations where partials can be implemented,
how property owner consent applies, and how these requirements are applied in joint
(utility and customer) ownership scenarios. EPA can not summarize all the unique local
or state requirements that could impact this issue. However, a separate guide or fact
sheet providing specific examples of real world scenarios for how these requirements
should be applied based on control, access, consent would be extremely helpful.
5) Removal of LCRR Trigger Level
We support the removal of the “Trigger Level” in the LCRI proposal as this was
challenging for water systems to communicate to customers.
6) Service Line Replacement
The EPA “Calculating Service Line Replacements” fact sheet states:
120Water | info@120water.com | 250 South Elm St. Zionsville, IN 46077

“Water systems must replace at least 10% of the service lines in their replacement pool
per year calculated across a 3-year rolling average unless the primacy agency determines
your system can replace all its lead and GRR service lines in less than 10 years or your
system qualifies for a deferred replacement rate.”
Primacy agencies may have challenges determining if water systems are capable of a
shorter replacement timeline given the variety of factors and resources that need to be
considered with a service line replacement program.
7) Consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three calendar days of
obtaining those results
EPA is proposing that water systems provide notice of individual tap sampling results
within three calendar days of obtaining those results regardless of whether the results
exceed the lead or copper action level.
Holidays and weekends are likely to impact water systems abilities for some notification
and should be considered with a final rule.
Thank you for your consideration of these comments.
Sincerely,
Jonathan Cuppett
Director of Water Quality Compliance
120Water
120Water | info@120water.com | 250 South Elm St. Zionsville, IN 46077

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1853 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
EPN Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations
for Lead and Copper: Improvements
Docket No.: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
February 5, 2024
The Environmental Protection Network (EPN) harnesses the expertise of more than 600 former
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) career staff and confirmation-level appointees from Democratic
and Republican administrations to provide the unique perspective of former regulators and scientists with
decades of historical knowledge and subject matter expertise.
EPN appreciates the proposed updates to the Lead and Copper Rule and will provide an important path
towards safe drinking water for all. EPN is providing comments on the following issues in the Lead and
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI): Full and Partial Service Line Replacement and Exemptions; Corrosion
Controls; School Requirements; Public Education; Enforcement; and Benefits.
Service Line Replacement
EPN commends EPA for proposing mandatory full service line replacement for all lead service lines (LSLs)
and galvanized requiring replacement service lines (GRRs) under a water system’s control within 10 years.
We note that under the 2020 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR), EPA projected that only 854,000 to
1.3 million LSLs would be replaced over the 35 year period of the rulemaking analysis. That would leave
millions of LSLs, accounting for 50% to 75% of the nation’s lead contaminated drinking water, in active use
in water systems both with and without optimal corrosion control treatment. EPN agrees with EPA that
improper implementation of sampling and corrosion control treatment processes in addition to disturbances
of LSLs caused by other utilities or heavy traffic would expose the people served by those unreplaced LSLs
to unacceptable health risks.
EPN supports EPA’s proposed approach of calculating the average annual replacement rate across a rolling
three-year period in which systems assess their rate at the end of the first three years and afterwards, adding
in the next year to recalculate a new three-year average rate. This rolling average approach allows states to
enforce sooner, rather than waiting until the end of the 10th year. EPN recommends that EPA add a
requirement that water systems must meet a minimum 10% replacement rate in each of the first three years.
This would allow states to enforce earlier than three years after the compliance date. Systems will have the
three years prior to the compliance date to get prepared to meet this minimum rate.
EPN supports EPA’s proposal to require annual updates of the inventory in order to subtract unknown lines
found to be non-lead and add unknown lines found to be LSLs or GRRs. This requirement incentivizes
faster identification of unknown service lines and enables states to determine if line replacement can
proceed faster than the minimum mandatory rate. EPN recommends that EPA require states, as a condition
of primacy, to set shortened replacement deadlines where feasible at any time throughout the replacement
program and to notify the water system of that determination in writing. This requirement is critical if
annual updates to the inventory indicate fewer lines need replacing or if the system is moving faster than
predicted.

EPA proposes allowing a system to get credit for a full service line replacement when a line that is not in
active use is physically disconnected, as long as there is a state or local law prohibiting disconnected LSLs
and GRRs from being put back into service. EPN is unclear about how EPA defines “physically
disconnected,” but it should mean disconnecting or plugging the lead service line, not just closing the
corporation stop. EPN recommends that in the final rule EPA specifically prohibit reconnection of a service
line that is counted as a full line replacement to ensure disconnected LSLs or GRRs are not put back into
service in situations where a state or local law is changed to allow this.
EPN supports EPA’s proposal to prohibit systems from getting credit for a full line replacement when they
line or coat the pipes instead of replacing them. EPN supports EPA’s prohibition on partial pipe
replacement and especially supports EPA’s proposal to prohibit systems from getting credit for a partial line
replacement or a test-out situation.
Exemptions to 10-year Deadline
EPN agrees with EPA that ample evidence is available demonstrating that a minimum average annual
replacement rate of 10%, calculated across a rolling three-year period and corresponding to a 10-year
replacement deadline, is feasible as defined in the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) Section 1412(b)(4)(D).
EPA estimates that the 10 year deadline is feasible for 96% to 99% of community systems nationwide and
proposes two eligibility criteria for systems where it may not be feasible to meet that deadline. EPN
supports EPA’s proposed requirement that in order to apply for these exemptions, systems can only count
the known LSLs and GRRs reported in their baseline inventory. By prohibiting the counting of unknown
lines for these exemptions, EPA is incentivizing systems to prioritize identifying unknown lines in the three
years before compliance is required.
The first criterion allows an exemption if a water system has a high proportion of LSLs and GRRs relative
to their total number of households served. This criterion is for situations where customers must help pay
for line replacement and sets an affordability threshold of 0.039 replacements per household per year. EPA
estimates that 663 to 2,134 systems (1.3% to 4.3% of systems nationwide) would exceed this threshold.
The second criterion allows an exemption if a water system would need to replace greater than 10,000
service lines per year to meet the 10-year deadline. EPA estimates that three or four systems nationwide may
be eligible under this criterion. EPA seeks comment on an alternative annual replacement rate of 8,000 lines
which would result in six or seven systems being eligible.
EPN recommends that for the first criterion, EPA defines “households” so that water systems will have
specific requirements on how to calculate this. EPN notes that EPA expressed the percentage of systems
eligible for this exemption as a percentage of national systems. That percentage should have been expressed
as the percentage of LSL systems, which would double the percentages shown and increase concern over
the scope of the exemption. EPN recommends that EPA require states, as a condition of primacy, to assess
whether a system eligible for one of these exemptions can meet the 10-year deadline or even a shorter
deadline. If the state determines the system needs more time, the state should be required to approve the use
of a specific alternative deadline.
2

For the second criterion, EPN recommends that the threshold not be reduced to 8,000 lines because several
systems have already demonstrated the ability to replace 10,000 or more lines per year. EPN further
recommends that after 10 years, the threshold should be increased to 20,000 lines since by then supply
chains will be functioning well, there will be ample contactors, and innovative replacement approaches will
have been developed. EPN notes that the proposed compliance date for the final rule allows three years
before the 10-year replacement period begins, allowing market forces to correct for shortages in labor and
supplies and for states to set up programs to train workers before the replacement program even begins.
Partial Line Replacement
EPN supports EPA’s proposal to prohibit partial line replacement unless it is conducted as part of an
emergency repair or in coordination with planned infrastructure work, excluding infrastructure work solely
for LSL or GRR replacement. While we agree with EPA that an outright ban on partial replacement is
infeasible as emergency water main replacement may require removal of a portion of an LSL, the risk of
increased lead exposure especially from particulate lead is high. In cases where partial replacement is
planned in coordination with non-emergency infrastructure work, we support EPA’s proposal to require
systems to offer to replace the customer-owned portion at least 45 days prior to the scheduled replacement.
We support EPA’s requirement that any partial replacement requires risk mitigation measures immediately
following replacement and for six months after replacement. These measures include providing pitcher
filters or point of use devices certified to reduce lead in drinking water. EPN supports EPA’s revised
requirement that filters and replacement cartridges be supplied to every occupancy, rather than residence, in
order to protect businesses. We also support EPA’s requirement that these risk mitigation measures include
installing a dielectric coupling separating the remaining service line and the new one to prevent galvanic
corrosion unless the new line is plastic. We commend these enhancements not only following full and partial
replacement of lead and GRR service lines but also after replacement of a lead connector, inline water
meter, and water meter setter. We recommend that EPA require the water system monitor to ensure that the
risk mitigation is effective.
EPA proposed that systems must replace lead connectors as they are encountered during LSL and GRR
replacement but did not require that they be inventoried and included in the mandatory replacement plan.
EPN is concerned about expanding the scope of the inventory because it would take more resources and
slow down the process. We suggest that EPA consider recommending Michigan’s approach in which a
system can choose to: 1) conduct a physical verification for a lead gooseneck and add it to the inventory;
2) rely on a control that was in place demonstrating that lead goosenecks were never used so it would not
have to be inventoried; or 3) assume locations with galvanized service lines between the main and curb stop
contain (or previously contained) a lead connector and add them to their inventory without physical
verification.
EPN is very concerned that EPA lacks the authority to require systems to replace LSLs and GRRs not
under their control. Full LSLR is the “best available technology” based on the records for the 1991 LCR and
the LCRR, the legislative history on the definition of “feasibility” in the SDWA, and the City of Newark’s
1
service line replacement program. Partial replacements are known to raise water-lead levels (WLLs) and
2
2 https://www.newarkleadserviceline.com/
1 See NRDC and Earthjustice (2023) Letter to EPA, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0518
3

lead exposures both immediately and in the intermediate term. It can be many years before WLLs return to
pre-intrusion levels. Lead pipes have disproportionately remained in low-income and disadvantaged
communities. Partial replacements are most likely to occur where homeowners are unable or unwilling to
pay for replacing the part of the lead pipe that reaches the house. Consequently, EPA’s proposal has the
potential to worsen the disparity in access to safe drinking water. Especially in such locations, EPA should
strengthen the disincentives for partial replacements.
Both EPA and water systems themselves acknowledge that public water systems (PWSs) exert control over
the entire service line, including the part located under private property, in various ways. For instance,
without the owner’s permission, PWSs can enter private property to install water meters, read the meters, fix
and calibrate the meters, etc. PWSs will enter private property to fix water leaks. Furthermore, EPA can
require full LSLR through the authority granted by the SDWA to regulate ‘distribution facilities under the
control of the operator’ of a PWS. EPA states in this proposed rule that “A system’s existing authority to
access the service line and complete the full service line replacement might provide the system with the legal
authority to conduct the service line replacement over the objection of the property owner or resident.”
EPA should strengthen pressure on the states and PWSs to avoid partial replacement. We support every
action that EPA is proposing to encourage state and local governments to enable full replacement by
providing systems with legal, physical access to all LSLs and GRRs. We support EPA’s proposal to require:
1) states to notify systems in writing by the compliance date whether any state laws govern a system’s access
to private property with or without customer consent or agreement to pay; 2) systems to identify in their
LSLR plans any state or local laws or water tariff agreement provisions that govern access to conduct full
service line replacement; 3) systems to make at least four outreach attempts using at least two different
communications methods to gain private property access for full replacement; and 4) systems to conduct
annual outreach to non-consenting customers and whenever there is a change in ownership, even after the
mandatory replacement deadline has passed.
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and other funding sources authorize systems to pay for replacement of
LSLs and GRRs on private property. Even when replacement on private property is paid for by a system,
state and local laws may require customer consent for line replacement. EPN recommends that EPA add a
requirement that systems conduct full line replacement where a system has legal access but property owners
or residents deny physical access.
EPN understands that EPA chose not to ban cost-sharing for line replacement in deference to state and
local governments that have historically regulated how systems provide and charge for services to
customers. We agree that attempts to assert federal authority over how systems charge would be met with
protracted legal challenges that could delay implementation of this critical public health rule for years. EPN
urges EPA to recommend that all states adopt explicit policies giving PWSs the authority to use ratepayer
funds to replace LSLs and GRRs on private property. Six states (Indiana, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin) have already enacted such policies which are key to preventing partial line
replacements and the ensuing public health risks in communities across the country.
Deferring Optimal Corrosion Control in Systems that can Remove LSLs Within Five Years
EPA proposes to streamline the LCRR by deferring optimal corrosion control treatment and re-optimized
optimal corrosion control treatment (OCCT) processes for systems that can remove 100% of lead and GRR
4

service lines within five years of the date the system is triggered into the corrosion control treatment steps.
EPA argues that by the time a utility could complete all the steps necessary for determining and
implementing OCCT, lead pipes would be removed. EPN supports this proposal in part. For systems that
already have corrosion control in place, it seems reasonable to defer re-optimization during the period of
pipe replacement, as long as the corrosion control treatment stays in place. However, for those utilities that
don’t have corrosion control in place, this proposal could subject customers to increased risk. EPA is aware
that the physical disruptions of pipe replacement activities will increase WLLs by dislodging protective
passivation, leaving unprotected lead pipes in direct contact with the drinking water. Corrosion control
treatment is even more necessary then and EPA requires that public education occur during remediation
activities. EPN appreciates EPA’s point that the process of developing and implementing optimal corrosion
control can be time consuming and may not provide timely protection. One possible approach would be to
eliminate the pipe test rig requirement for optimization studies for utilities that will remove all their lead and
GRR service lines within five years. This would significantly reduce the time and cost of developing the
OCCT and is the same relief the rule proposes for all utilities serving less than 10,000 people.
More Timely Notification of Residential WLLs
We applaud EPA for requiring water systems to deliver the results of home testing to the residents within
three days of sampling, regardless of the levels in the sample.
Partial Replacement of the LSL Under PWS Control
EPA only proposes that PWSs must replace the portion of the LSL that is on public property. EPN is
concerned that this may inadvertently mandate that LSLs be partially replaced. Partials are well known to
raise WLLs and lead exposures both immediately and in the intermediate term. It can be many years before
WLLs return to pre-intrusion levels. It is especially likely that either no replacement or only partial
replacement will continue to occur in vulnerable communities.
Both EPA and water systems themselves acknowledge that PWSs exert control over the entire service line,
including the part located under private property, in various ways. For instance, without the owner’s
permission, PWSs can enter private property to install water meters, read the meters, fix and calibrate the
meters, etc. PWSs will enter private property to fix water leaks. Furthermore, EPA can require full LSLR
through the authority granted by the SDWA to regulate ‘distribution facilities under the control of the
operator’ of a PWS.
EPA says, “A system’s existing authority to access the service line and complete the full service line
replacement might provide the system with the legal authority to conduct the service line replacement over
the objection of the property owner or resident.”
Furthermore, full LSLR is the “best available technology'” based on the records for the 1991 LCR and the
LCRR, the legislative history on the definition of “feasibility” in the SDWA , and the City of Newark’s
3
service line replacement program .
4
4 https://www.newarkleadserviceline.com/
3 See NRDC and Earthjustice (2023) Letter to EPA, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0518
5

We recommend EPA strengthen pressure on the states and PWSs to avoid partial replacements. The
proposal is inconsistent in describing circumstances under which partial replacements are or are not
permitted.
Lead pipes have disproportionately remained in low-income and disadvantaged communities. Partial
replacements are most likely to occur where homeowners are unable or unwilling to pay for replacing the
part of the lead pipe that reaches the house. Consequently, EPA’s proposal has the potential to worsen the
disparity in access to safe drinking water. Especially in such locations, EPA should strengthen the
disincentives for partial replacements.
First and Fifth Liter Sampling
We applaud EPA’s proposal that water systems sample both first and fifth liter from homes with known or
unknown lead service lines and the higher will serve as the compliance determination. This is more likely to
reflect the contribution of the lead pipe to residents’ exposures. It will also provide better data to the water
system on the efficacy of treatment and control efforts.
Action Level - Implementation and Enforcement
EPN strongly commends EPA’s proposal to lower the Action Level to 10 ppb. However, permitting three
exceedances every five years guarantees that 10% or more of the service population can have high lead
exposures for extended periods of time. EPN has three concerns:
1.
This permits five years of exposure to high WLLs, which is a lot of high exposure.
2.
It's a complication, as one exceedance is adequate to require additional action by the PWS.
3.
Every single lead action level exceedance should require mandatory POU filters provided for two
compliance sampling periods following the exceedance.
Including Information on Presence of LSLs When Building Ownership Changes
We commend EPA’s proposal that “whenever there is a change in ownership, even after the mandatory
service line replacement deadline has passed, the system would be required to offer to conduct the
replacement.” We also applaud disclosure of information on the presence of lead services, connections,
goosenecks, etc. when building ownership is transferred.
Schools
Schools and other child-occupied facilities (COFs) are inadequately addressed in this proposal. This is
inconsistent both with the science and with EPA’s holistic approach in its Lead Strategy. Children spend
more of their waking hours in school than anywhere else. They drink more there, too. Based upon children’s
unique vulnerability to lead’s neurotoxicity, the American Academy of Pediatrics has called for a WLL
standard of 1 ppb in school drinking water. EPA should strengthen the minimal standards for schools and
other COFs delineated in the LCR by increasing both the percent of schools samples and the number of
samples taken per school, and focus on schools providing filters certified to reduce lead in water as
discussed below.
6

Large buildings, including schools, have long pipes. WLLs rise in water that has stagnated in pipes for
extended periods. Use patterns in COFs present heightened risks of high WLLs due to long periods of
disuse over nights, weekends, and vacations . In addition, a study of almost 80,000 samples from schools
5
and other large buildings showed high potential WLLs from stagnation periods as short as 30 minutes due
to the long piping . In large buildings, high lead levels can be persistent, reflected by high median values
6
considering all taps, or specific to a few taps in the building. In addition, specific plumbing components,
especially water fountains, coolers and ‘bubblers’, are susceptible to high WLLs.
Lead service lines are unlikely in large buildings due to the water volumes needed. However, despite the ban
on plumbing components containing lead instituted in 1986, studies have found that buildings built after
that, including schools, may still evidence high WLLs likely due to premise plumbing containing lead .
7
Because monitoring of school water is minimal, high exposures can continue for extended periods, unless
detected by happenstance . A five-sample lead testing requirement, where five sequential one-liter samples
8
are taken, may help to identify plumbing component risks but only if the building is not too big and with
9
extreme rigor in sampling. Machine learning techniques using publicly available data may be able to identify
schools at risk . Flushing is not always an effective mitigation strategy . In large buildings, clustering
10
11
appears to occur with high WLLs. For instance, in Massachusetts, approximately 90% of fixtures with lead
>15 ppb were clustered in 34% of schools . On the other hand, low WLLs are widely distributed.
12
13
13 Rome, M.; Estes-Smargiassi, S.; Masters, S. V.; Roberson, A.; Tobiason, J. E.; Beighley, R. E.; Pieper, K. J. Using the Lead and
Copper Rule Revisions Five-Sample Approach to Identify Schools with Increased Lead in Drinking Water Risks. Environ. Sci.
Technol. Lett. 2022, 9 (1), 84– 89, DOI: 10.1021/acs.estlett.1c00845
12 Rome, M.; Estes-Smargiassi, S.; Masters, S. V.; Roberson, A.; Tobiason, J. E.; Beighley, R. E.; Pieper, K. J. Using the Lead and
Copper Rule Revisions Five-Sample Approach to Identify Schools with Increased Lead in Drinking Water Risks. Environ. Sci.
Technol. Lett. 2022, 9 (1), 84– 89, DOI: 10.1021/acs.estlett.1c00845
11 Barn P, Nicol AM, Struck S, Dosanjh S, Li R, Kosatsky T. Investigating elevated copper and lead levels in school drinking water.
Environmental health review. 2014 Apr 11;56(04):96-102. Murphy EA. Effectiveness of flushing on reducing lead and copper
levels in school drinking water. Environmental Health Perspectives. 1993 Aug;101(3):240-1.
10 Lobo GP, Laraway J, Gadgil AJ. Identifying schools at high-risk for elevated lead in drinking water using only publicly available
data. Sci Total Environ. 2022 Jan 10;803:150046.
9 Rome, M.; Estes-Smargiassi, S.; Masters, S. V.; Roberson, A.; Tobiason, J. E.; Beighley, R. E.; Pieper, K. J. Using the Lead and
Copper Rule Revisions Five-Sample Approach to Identify Schools with Increased Lead in Drinking Water Risks. Environ. Sci.
Technol. Lett. 2022, 9 (1), 84– 89, DOI: 10.1021/acs.estlett.1c00845
8 Barn P, Nicol AM, Struck S, Dosanjh S, Li R, Kosatsky T. Investigating elevated copper and lead levels in school drinking water.
Environmental health review. 2014 Apr 11;56(04):96-102.
7 Carter JA, Erhardt RJ, Jones BT, Donati GL. Survey of lead in drinking water from schools and child care centers operating as
public water suppliers in North Carolina, USA: implications for future legislation. Environmental Science & Technology. 2020
Nov 3;54(22):14152-60.
6 ​Deshommes E, Andrews RC, Gagnon G, McCluskey T, McIlwain B, Doré E, Nour S, Prévost M. Evaluation of exposure to lead
from drinking water in large buildings. Water research. 2016 Aug 1; 99:46-55.
5 Sathyanarayana S, Beaudet N, Omri K, Karr C. Predicting children’s blood lead levels from exposure to school drinking water in
Seattle, Washington, USA. Ambulatory Pediatrics. 2006 Sep 1;6(5):288-92.
Triantafyllidou S, Le T, Gallagher D, Edwards M. Reduced risk estimations after remediation of lead (Pb) in drinking water at two
US school districts. Science of the total environment. 2014 Jan 1;466:1011-21.
Lambrinidou Y, Triantafyllidou S, Edwards M. Failing our children: Lead in US school drinking water. NEW SOLUTIONS: A
Journal of Environmental and Occupational Health Policy. 2010 May;20(1):25-47.
Bryant SD. Lead‐contaminated drinking waters in the public schools of Philadelphia. Journal of Toxicology: Clinical Toxicology.
2004 Jan 1;42(3):287-94.
7

Testing each faucet in a COF is time-consuming and expensive; the effect of temperature on WLLs
necessitates testing under multiple conditions. Good testing is likely beyond the capacity of most schools
and even school systems.
We recommend that each faucet within a COF that is used for drinking, including water fountains/bubblers, and the kitchen,
be outfitted with a filter that will reduce the lead levels. The PWS should ensure that the filter is properly maintained.
The PWS can then work with each school to develop a testing protocol that includes all faucets within the
COF that may be used for drinking. Because studies show that in large buildings such as schools high WLLs
are likely due to the long piping , schools should remove the filters only when no samples exceed 10 ppb
14
under extended stagnation testing even in warm weather. Bottled water is not a sustainable option to a POU
device unless complete facility remediation occurs within one calendar year.
Public Education and Outreach
EPA proposal made significant additions to public education requirements that water systems must take,
including revised requirements and new mandatory health effects language in public notice and Consumer
Confidence Report (CCR), notice of lead results, and notice of lead exceedances, with firm deadlines for
when such notice must be given. EPN supports EPA’s proposal but believes that water systems will continue
to not fully complete the monitoring requirements or fully report the results to the public and primacy
agency. These water system monitoring and reporting violations need to be better tracked by the primacy
agency and EPA as they hide lead levels and underreport lead exceedances and violations from the primacy
agency and thus EPA and the public. EPN recommends that EPA add a requirement or explanation that
failure to comply with monitoring and reporting violations is high priority, to be reported by the primacy
state to the Safe Drinking Water Information System (SDWIS), and requiring follow-up.
Earlier Notification of Testing Results
We applaud EPA for requiring water systems to deliver the results of home testing to the residents within
three days of sampling, regardless of the levels in the sample.
Primacy Agency Rule Implementation and Enforcement
EPA revised and expanded the LCRR special primacy requirements to require primacy agencies to report to
EPA the total lead service lines and the date and number of lead service lines replaced and all lead
exceedances reported by the water system. EPN recommends that EPA add a primacy requirement that
states must report whether the required remedial actions were taken by water systems that experienced an
exceedance of the lead action level. EPN supports these new primacy requirements but believes that state
reporting to EPA will continue to be incomplete and late until data quality problems with water system
reporting to the primacy agency is corrected. EPN recommends that EPA negotiate working agreements
with the states to comply with these reporting requirements, including completing and implementing the
new SDWIS.
14 Deshommes E, Andrews RC, Gagnon G, McCluskey T, McIlwain B, Doré E, Nour S, Prévost M. Evaluation of exposure to
lead from drinking water in large buildings. Water research. 2016 Aug 1; 99:46-55.
8

Benefit Analysis
We applaud EPA's decision to present-value the costs and benefits of the LCRI. We could not follow
through every calculation-train and must assume that EPA consistently applied the calculations to both costs
and benefits. While improved over previous cost-benefit analyses, EPA’s analysis of the LCRI benefits
remains woefully inadequate.
EPA substantially increased the assessed benefits of health endpoints — from one health endpoint
(decreased IQ-earnings) to four health endpoints across seven potential physiological systems — and the
total estimated benefits have increased 20-fold. Nonetheless, the benefit analysis is conspicuous in its
omissions. Most glaring — despite its heavy labor market/capital emphasis — is the omission of
productivity losses associated with the limited health endpoints EPA has included. This omission constitutes
an intentional bias in quantifying the damages associated with at least preterm births and ADHD. For
instance, Doshi et al.
(used in the EA) finds that “[o]verall national annual incremental costs of ADHD
15
ranged from $143 billion to $266 billion. Most of these costs were incurred by adults ($105 billion – $194
billion) compared with children/adolescents ($38 billion – $72 billion). For adults, the largest cost category
was productivity and income losses ($87 billion – $138 billion).” The Doshi estimates do not include loss of
employment or stress-related illnesses.
EPA describes the robust scientific evidence of lead’s health damages. “… health endpoints identified using
two comprehensive United States Government documents summarizing the literature on lead exposure
health impacts. These documents are EPA’s Integrated Science Assessment for Lead (ISA) (USEPA, 2013);
and the United States Department of Health and Human Services’ NTP Monograph on Health Effects of
Low-Level Lead (NTP, 2012). Both of these sources present comprehensive reviews of the literature as of
the time of publication on the risk of adverse health effects associated with lead exposure. EPA summarized
those endpoints to which either the EPA ISA or the NTP Monograph assigned one of the top two [highest
causality] tiers of confidence in the relationship between lead exposure and the risk of adverse health effects.
These endpoints include cardiovascular effects, renal effects, reproductive and developmental effects [...],
immunological effects, neurological effects [...], and cancer.”16
However, both of these comprehensive reviews are outdated and newer data should be considered. EPA’s
most recent ISA for lead
had already been released for external review at the time this proposal was
17
drafted, with a final version published in January 2024.
In addition, with the almost 20 separate health endpoints across seven separate body systems EPA identified
as causally related to lead exposure contained in these comprehensive reviews, why was EPA able to quantify
only four? Further, EPA notes that for three of the four quantified benefits, the slopes are steeper at lower
levels and several show no evidence of a threshold below which effects cease (IQ, cardiovascular, reduction
in birth weight). EPA also describes average U.S. lead exposures from drinking water as low. This indicates
that it is precisely the drinking water exposures that are likely to produce the highest benefits.
17 EPA. Integrated Science Assessment for Lead. 2023. https://assessments.epa.gov/isa/document/&deid=359536
16 Economic Analysis of the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p 6-5. https://www.regulations.gov/document/
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0712
15 Doshi JA, Hodgkins P, Kahle J, Sikirica V, Cangelosi MJ, Setyawan J, Erder MH, Neumann PJ. Economic impact of childhood
and adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in the United States. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry. 2012 Oct 1;51(10):990-1002.
9

EPA ascribes several pages to uncertainties in these health estimates and declined to include other
endpoints. Does EPA think that the uncertainties in WLLs are principally higher WLLs? If not, each of these
monetized estimates should be portrayed as a lower bound estimate.
EPA has not included all the data that it clearly has. The monetization of cognitive damage referred to as the
IQ-earnings matrix is heavily detailed, but the effect on earnings is the delayed damage that is visible in
adulthood. The concurrent remediation is compensatory education for the children who have sustained the
IQ damage. Using the same exposure-IQ decrement data portrayed in chapter 5 (sections 5.5.1 and 5.5.2) of
the EA, EPA could easily estimate the number of children likely to need compensatory remedial education.
EPA estimates 297,190 IQ points saved by the LCRI. With a national mean IQ of 100 and with 68% of the
U.S. population estimated to have IQs between 85 and 115, assuming that children exposed to lead from
drinking water have the same IQ distribution as the rest of the US population, we can assume that a loss of
10 IQ points will drop a child’s IQ by almost one standard deviation.
Only the children with below average
18
IQs will require compensatory education.
To better assess all the health benefits of EPA’s LCRI, we used EPA’s exposure and effect estimates from the
LCRI (contained in its Economic Analysis), converted all estimates to 2022 dollars, then scaled the omitted
health endpoints to include the categories published in the Levin Schwartz 2023 benefit analysis
(Table 1).
19
The total estimated benefits ($36,772 million in 2022 dollars), while only 10% higher than EPA’s estimates,
present a much more comprehensive picture of the benefits of the LCRI. Of course, this assessment
remains a poor underestimate of the total damages because each monetized endpoint is incomplete; the
largest omissions are likely productivity losses and the long-term sequelae of low birthweights.
EPA repeatedly claims an inability to quantify benefits, but not costs. For instance, “because of the lack of
granularity in the lead tap water concentration data available to EPA for the regulatory analysis, EPA is
unable to quantify the benefits of small improvements in CCT to individuals residing in homes with
LSLs/GRR service lines.”
Nonetheless, EPA does not find either the lack of granularity in the WLL data
20
nor the lack of evidence of a threshold to constitute ‘uncertainties’ in the cost estimates or a downward bias
in the benefits.
In addition to the paucity of monetized health benefits, EPA also refused to include materials benefits
associated with required corrosion control. Corrosion control is the control treatment of choice because
lead is principally a corrosion by-product in drinking water. EPA’s omission of this monetized materials
benefit estimation is willful. EPA acknowledges that estimates exist and indeed, EPA first published
estimates of avoidable corrosion damage in 1986.
The quadrennial American Society of Civil Engineers
21
report card on the state of US infrastructure contains a host of estimates of corrosion damage.
In addition,
22
there are at least two international organizations that study corrosion: the National Association of Corrosion
Engineers (NACE) and The Association for Materials Protection and Performance. EPA acknowledges that
22 Lo S. Report on America’s Infrastructure. Defense Transportation Journal. 2018 Aug 1;74(4):17-21.
21 Levin R. The benefits of reducing lead in drinking water. 1986, EPA report 230-09-86-019.
20 Economic Analysis of the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p 6-5. https://www.regulations.gov/document/
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0712
19 Levin R, Schwartz J. A better cost: benefit analysis yields better and fairer results: EPA’s lead and copper rule revision.
Environmental Research. 2023 Jul 15; 229:115738.
18 Omni Health Calculator, available at www.omnicalculator.com › health › iq-percentile
10

Table 1. Monetized benefits of LCRI including those omitted from EPA economic analysis.
Body system
Component assessed
Population
Aspect
monetized
Monetized
unit cost
(2022$)
Incidence
Derivation of
Incidence
Estimate
Total monetized
benefit (millions
2022$)
Nervous System Effects Cognitive Function
Decrements
Children
IQ earnings
$22,400 per
IQ ptᵃ
297,190ᵃ
EPA LCRI
$6,657ᵃ
Cognitive Function
Decrements
Children
Short-term
damages
(compensatory
ed)
$51,500ᵇ
15,000
Scalingᶜ
$773
Behavioral & Conduct
Problems
Children
ADHD
$179,000ᵃ
4,221ᵃ
EPA LCRI
$755ᵃ
Sensory Function
Decrements
Children
Auditory
impairment
$18,300ᵇ
1620
Scalingᶜ
$30
Internalizing Behaviors
Children
---
Cognitive Function
Decrements
Adults
Depression
$70,000ᵇ
2400
Scalingᶜ
$168
Psychopathological
Effects
Adults
ADHD
$11,000ᵇ
20,000
Scalingᶜ
$220
Psychopathological
Effects (alternative)
Adults
Dementia
$31,000ᵇ
400
Scalingᶜ
$12
Cardiovascular Effects
Hypertension
Adults
Hypertension
$5,700ᵇ
100,000
Scalingᶜ
$570
Coronary Heart Disease
Adults
Coronary heart
disease
$19,500ᵇ
1500
Scalingᶜ
$29
Immune System Effects Immunological damage
Lifetime
Asthma
$56,000ᵇ
2080
Scalingᶜ
$116
Hematologic Effects
Decreased Red Blood
Cell Survival and Altered
Heme Synthesis
Lifetime
Anemia
$3,700ᵇ
50
Scalingᶜ
--
Reproductive &
Developmental Effects
Development
Lifetime
---
Birth Outcomes
Childhood &
life
Low birth weight $5ᵃ
1.4 milᵃ
EPA LCRI
$6ᵃ
Male Reproductive
Function
Adult
Male
reproductive
impairment
$66,800ᵇ
800
Scalingᶜ
$53
Cancer
Cancer
Adult
Lung cancer
$293,000ᵇ
5
Scalingᶜ
$0.90
Mortality
Cardiovascular
Adult
VSL
$10.4 milᵃ
2642ᵃ
EPA LCRI
$27,382ᵃ
TOTAL
$36,772
aEPA LCRI Economic Analysis
bLevin Schwartz 2023 converted to 2022 dollars
c Scaling from Levin Schwartz to LCRI exposure estimates
11

individuals who live or work in buildings without LSL/GRR lines are likely to benefit from the improved
monitoring and additional actions to optimize corrosion control.
Nonetheless, EPA concludes “EPA did
23
not have sufficient information to estimate these impacts nationally for the proposed rule analysis.”
Discount Rate
The Office of Management and Budget’s (OMB) revised Circular No. A-94
states that discounted benefits
24
or costs should be determined using a real discount rate of 2.0 percent if the benefits or costs reflect
certainty-equivalent valuations and 3.1 percent if they do not. EPA’s proposed rule includes two discount
rates: 3% and 7%. EPA should consider only 2% and 3% discount rates and should not include the 7%
estimates.
In addition, Circular No. A-4 provides OMB’s guidance to federal agencies on the development of
regulatory analysis and calls for federal cost benefit analyses to include the fullest range of information on
known and anticipated social costs and benefits. EPA has not adhered to this OMB directive.
24 https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/CircularA-4.pdf
23 Economic Analysis of the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p 5-22. https://www.regulations.gov/document/
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0712
12

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1348 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Mr. Michael Goldberg 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue 
Mail Code 4607M 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re:  National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (Docket 
Number EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg, 
 
The New York Section American Water Works Association (NYSAWWA) represents drinking water 
utilities across New York State, providing safe, dependable, and affordable water to over 15 million 
residents. Our core principle is the protection of public health, and we take pride in New York State's 
leadership role in advancing these initiatives. Our diverse membership consists of leading experts in 
drinking water treatment, engineers responsible for designing and constructing our systems, 
academics at the forefront of innovative research, and pioneers driving the development of 
emerging technologies. Together, we ensure that New York's water supply remains of the highest 
possible quality now and in the future. 
 
We have carefully reviewed the proposed regulations and offer the following comments and 
recommendations: 
 
General Matters 
1. The requirements of the LCRI increase the administrative and technical work requirements for 
all utilities and water suppliers. These additional requirements are disproportionally stressful for 
medium and small systems that do not have their own lab facilities to conduct sampling, do not 
have sufficient resources or personnel to comply with the LCRI. All systems, but especially 
medium and small systems, require effective guidance, templates, and other tools to assist with 
complying with the rule. These tools should be distributed to utilities, along with expanded 
guidance, at least two years prior to the compliance deadline. 
 
Service Line Replacement 
2. NYSAWWA recognizes the funding made available through the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law 
(BIL) will be instrumental in helping water suppliers achieve the removal of lead service lines 
(LSLs) as required by the LCRI. However, we note that this funding is woefully inadequate to 
ensure all water systems can comply with the 10-year timeframe, while also conducting other 
critical infrastructure improvements that ensure reliable and continuous delivery of water. In 
New York State alone, we estimate the total funding for removal of the estimated 360,000 LSLs 
will exceed 3.5 billion dollars. New York’s share of BIL funding will not cover 20% of these costs 
Additional funding from the federal government is needed to complete full LSL replacement 
within the requirements proposed in the rule, however even with funding this requirement will 
likely be infeasible for most systems. Any decrease to the 10-year requirement (six, seven, eight 
years) is also infeasible. 
 
3. The minimum average annual LSL replacement rate is calculated by counting the number of 
replaced service lines divided by the “replacement pool”. However, a Utility that is acting in good 
faith to comply with the rule could identify large quantities of unknown service lines as non-lead, 
which would not contribute towards the calculated compliance percentage. This could result in 
the rolling average for replacements dropping below compliance through no fault of the utility 
and despite progress identifying unknowns. 
 
 

Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
 
4. The LCRI includes several instances where utilities and/or water suppliers are assumed to know 
the premise plumbing material in consumer’s homes. This is included in revisions to sampling 
sites, “EPA is proposing to correct the definition for Tier 1 and Tier 2 sites to include sites with 
premise plumbing made of lead due to the high risk of lead exposure associated with premise 
plumbing made of lead.” Requiring utilities and/or water suppliers to enter consumer’s homes to 
identify pipe material likely extends beyond their authority and would be difficult, or impossible, 
to comply with. This requirement would place an unnecessary burden on water systems and 
divert resources from important public health activities. 
5. Aligned with the previous comment, clarification is required regarding how much effort needs to 
be expended to identify premise plumbing after all lead and galvanized requiring replacement 
(GRR) lines have been removed. The Tier selection protocols must be aligned to ensure water 
suppliers are not forced to spend excessive time gaining access to homes to inspect internal 
plumbing in an effort to find appropriately Tiered sample locations.  
 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
 
6. The definition of lead connectors is troublesome. Including a specific length of connector 
suggests that water suppliers are responsible for locating and measuring connectors to 
determine if they are an LSL. By this interpretation, inventorying would require excavating and 
measuring every lead connector, as well as removing them once uncovered. A better, more 
generic definition should be considered that centers on the intent of lead connectors, a flexible 
pipe that allows connection of a rigid service line. 
 
Lead Action and Trigger Levels 
 
7. The use of a single 0.010 mg/L action level, rather than using an action level and a separate 
trigger level, improves the rule by reducing complexity compared to the LCRR. 
 
Corrosion Control Treatment 
 
8. Systems that have voluntarily optimized their corrosion control treatment and demonstrated 90th 
percentile lead concentrations below 0.005 mg/L should be recognized and given the 
opportunity to have an extended schedule for identifying unknowns and service line 
replacement.  
 
Public Education 
9. The requirements for sample result notification are unreasonable. The three calendar days for 
postmarked notification is technically impossible for most water suppliers who may receive 
sample results at the end of the week. In addition, water suppliers generally provide explanation 
and context to sample results through a letter that accompanies the lab report. EPA must 
consider changing the sample results as follows: 
 
a. Provide alternative means by which to transmit sample results. Most water systems 
communicate with their customers through a variety of ways, phone, text, email, and 
social media. The requirement to use the most outdated means of communication to 
transmit sample results impairs the ability of systems to communicate with their 
customers effectively and proactively. It the LCRI is meant to engage and inform 
customers, EPA must provide flexibility in communicating sample results. 
 
b. Provide a longer timeframe (2 weeks) to communicate results that do NOT exceed the 
action level. This will allow water suppliers to focus more effort on providing information 
and education to customers that have high lead levels. Requiring the same level of 

immediate communication will only be detrimental to the efforts to educate the 
customers that truly need it. 
10. The rule must provide guidance or instruction related to sample delivery other than postal mail. 
Many utilities and water suppliers find mail to be an unreliable method to effectively deliver 
communications and information to their customers and consumers. Sample result delivery 
options such as consumer accounts, email, or text messaging should be allowed, as water 
utilities have found these to be more effective at delivering information and are often preferred 
by consumers. 
 
Reporting and Recordkeeping 
11. The as-drafted rule language to include connectors in the inventory does not align with the past 
inventory requirements. As such, water utilities that have expended significant efforts to 
complete their inventories may not have collected the service line connection data in a manner 
that complies with the proposed regulatory requirement. Furthermore, the distinction between 
“never lead” and “no connector” is unclear, as copper services do not have connectors, and 
thus are both. Significant rework is likely required for those who proactively began their 
inventory. 
 
Cost and Affordability 
 
12. The LCRI intends for water utilities to complete all LSL replacement within 10 years and 
estimates the cost of approximately $90 billion. The LCRI uses the BIL as a means for 
communities to afford service line replacement. However, the BIL only allocates $15 billion to 
fund service line replacement. This indicates current federal funding allocation is insufficient for 
the replacement of lead and GRR service lines. 
13. Many communities with large quantities of LSLs are considered economically disadvantaged 
and have been disproportionally affected by the negative impacts of lead services and lead 
plumbing. Therefore, these communities would be further disadvantaged if their water rates 
were increased to afford the cost for LSL replacement without additional federal grants and 
other funding resources. 
 
We appreciate your attention to these important matters and the opportunity to provide our input. As 
a collection of water suppliers and professionals dedicated to the well-being of our community, we 
strongly encourage regulations to strike a balance between protecting public health and considering 
the practical challenges faced by water suppliers. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. We look forward to continued collaboration and the 
opportunity to contribute to the development of effective and scientifically lead and copper rule 
regulations. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Daniel J. Hamlin, PE 
New York State American Water Works Association

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0950 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0861 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
EPA Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
February 2, 2024 
Page 1 of 6 
General Office File Reference: 
GP
 
 
February 2, 2024 
 
 
Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal:  https://www.regulations.gov/ 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water  
Docket Center, Docket, Mail Code 28221T, 1200 
Pennsylvania Avenue NW,  
Washington, DC 20460. 
 
 
Re:  EPA Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
 
Dear Sir or Madam: 
 
The following comments are submitted in the above-referenced matter on behalf of the 373,000 members of the 
United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipe Fitting Industry of the United States 
and Canada, AFL-CIO (United Association or UA).  At the outset, we would like to express our appreciation for the 
opportunity to share our views in this proceeding.  
 
I. 
POLICY CONTEXT AND OVERVIEW 
 
Given the dramatic rise in water quality threats in both our national water infrastructure, as well as indoor premise 
piping systems, the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed Lead and Copper Rule (Rule) is a matter 
of critical importance to public health and safety and we applaud the EPA’s leadership and initiative in developing 
this Rule.  
 
As the leading trade union in the plumbing and mechanical contracting industries—safe water quality has been 
one of the main reasons our union was founded over 135 years ago.  Moreover, the issues this Rule impacts 
directly affect the day-to-day work of our members and because water quality remains one of our foremost 
priorities, we have conducted extensive research in this policy area in recent years, especially on new and 
emerging safety threats, including lead contamination.  
 
From a 30,000 ft. view, we highly commend the following key revisions the Rule proposes:  
 
(a) Reducing the action level from 15 parts per billion (ppb) to 10 ppb; 
 
(b) Requiring water suppliers/utilities to update their inventories of lead pipelines; and  
 
(c) Improving sampling requirements for drinking water based on best practice procedures developed in the 
industry.  

EPA Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
February 2, 2024 
Page 2 of 6 
In terms of more specific points that we believe should be addressed, including provisions of the Rule that should 
be strengthened or improved, we have provided more detailed comments below.   In this regard, the points we 
raise, which we submit are vital to the Rule’s success, relate to the following issues:  
 
1. Ensuring Complete Replacement of Lead Service Lines;  
 
2. Making Lead-Free Schools a National Priority; 
 
3. Promoting Interim Treatment Solutions Pending Full Remediation; and  
 
4. Requiring Good Skill Standards on EPA-Assisted Projects to Ensure Effective Quality Control AND Positive 
Community Impact  
 
II. ENSURE COMPLETE REPLACEMENT OF LEAD SERVICE LINES 
 
In recent years it has been discovered that one of the greatest sources of lead contamination in drinking water 
comes from the lead service lines (LSLs), which are the pipelines that connect water mains in water supply systems 
to homes and buildings.  Because there is no safe level of lead in drinking water, addressing the threat from LSLs 
should be a top priority.  President Biden and Vice President Harris share this concern and have vowed to ensure 
that their administration will take action to ensure that every lead service line in the nation is replaced within the 
next decade.   
 
Fortunately, Congress and President Biden have taken major steps to make this commitment a reality.  The 2021 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (BIA) authorized $50 billion in EPA funding to strengthen the 
nation’s drinking water and wastewater systems, $15 billion of which has been allocated to the LSL Replacement 
Program.1   
 
We appreciate that while quite substantial, this funding may not be sufficient to fund all the work needed to 
replace all LSLs across the country.  Therefore, we encourage the EPA to continue to promote its multi-faceted 
strategy to complete this mission, including its efforts to encourage states and municipalities to raise additional 
funding for these projects.2   
 
It would also be helpful for the EPA to track, identify, and disseminate best practices information on state and 
local funding options, including the use of new fees, special assessments, and other funding streams to meet these 
crucial funding needs.  We also strongly support the EPA's efforts to prioritize disadvantaged communities when 
awarding grants for LSL Replacement Programs as populations in these areas often lack resources to address this 
urgent public health threat.   Likewise, it should highlight state or local laws and policies that help overcome access 
issues regarding private property necessary for these programs.  As EPA knows, Newark, New Jersey enacted an 
ordinance that effectively addresses such issues and provides other key benefits.  
 
 
 
 
1 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, Pub. L. No. 117-58, 135 Stat. 429 (2021). 
 
2 EPA, Strategies to Achieve Full Lead Service Line Replacement, October 2019 EPA 810-R-19-00, pp. 25-27;  see also pp. 29-
30, strategies_to_achieve_full_lead_service_line_replacement_10_09_19.pdf (epa.gov) (last visited Jan. 24, 2024).    

EPA Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
February 2, 2024 
Page 3 of 6 
This EPA initiative should also continue to be promoted, along with assistance from state and municipal 
government, as an ongoing commitment under the administration’s Environmental Justice policy.  As discussed 
below, when these efforts are combined with the appropriate craft labor contracting policies, investments in LSL 
replacement programs could provide highly valuable training and employment opportunities for affected 
communities.  
 
However, one important aspect of the Rule that we believe requires substantial revision is the provision that 
permits certain large municipalities to extend their LSL Replacement Programs well beyond the standard 10-year 
requirement, in some cases decades beyond this normal limit.  This approach presents far too great a risk to public 
safety and severely undercuts the fundamental goal of the Rule.  In the alternative, we recommend that this 
provision be revised to instead permit such jurisdiction to submit an extension request to EPA where legitimate 
grounds exist for a reasonable amount of additional time to complete the LSL Replacement Program.    
 
III. MAKE LEAD-FREE SCHOOLS A NATIONAL PRIORITY 
 
The EPA is well versed in the fact that children face the greatest risk from lead exposure, underscoring the need 
for making lead-free schools another key priority.  Lead is extremely toxic, especially for young children as even 
low levels of exposure can result in lower IQs, learning disabilities, and impaired hearing of children.  Further, lead 
poisoning in children creates long-term health effects and irreversible learning disabilities.  
 
It is, therefore, extremely disturbing that—even though it has been almost ten years since the water crisis was 
discovered in Flint, MI—and yet we are still seeing one new research report after another highlighting persistent, 
dangerous lead levels in America’s schools.3  This is a sad reality for one of the most prosperous nations on earth.  
For these reasons, the new rule should ensure improved water quality monitoring and testing in schools and 
daycare centers, mandate adequate prevention and remediation efforts, and impose stricter action levels for 
these facilities per the recommendations of the American Academy of Pediatrics.4    
 
We recognize that the Administration and the EPA are making determined efforts to address these challenges.  
Securing substantial funding under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to address the threats in schools particularly 
was a major victory that should be applauded.5  We also strongly support the agency’s 3Ts Toolkit:  Training, 
Testing and Taking Action for Reducing Lead and recommend that this initiative should be substantially expanded 
and funded with additional resources to reach all school districts across the nation.  Economically disadvantaged 
communities that lack the resources to correct these unacceptable conditions should be made a top priority.6 
 
3 See e.g., Tolly Taylor, WBLA TV, I-Team exclusive: Data shows many school districts haven't fixed elevated levels of lead in 
water (May 11, 2023)(testing for school districts across Maryland showing continuously showing dangerous lead levels in 
water systems in violation of legal EPA standards  ), Exclusive: Schools still have elevated levels of lead in water (wbaltv.com) 
(last visited Nov. 8, 2023). 
 
4 Prevention of Childhood Lead Toxicity, American Academy of Pediatrics, Council on Environmental Health, Pediatrics, Vol. 
138,  (July 2016), Issue 1, Prevention of Childhood Lead Toxicity | Pediatrics | American Academy of Pediatrics (aap.org) (last 
visited Nov. 8, 2023). 
 
 
5 EPA, Biden-Harris Administration Announces $58 million to Reduce Lead in Schools and Childcare Facilities Through Investing 
in America Agenda (July 24 2023), Biden-Harris Administration Announces $58 million to Reduce Lead in Schools and Childcare 
Facilities Through Investing in America Agenda | US EPA (last visited Nov. 8, 2023).  
 
 
6 See, Lead Service Line Replacement Collaborative, Child Care Facilities and Schools (last visited Nov. 8, 2023) 
citing 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water | US EPA. 

EPA Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
February 2, 2024 
Page 4 of 6 
IV. PROMOTE INTERIM TREATMENT PENDING FULL REMEDIATION 
 
Insofar as full abatement of lead threats throughout the country, including all service lines and school systems, 
will take considerable time and extensive planning, we recommend that the new rule establish procedures to 
ensure that appropriate water filters are installed in taps used for cooking or drinking water.  These devices are 
relatively quick and inexpensive to install and offer vital interim assistance in preventing lead contamination. The 
EPA should also establish a preference under BIL grant programs for school districts committed to assisting these 
efforts.   
 
V. REQUIRING GOOD SKILL STANDARDS ON EPA-ASSISTED PROJECTS PROMOTE  
QUALITY CONTROL AND POSITIVE COMMUNITY IMPACT 
 
We also applaud the commitment of the Administration to ensure the use of high-road contractors and qualified 
trade persons to perform this work, while also creating family-sustaining jobs through new infrastructure 
programs, including those relating to our water systems.  This policy is well founded as it will help protect federal 
investments in these projects and promote successful project delivery, while also ensuring substantial community 
benefits in affected local communities.  
 
A.   Win-Win-Win Results from Quality Contracting Policies 
 
It should be stressed that these goals can be best accomplished by incorporating certain key contracting and labor 
policies into the EPA’s water quality grant programs.  As discussed below, this approach will yield multiple, 
substantial dividends.   
 
 First, the work in question under these programs will often involve highly skilled, complex work, which 
means it is essential to ensure that qualified contractors and craft persons are used for these projects.  
Conversely, the failure to do so effectively jeopardizes the whole mission.  Clearly, this is not an area 
where projects should be blindly awarded to the lowest bidder with little or no regard for qualifications.  
To do so will unquestionably lead to defective and substandard work—and ultimately unsafe water 
systems, which would obviously undermine the fundamental goal of this policy. 
 
 Second, the failure to ensure proper qualification standards will create very real risks that the crucial, 
limited investments being made by the EPA will be wasted.  As noted above, the nation is fiercely struggling 
to secure adequate funding for the vast amount of work that is needed for our water systems.  Thus, we 
need to make every effort to ensure the success of these projects, both for their own sake and to continue 
to maintain public support for these programs.  The reality is that even with massive funding assistance 
recently provided by Congress, additional funding is needed to fully rebuild infrastructure, make schools 
safe, and assure property owners of safe water quality.   
 
 Third, a vital, compelling fact is that when the right contracting and labor policy tools are used for these 
types of infrastructure programs—maximum community benefits are achieved because they also produce 
the most valuable training and employment opportunities available in the construction industry—in 
addition to protecting taxpayer investments and promoting successful project delivery.    
 
B.   Key Quality Contracting Tools Needed for the Work 
 
For these reasons, we submit the new rule should require that all contractors and subcontractors used to perform 
EPA-assisted construction work should be required to verify:  
 

EPA Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
February 2, 2024 
Page 5 of 6 
(a) Strict Compliance with applicable State & Local Licensing Laws; 
 
(b) Strict Compliance with Davis-Bacon Prevailing Wage Standards (PWSs); and  
 
(c) Participation in Apprenticeship Programs for all Crafts or Trades Used on Projects.   
 
State & Local Licensing Laws: EPA-assisted projects should mandate that contractors and subcontractors 
performing the work comply with any applicable licensing laws enacted by state or municipal government in the 
area where the project is being performed.  Such laws are crucial for ensuring that persons performing highly 
skilled, complex work in areas such as plumbing have the requisite specialty skills to perform the work safely and 
correctly.7   
 
Prevailing Wage Standards: PWSs have long been used by federal, state, and local governments for protecting 
wage rates of local communities and creating jobs for local residents. In addition, PWSs promote critically needed 
investments in apprenticeship training and attract higher-skilled workers who, in turn, deliver better quality 
projects.   
 
Moreover, comprehensive research proves that while PWLs generate considerable benefits—they do so without 
increasing total project costs.   Further, comprehensive research proves that while PWLs  generate considerable 
benefits—they do so without increasing total project costs.  This is because better-trained, higher-skilled workers 
achieve significantly higher productivity, which offsets any cost differential from the higher wages.8  
 
Apprenticeship Requirements: When properly designed to ensure that contractors and subcontractors have a 
mandatory obligation to participate in bona apprenticeship programs that maintain consistent graduation rates, 
these standards effectively ensure the craft labor deployed on the project will have requisite skill training.9  Such 
requirements are critically important, especially for complex work and work that impacts public safety.  In fact, in 
tight labor markets, as the construction industry is witnessing now, such protections are vital.  
 
Exemption for PLA Projects: A policy should also be established that allows the prevailing wage and 
apprenticeship requirements here, as well as their related reporting obligations, to be waived for any projects that 
 
7 We have extensive research on all the policy tools discussed in this section and would be glad to make such materials 
available to the EPA if needed.  For example, information on craft licensing includes a national report on plumbing licensing 
laws, as well as a recent national survey by professional plumbing inspectors, which attests to the value of plumbing licensing 
law in maintaining public safety by promoting compliance with essential plumbing codes.  
 
8 See e.g., Lina Stepick & Frank Manzo IV, The Impact of Oregon’s Prevailing Wage Rate Law: Effects on Costs, Training, and 
Economic Development, U. OF OR. & ILL. ECON. POL’Y INST.  (2021), uo-ilepi-oregon_prevailing_wage_report_final.pdf 
(wordpress.com); Malkie Wall et al, Lameck Onsarigo et al., The Effect of Prevailing Wages on Building Costs, Bid Competition, 
and Bidder Behavior: Evidence from Ohio School Construction, 30 CONSTRUCTION MGMT. & ECON. 1 (2020; (PDF) The effect of 
prevailing wages on building costs, bid competition, and bidder behaviour: evidence from Ohio school construction 
(researchgate.net); Frank Manzo IV & Kevin Duncan, An Examination of Minnesota’s Prevailing Wage Law Effects on Costs, 
Training, and Economic Development, MIDWEST ECON. POL’Y INST. & COLO. ST. U.-PUEBLO (2018), mepi-csu-examination-of-
minnesotas-prevailing-wage-law-final.pdf (wordpress.com). 
 
9 See e.g., A Review of the Literature on Registered Apprenticeships Evaluating Registered Apprenticeship Initiatives, Urban 
Institute, 5 (2023)(benefits of apprenticeship significantly exceed costs), A Review of the Literature on Registered 
Apprenticeships (dol.gov); U.S. DEP’T OF COMMERCE, ECON. & STATISTICS ADMIN. & CASE WESTERN RESERVE UNIV., THE BENEFITS AND 
COSTS OF APPRENTICESHIP: A BUSINESS PERSPECTIVE, 24-25 (2016), The Benefits and Costs of Apprenticeship: A Business Perspective 
(November 2016) (commerce.gov) (apprenticeship programs cost-effective due to higher productivity of trained workers, 
improved safety and project quality, more reliable project staffing).   
 

EPA Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
February 2, 2024 
Page 6 of 6 
are fully covered by Project Labor Agreements (PLAs).  Such a waiver makes perfect sense as it is well-recognized 
that PLAs effectively secure prevailing wage and apprenticeship benefits for covered construction projects, while 
also providing many other substantial benefits. including those relating to safety.10    
 
In evaluating these recommendations, the EPA should recognize that prevailing wage standards, apprenticeship 
requirements, and PLAs have all been fully embraced by the administration in multiple federal procurement and 
grant programs, including those of the Departments of Energy, Commerce, and Treasury—on programs directly 
impacting hundreds of billions of dollars.11  This is precisely because of their proven effectiveness in achieving the 
crucial benefits outlined above.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
 
The EPA’s Rule seeks to ensure that every American has a right to safe drinking water, which is exactly the right 
goal.  No one should have to worry that the simple act of taking a drink of water from their kitchen faucet or 
school fountain will create a serious risk to their health.  The EPA’s new Lead and Copper Rule is essential for 
addressing existing threats and ensuring America maintains safe water quality.  We hope the recommendations 
set forth above are helpful to these efforts.   
 
 
Respectfully, 
 
 
 
Mark McManus 
 
General President 
 
MM:ail 
 
10 While PLAs are open to all contractors, union or non-union, the typically require the project workers be hired through local 
building trades workers due to the high quality skill training and reliable project staffing capabilities they provide.  Further, 
while there is a common misperception that union labor costs more, a groundbreaking study from a leading construction 
research group proves the exact opposite: total costs on union projects are at least 4% lower.  Michael McFadden, Sai Santosh, 
and Ronit Shetty,  Independent Project Analysis, Quantifying the Value of Union Labor in Construction Projects (2022)(review 
of 1,500 projects over 20 year period, using 2,000 metrics to evaluate labor productivity, project cost and related factors), 
https://www.ipaglobal.com/news/article/investment-in-construction-union-labor-pays-off-for-us-capital-projects. 
 
11 We also have extensive research on these programs, which we will be glad to make available upon request if this 
information would be helpful to the EPA; this includes a listing of all recent federal quality contracting programs.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0794 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1901 Centre Ave | Suite 200 | Pittsburgh, PA 15219 
Office: (412) 391-6732 | www.pcrg.org 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,  
EPA Docket Center  
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket  
Mail Code 28221T  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE: Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
Dear EPA Officials, 
We are writing to provide both commendations and constructive critiques on the proposed 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) in response to the EPA's call for public input. As a 
cohort of environmental experts and advocates, we appreciate the significant strides the EPA 
has taken to address the pervasive issue of lead contamination in our drinking water, 
particularly acknowledging the urgency highlighted by the water crises in communities like 
Flint, MI and the water access issues highlighted during the Covid-19 Pandemic. 
Commendations: 
1. Timely Action: We commend the EPA for its swift response to the national call for 
urgent action to address lead exposure through the LCRI. The commitment to replacing 
lead service lines (LSLs) within 10 years is a monumental step toward achieving the goal 
set by President Biden to eliminate lead pipes across the country. 
2. Lowering Action Levels: The decision to lower the lead action level from 15 to 10 parts 
per billion (ppb) and the requirement for utilities to complete lead service line 
inventories by 2024 are crucial components in safeguarding public health. This 
demonstrates a commitment to aligning regulatory standards with the latest scientific 
understanding of lead's detrimental impact on health. 
3. Community Engagement: The acknowledgment of community voices and the role they 
played in exposing water crises is commendable. Public disclosure of water testing 
results, political pressure, and media strategies are powerful tools, and the EPA's 
recognition of their importance strengthens the democratic process in environmental 
decision-making. 
4. Proactive Outreach: We commend the EPA for its prioritization of schools and daycares, 
as the proposed LCRI requires community water systems to proactively reach out to all 

 
1901 Centre Ave | Suite 200 | Pittsburgh, PA 15219 
Office: (412) 391-6732 | www.pcrg.org 
public schools and daycares to offer testing within five years. Prioritization of these 
locations is crucial, as children are more vulnerable to impacts of lead contamination, 
and the existing testing of these locations is not consistent nationally. Additionally, we 
commend the proposed rule for requiring follow-up community education for schools 
which may have experienced lead exposure. 
5. Full-Service Line Replacement: The decision to ensure that lining or coating 
technologies do not count as full-service line replacement under the proposed LCRI is 
crucial to long term protection from lead exposure. This decision recognizes that these 
technologies do not permanently remove lead from the service lines and only delay 
necessary investments in full replacement. 
Constructive Critiques: 
1. Equity Implications: While the LCRI represents a significant step forward, there are 
concerns regarding equity implications. The proposed rule allows cities with more than 
100,000 lead service lines an extended timeline for replacement. This may 
disproportionately affect communities of color and low-income communities, exposing 
them to lead contamination for an extended period. The EPA should strive to ensure 
equal protection for all communities, regardless of their size. 
2. Financial Responsibility: The proposed rule falls short in requiring water systems to 
cover the full cost of lead pipe replacement. While the EPA encourages this, a more 
robust stance is necessary to ensure that the burden does not fall disproportionately on 
property owners, particularly in low-income communities. The success of lead pipe 
removal programs should not be contingent on residents' ability to pay. 
3. Partial Service Line Replacement: We are disappointed that the proposed rule does not 
include a ban on partial line replacement. We appreciate that the proposed LCRI would 
require community water services to offer private replacement. However, it is vital that 
the EPA outlines the notice procedures for such notices. We urge the EPA to ensure that 
private homeowners receive multiple advance notices and through various methods. 
Community water systems contain the necessary contact information of customers and 
have the software for sending out geographical alerts when services may be affected. In 
the event that someone does not receive adequate notice, the EPA should provide 
nationwide education and technical support to remediate the potential harm of not 
receiving the offer for line replacement.  

 
1901 Centre Ave | Suite 200 | Pittsburgh, PA 15219 
Office: (412) 391-6732 | www.pcrg.org 
4. Modeling After Michigan's Approach: The EPA should consider adopting Michigan's 
approach, requiring utilities to bear the entire cost of lead pipe replacement. This 
provision ensures a more equitable distribution of the financial burden and guarantees 
that those unable to afford the replacement, including renters, are not left behind. This 
approach aligns with the principles of environmental justice and ensures that access to 
safe drinking water remains affordable for all. 
In conclusion, we appreciate the EPA's efforts in addressing the lead crisis through the LCRI. 
However, we urge the agency to consider the aforementioned critiques during the finalization 
process to ensure that the rule reflects a commitment to environmental justice, public health, 
and the fundamental right to safe drinking water for all Americans. 
Thank you for considering these comments, and we look forward to seeing the EPA's continued 
commitment to improving the Lead and Copper Rule. 
Signed,
Ernie Hogan 
Executive Director 
Pittsburgh Community Reinvestment Group 
412-391-6732 x204 
 
Jo Anne Tippett 
President of the Green and Beautification Team 
Lincoln Lemington Community 
Consensus Group 
412-352-5177 
 
Brooke Christy 
Equal Justice Works Fellow, Sponsored by 
Fenwick & West LLP 
Fair Shake Environmental Legal Services 
267-817-5917 
 
Leslie Centola 
Advocacy Director 
UpstreamPgh 
828-775-3939 
 
Denele Hughson 
Executive Director 
Grow Pittsburgh 
412-362-4769 
 
Fawn Walker Montgomery 
CEO 
Take Action Advocacy Group (TAAG) 
412-440-8268 
 
Heather Hulton VanTassel 
Executive Director 
Three Rivers Waterkeeper 
412-589-9411 
 
Ilyssa Manspeizer 
Executive Director 
Landforce Pgh 
412-727-6936

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2267 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Shadi Houshyar <shadi.houshyar@cssp.org>  
Sent: Tuesday, February 6, 2024 4:50 PM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Subject: Docket (EPA‐HQ‐OW‐2022‐0801): National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and 
Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg: 
 
The Center for the Study of Social Policy (CSSP) is pleased to provide comments on revisions to the 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) for lead and copper under the authority of the 
Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA). We appreciate your consideration of our comments. Please let me 
know if you have any questions. 
 
Sincerely, 
Shadi Houshyar 
 
Shadi Houshyar, PhD 
Pronouns: She, Her, Hers 
Senior Associate 
 
Center for the Study of Social Policy 
1575 Eye Street, NW, Suite 500 
Washington, D.C. 20005 
 
Main: 202.371.1565 
Direct: 202.866.6471 
Cell: 202.674.2453 
 
Email: shadi.houshyar@cssp.org 
 
Visit us at www.CSSP.org 
 
 
 
Information in this electronic email message and any associated files or attachments may contain information that is (a) advisory, 
consultative or deliberative material and, therefore, is CONFIDENTIAL, PRIVILEGED, PROPRIETARY, OR OTHERWISE 
MAY BE PROTECTED FROM DISCLOSURE; and (b) for the sole use of the intended recipient(s).  If you are not the intended 
recipient, or the person responsible for delivering this to the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that reading, using, 
copying, or distributing all or any part of this message is strictly prohibited.  If you have received this electronic mail message in 
error, please contact us immediately by replying to this message and taking the steps necessary to delete the message completely 
from your computer system. 
 
 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1382 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
RE: Ensuring Safe Drinking Water at School - Proposed Lead and Copper Rule
Improvements (Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801)
EPA Administrator Michael Regan,
Thank you for proposing a 10-year deadline for water utilities to replace lead service lines.
Replacing these toxic pipes is a crucial step for protecting the public’s drinking water generally.
However, I also urge you to do more to stop lead from contaminating our kids’ water at school.
For most schools, lead in water comes from plumbing, fountains or faucets inside the school
building.
That’s why the EPA’s Lead & Copper Rule Improvements should require federally regulated
schools to replace fountains with water stations and put filters on all taps used for cooking or
drinking. The EPA should also limit lead in schools’ water to 1 part per billion, as recommended
by the American Academy of Pediatrics. And lastly, the EPA should work with state and local
officials to encourage all other schools to adopt such measures.
You have a historic opportunity to ensure safer drinking water for America. Please go the extra
mile to get the lead out.
Sincerely,

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2274 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 20,  2024 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
The Local Government Advisory Committee (LGAC) appreciates the 
meaningful opportunity to provide input on the proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements. This regulatory action is a once in a lifetime 
opportunity to finally get the lead out of water across the country. As 
elected and appointed officials for local and state governments, we are 
dedicated to protecting the safety, health, and well-being of our 
communities. 
 
Based on the proposed rulemaking, the LGAC has developed the 
following recommendations, with input from its Small Communities 
Advisory Subcommittee. We recommend that EPA: 
 
• Allow flexibility for local governments to request timeline extensions 
based on their communities unique needs, opportunities, and 
challenges, and provide assistance to help them meet the law’s 
requirements.  
 
• Expand lead service line inventory reporting to include interior lead 
pipe connectors that may attach service lines to homes or meters.  
• Provide communities with technical assistance to develop the policy 
and legal framework to successfully deploy a lead service line 
replacement program that includes accessing private property. 
 
• Allow flexibility in lead service line replacement quotas from one year 
to the next if a replacement plan is in place and work is progressing. 
 
• Work to secure inventory and stabilize the cost of needed supplies 
whenever possible, with some members of LGAC suggesting 
consideration of waiving the Buy America requirement if absolutely 
necessary to help alleviate this challenge. 
 
• Provide dedicated funding and technical assistance to support 
meaningful public outreach and engagement and allow flexibility in the 
timeline to complete this. 
 
• Empower local communities, rather than states, to establish the 
timelines, but allow states to incentivize systems that have capacity to meet a shorter timeline.  
 
• 
Include specific language in the LCRI to enumerate states with the power to develop their own rules for 
multiple exceedances.   
 
• 
Not require water systems to provide filters to residents, and discontinue notice and filter requirements 
early in certain circumstances, such as when lead service line replacement is completed or when 
implementation of optimized corrosion control has ocurred.  
 
 
Hon. Leirion Gaylor Baird, Chair  
Lincoln, NE 
Hon. Lucy Vinis, Vice-Chair Eugene, OR 
Hon. Ras Baraka Newark, NJ 
Hon. Sharon Broome Baton Rouge, LA 
Mr. Gary Brown Detroit, MI 
Hon. Darcy Burke Elsinore Valley, CA 
Hon. Tricia Canonico Fort Collins, CO 
Hon. Wilmot Collins Helena, MT 
Hon. Becky Corran Las Cruces, NM 
Hon. Jim Donchess Nashua, NH 
Hon. Allison Eckel Burlington County, NJ 
Ms. Miki Esposito Los Angeles County, CA 
Hon. Dawn Euer Newport, RI 
Ms. Chandra Farley Atlanta, GA 
Ms. Jessyn Farrell Seattle, WA 
Ms. Sarah Fox State of Washington 
Hon. Jacob Frey Minneapolis, MN 
Hon. Evan Glass Montgomery County, MD 
Hon. Evan Hansen Morgantown, WV  
Hon. Deana Holiday Ingraham East Point, GA 
Hon. Heather Kimball Hawai’i County, HI 
Hon. Ruthzee Louijeune Boston, MA 
Hon. Ann Mallek Albemarle County, VA 
Hon. Christian Menefee Harris County, TX 
Hon. Douglas Nicholls Yuma, AZ 
Hon. Ron Nirenberg San Antonio, TX 
Hon. David Painter Clermont County, OH 
Hon. Shawyn Patterson-Howard Mount 
Vernon, NY 
Hon. Mary Lou Pauly Issaquah, WA 
Hon. Evan Pratt Washtenaw County, MI 
Mr. Whitford Remer Tampa, FL 
Hon. Satya Rhodes-Conway Madison, WI 
Hon. Katie Rosenberg Wausau, WI 
Hon. Danene Sorace Lancaster, PA 
Hon. Ashley Stolzmann Boulder County, CO 
Ms. La’Meshia Whittington State of North 
Carolina 
Mr. Jeff Witte State of New Mexico 
 
Paige Lieberman, Designated Federal Officer, 
EPA 

• 
In agreement with EPA’s proposal, allow states to approve corrosion control treatment (CCT) re-
optimization changes for systems based on previously conducted CCT studies. Furthermore, the LGAC 
agrees with EPA that excessively stagnant samples should be withheld from being sent to laboratories. 
 
• 
Not change the definition of small systems, given the ripple effect it would have (noted below), and pair 
funding and one-on-one technical assistance with any new or changed requirements for small systems.  
More details about these recommendations are included below. The LGAC believes these steps will be critical 
in alleviating potential burdens on cities and small communities as they move forward with addressing 
harmful lead contamination in drinking water. We look forward to continuing discussions on this important 
topic. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Mayor Leirion Gaylor Baird  
 
 
 
 
LGAC Chair 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LGAC Recommendations – Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
10-Year Replacement Timelines 
LGAC previously recommended that EPA consider all reasonable requests for extending timelines related to 
replacing lead service lines. In this rulemaking, EPA estimates that 96% to 99% of water systems can replace all 
service lines within 10 years, with only three or four systems needing more time. However, local governments are 
continuously confronted with unknowns and challenges relative to project delivery, including but not limited to 
costs, financing, and affordability concerns, staff capacity and workforce shortages, replacement program scope 
and sequencing, geography and climate considerations, length of construction season, access to private property, 
timely procurement and supply chain delays, and the need for robust and meaningful community engagement. 
The LGAC reiterates its prior recommendation that EPA allow flexibility in the rule for local governments to 
make reasonable requests for extending the timeline to replace lead lines in their communities based upon their 
unique needs, opportunities, and challenges. As part of the request, EPA should be responsive and helpful to 
these communities by standing up programs to assist communities that are struggling to replace lead lines, 
including inventory development, navigating funding authorities and applications, developing community 
engagement plans, and procuring contractors for replacement work, to name a few. 
 
Replacement Program Scope and Access to Private Property 
EPA required many municipal water systems to identify all lead service lines in their communities, so they know 
the scope of the problem they seek to solve. However, private residences and commercial properties may have 
interior lead pipe connectors that attach the service line to the home or meter that have not been identified. The 
scope of replacing these interior lines and connectors, as well as the myriad of challenges and potential delays in 
doing so is still unknown. The rule states that there is no known safe level of lead exposure. The LGAC 
recommends expanding the inventory reporting to include connectors. The LGAC emphasizes that all lead must 
be removed when encountered, regardless of length of pipe. The definition of connector is sufficient, as long as it 
is clear anything over 2 feet is considered a service line.  
 
Communities need support with successfully gaining access to private property and assuming liability for this work. 
First, in areas with rental property there is the burden of gaining approval from both the property owner and the 
resident. This requires significant staff outreach and trust building (more below). Second, is the challenge of 
funding the repair, especially if a landscaped yard must be torn up and repaired. Property owners need to be 
assured that their homes will be restored to as good if not better than they started. Depending on the home, 
restorations can cost as much as the service line replacement. There are also public relations concerns about 
leaving a lawn or sidewalk exposed during winter months because it cannot be restored until warmer weather 
arrives.    
 
Communities may also need technical assistance to develop the policy and legal framework to successfully 
deploy a lead service line replacement program that includes replacing connectors on private property. From 
model ordinances to standard legal provisions, to typical access agreements, many communities will need a suite 
of governing documents and best practices that are “tried and true” and have worked in other places. For 
example, Detroit Water and Sewerage Department is trying to pass local legislation to give the City control of the 
private side of the line for one year, so that they can get access to the line, replace it, and offer a one-year 
warranty before returning it to the property owner. Detroit is also working with the state to enact a law allowing 
control of private side for purposes of replacing lead lines. However, this is arguably one extreme response, and 
there are concerns these types of laws constitute an unconstitutional taking of property. Many other communities 
are taking the approach of creating ordinances that give property owners the opportunity to be part of a free lead 
service line replacement program. If property owners don’t accept, they would be required to replace the line at 
their own cost by a certain date or lose water service. Regardless of the approach, these types of action will 
require significant time to develop and implement.  

 
 
Geography and Climate 
Geography and climate are additional factors in determining timeline. In a place like Madison or Lincoln, you must 
dig significantly deeper than a place like Dallas to reach the frost line. There are also different windows of 
opportunity to dig and repair sidewalk and landscaping depending on climate. The city of Madison underwent a full 
lead service lane replacement project in 2000, which serves as a relevant case study. The city estimated as many as 
11,000 lines existed and were required through a consent decree to replace both the public side and the private 
side of the lines within ten years. City officials were optimistic that they would meet the deadline, and even 
accomplished most of the work within six years, once the needed processes and contracts were in place. However, 
they chose to stretch the last ten percent of the work over the remaining four years because there were future 
public works projects planned in that location, and waiting until those projects began meant saving significant 
money and decreasing disruption to residents’ daily lives. While the project was overall a success, it’s worth noting 
that part of the success is because it was a major municipal priority, with all hands-on deck. In a city of 300,000 
people, with 70,000 service connections, an average of three to five replacements were completed each day, and 
that was at maximum capacity. The LGAC recommends that EPA allow – or encourage states to allow – flexibility 
in quotas from one year to the next if there is a plan in place and work is progressing. 
 
Supply Chain and Labor 
Completing this work on a national scale will test the market. With any type of major capital improvement project, 
the supply chain and labor are drivers of timeline and cost. If the whole country is simultaneously buying pipe, 
soliciting a workforce, and seeking lab results, there will be shortages that delay timelines and introduce price 
volatility. While the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) provides a significant amount of funding, it will not be 
enough. Water rates will increase to cover the cost of lead line replacement. Having the flexibility to manage the 
costs over time will be helpful to stabilizing rates and affordability, especially for overburdened communities. 
Recent inflation has made most U.S. household reevaluate their expenditures. Combine that with other proposed 
regulations like PFAS drinking water limits, and utility rates could quickly become untenable for many households 
and businesses. The LGAC recommends that the U.S. government work to secure inventory and stabilize the cost 
of needed supplies whenever possible. Some members of LGAC suggested that waiving the Buy America 
requirement could be considered, only if absolutely necessary, to help alleviate this challenge. 
 
Contractors will also be in limited supply compared to demand. In Ann Arbor, the water utility has never received 
more than two bids in response to an RFP, and at times there have been no responses. In Detroit, long term 
contracts were used to incentivize contractors to relocate staff and equipment to the area for guaranteed funding 
and stable work. The influx of federal infrastructure funding has allowed skilled contractors to pick their projects, 
and working in residential neighborhoods is particularly challenging. With an estimated six to nine months needed 
for each bid cycle, multiple years of dependable funding is helpful to attract contractors looking to invest in a 
community.  
 
Community Engagement 
A critical part of this work is community engagement and risk communication. Most systems lack the bandwidth to 
do the type of public outreach and engagement that is required. The effort will necessitate intentional and 
meaningful communication that will resonate with residents and businesses. An approach may include townhalls, 
open houses, or a resource hub to share information about the program, the project schedule, the impacts to the 
community, and the cooperation needed by each resident or business. A variety of communication channels must 
be established through websites, social and traditional media, bill inserts, neighborhood and community 
publications, and door-to-door campaigns, all of which will require appropriate translation services, delivered in a 
culturally competent manner. EPA needs to provide dedicated funding and technical assistance to support this 
level of communication and allow communities to have a flexible timeline for meaningful public outreach.  

 
For example, in Detroit, replacement is occurring on a block-by-block basis. As one block comes to the top of the 
queue, the utility is hydro excavating to determine whether lead pipes are serving homes. Without proactive 
communication before, during, and after this lead determination, access to the home, digging up yards, and 
eliminating problem pipes would be impossible. Detroit states it costs $43 per house for staffing, printing 
literature, hosting meetings and door-to-door outreach for its lead line replacement community outreach 
program. To attain its goal of 10,000 line replacements per year, Detroit must set aside almost half a million dollars 
for outreach. Detroit credits its robust outreach program for the 100 percent cooperation in accessing the private 
service line.      
 
While specific projects are communicated, communities will need time and support with the overall message that 
municipal drinking water is still safe to consume. Robust and meaningful communication is the foundation in which 
to build and maintain public trust. Without it, credibility will be lost. This can extend beyond municipal boundaries 
as well. For example, the City of Newark owns the reservoir supplying its residents and many surrounding 
communities. When they replaced their lines in 2020, the safety of the water was questioned, even though the 
reservoir was not contaminated with lead. Several communities ended contracts with the City and have not 
returned, resulting in significant lost revenue.  
 
Deadlines and State Oversight 
EPA has asked whether states should be required – as a condition of primacy – to set initial shortened deadlines 
where systems seemingly have the capacity. The overall recommendation is to allow communities to establish 
their own timelines. With that said, LGAC members believed states could establish incentives for systems that 
do have capacity to meet a shorter timeline.  
 
Every local official is managing competing priorities and limited capacity. The LGAC recommends that EPA not give 
states any role that allows them to prioritize those resources. Looking at the cities of Newark and Yuma illustrate 
this need for community flexibility. When Newark replaced their lead service lines in 2020, during the height of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, ambition was a big motivator. The public supported the City’s streamlined work and their 
focus on protecting environmental justice communities, and that in turn motivated city departments to work 
harder. However, that was a collective decision made by the community. In Yuma, Arizona, water is a daily topic of 
discussion. The health of the water is extremely important to the community, but so is the availability of water. 
Right now, the community has prioritized the former via a system expansion. At the end of the day, there is a limit 
to capacity and financing, and Yuma would be unable to secure a bond for an additional water project if required 
under the LCRI.  
 
Lancaster, Pennsylvania, offers another perspective. The community and its leaders are committed to eliminating 
lead, but their research shows that only one percent of service lines are lead. The number one way that children 
are exposed to lead in Lancaster is through paint. In the last year, their health bureau received 91 cases of children 
with elevated blood lead levels (EBLL), 80 percent of which came from rental properties. The city is funding an 
aggressive campaign to eliminate the harmful contaminant and have been doing corrosion control for decades to 
mitigate any threat in drinking water. With more than 75 percent of the population considered an Environmental 
Justice community, affording another aggressive campaign under the LCRI will be a major challenge, and will not 
yield significant improvement in public health. 
 
Generally, systems can remove lines at a faster pace when they are clustered in a neighborhood, but the work 
slows down when lines are scattered across the city. Thus, systems do not want the EPA/States to have the option 
of mandating shorter schedules if they see a system removing lines at a rapid pace. The ten-year timeline should 
apply regardless of the pace in the first few years. 
 

Multiple Exceedances 
In response to EPA’s questions about filters and repeated exceedances, the LGAC is hesitant to support filters. 
They note that once communities have provided them, they will become a permanent responsibility, resulting in 
additional cost to the community, and putting the onus on residents to properly use and replace something on a 
set schedule. The better approach to growing public trust in water safety is to eliminate lead lines. Having filters 
available upon request is sufficient, but mandating delivery of filters to every home after an exceedance is 
administratively burdensome and costly, and they may not be used effectively anyway.   
 
In response to the question of whether states should be allowed to develop their own rule for multiple 
exceedances, states already have the right to enact laws that enhance federal regulations. Nonetheless, LGAC 
recommends the LCRI specifically say that states may develop their own rule for multiple exceedances.   
 
In response to EPA’s question about discontinuing notice and filter requirements early in certain circumstances 
(e.g. if the system implements optimized or re-optimized corrosion control, completes the LSLR, or has two 
subsequent periods below the actionable level), the LGAC unequivocally says yes. Especially if a line is replaced, 
every requirement regarding lead should end. 
 
Corrosion Control Treatment and Samples 
Regarding corrosion control treatments, LGAC members highlight the idea of “one water,” and that anything 
added for drinking water safety must be taken out in the wastewater treatment part of the cycle. However, the 
LGAC agrees with EPA about corrosion control being a reasonable and cost-effective treatment protocol. It will 
be an important tool long into the future, especially given the prevalence of lead in internal fixtures and faucets. 
The ultimate goal of water utilities is to protect public health and maintain their trust; if a lead action level is going 
to be hit, utilities need to be able to take action with additional corrosion control treatment. LGAC supports EPA’s 
proposal that states may approve a CCT re-optimization treatment change for a system based on a previously 
conducted CCT study. The previous study authorized a range of orthophosphate that may be added to the water 
supply; thus, in the event of an exceedance, there may be room within the range of the water utility’s current 
authorized treatment protocol to increase the orthophosphate level.    
The LGAC agrees with EPA that excessively stagnant samples should be withheld from being sent to the 
laboratory. Detroit considers any sample as excessively stagnant if the water has been stagnant for over one 
week. Water utilities should strive to sample at addresses with regular consumption, which is representative of 
households having potential exposure to lead daily. 
 
Small Communities 
The LGAC’s Small Communities Advisory Subcommittee (SCAS), which includes elected and appointed officials, 
mostly from communities of 10,000 residents or less, provided specific input on the rulemaking. 
Regarding the proposed lowering of the definition of small systems from 10,000 to 3,300 residents, they raised 
concerns. First, communities of this size have limited revenue, with little differentiation in resources between the 
two proposed thresholds. If flexibilities were no longer waived for communities between 3,300 and 10,000 
residents, there would need to be a corresponding funding mechanism to support compliance. There would also 
need to be little to no match requirement for planning and implementation, from municipalities no longer 
considered “small” under the new regulation. 
 
Beyond funding, technical assistance is an important factor for small communities. SCAS members highlighted that 
the expertise and worker retention of small water system operators has declined over the last ten years. The 
technical assistance offered is often via a website recording or dependent on completing a complex application. If 

the goal is to support compliance, implementation must involve a person coming into a facility, or at the least, 
connecting via one-on-one videoconferencing.  
 
A bigger concern with changing the threshold in the definition is the series of known and unknown impacts it 
would have on state regulations and guidelines. States often use EPA’s definition of small systems to determine 
different funding resources and requirements. Changing this for one specific rule could set a dangerous precedent, 
with the potential for a cascading, harmful fiscal impact. Furthermore, the change could impact regionalization 
efforts, where rural communities are working to combine operations to share resources and lower cost. The SCAS 
believes that EPA should incentivize this trend wherever possible. However, in some states there are population 
thresholds for this action, which are based on federal water regulations. SCAS members from western 
Massachusetts noted that it’s already difficult to connect communities with under 5,000 people to regionalization 
efforts, and this proposed change would further exacerbate the challenges associated with these efforts. 
 
In response to the question of who authors relevant guidance under the LCRI, the SCAS appreciates EPA’s 
evidence-based approach and overall supports EPA taking on this responsibility. However, if this responsibility is 
delegated to states, they recommend that EPA provide templates and deadlines for completion. Members also 
request that, wherever possible, communities be allowed to access funding and technical assistance directly from 
EPA – rather than an intermediary government or organization – as this makes a notable difference in efficiency 
and efficacy for small communities.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0788 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 1st, 2024
Harris Family Health
432 N Saginaw St, Suite 401A
Flint, MI 48502
Re: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and
Copper: Improvements
To Whom It May Concern,
My name is Dr Aisha Harris, MD and I am a family medicine physician at Harris Family Health in
Flint, Michigan who provides primary care for diverse and vulnerable populations. Additionally, I
participate in health outreach that helps address health and environmental concerns and
inequities in the Flint and Genesee County community. Lead exposure during the Flint Water
Crisis has negatively impacted our community so I believe in the importance of strong lead
regulations that focus on prevention and mitigation via equitable approaches and policies.
I would like to provide feedback on the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead
and Copper: Improvements, Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801. In November 2023, the US
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) released improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule
(LCR) that provide a critical step to reduce lead in drinking water over the next ten years. I have
recommendations that would strengthen these protections to prevent further exposure to lead in
environmental justice communities.
Weak lead exposure regulations fail to protect the most vulnerable populations in our
community. In Flint, the vulnerable populations include the Black and Brown community, low
income households, youth and seniors. Flint is home to approximately 80,000 residents and the
median household income is $35,000. There is a large Black and Brown community in Flint, with
56% identifying as African American. Because of sensitive periods of neurodevelopment, it is
imperative that kids are protected from the irreversible harms of lead exposure. Here in Flint,
24% of the population is under 18 years and 6.7% of the population is under 5 years. Lead
exposure is also particularly harmful for seniors age 65 and up, who make up 13% of the
population in Flint. (Census, 2023)
The EPA’s proposal for lead service line replacement is valid but I encourage more robust
systems for tracking and stringent regulation of the process across the country. There should be
consequences for water systems that do not replace the lead service lines within 10 years.
Additionally, it is recommended that lead service line replacement be an opt out procedure in
order to be inclusive and equitable in communities where communication is challenging and
households residents are not the homeowner. The replacement of lead service lines should be
completed and implemented in the most efficient, effective, and equitable way to eliminate

exposure to lead and protect public health. There should also be financial prioritization of lead
service line replacement in environmental justice communities.
The EPA’s proposal for reducing complexity and improving public health protection was fair, but I
encourage this rule to go even further to protect public health. Given that there is no safe level
of lead in drinking water, I demand that the federal action level be lowered from 15 ppb, not only
to 10 ppb as proposed here, but to 1 ppb to provide the strongest protection possible. I have
seen the acute and chronic medical problems that arise from lead exposure in adults and
children and believe there is no safe level of lead in drinking water.
Transparency and communication are vital to maintain and build public trust which is essential
for safeguarding public health and eliminating health disparities, especially in environmental
justice communities. The EPA should have a public notification process that has diverse
communication options including digital (website, social media, radio) and in person (flyers,
church announcements, etc) to effectively educate and inform communities. Equitable
communication strategies would assist residents in lead exposure notification and alert them to
when water-related work is occurring in a timely manner. As a primary care doctor, I see the
consequences of poor communication and understanding when it comes to mitigation and
prevention and know the importance of improving literacy and comprehension to decrease
combat public health issues.
Finally, the proposal includes a cost-benefit analysis for making improvements to the Lead and
Copper rule. As a resident of Flint and primary care doctor in Flint, I can assure you that there is
no dollar amount that could compare to the cost of human life or the irreversible harm caused by
lead exposure. In environmental justice communities all across the country, there are people
who depend on the government to put forward rules that truly protect our health and well-being
no matter the cost.
In closing I appreciate you taking the time to read our comments. Please consider incorporating
stricter regulations and stronger protections for drinking water to protect the health of the most
vulnerable among us.
Sincerely,
Dr Aisha Harris, MD
Family Medicine Physician
Harris Family Health
REFERENCE
2023 Census - https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/flintcitymichigan/PST045223

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1099 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0743 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Liggett, Jennifer <Jennifer.Liggett@jacobs.com>  
Sent: Wednesday, December 6, 2023 2:47 PM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Subject: Questions on LCRR and LCRI Timelines  
 
 
Hi – The overall timing between the LCRR and LCRI requirements is unclear. Here are a few questions for 
clarification: 
 
Should a water system follow LCR or LCRR requirements when completing tap compliance 
sampling between 2025‐2027? Also, when communicating the health effects of lead to the 
public is it appropriate to use the language in LCRR between 2025‐2027? 
 
Is the only required item the initial inventory by October 16, 2024? 
 
Can water systems complete school and childcare facility sampling starting October 17, 2024 or 
is the requirement to start after the LCRI compliance deadline? 
 
Thanks, 
Jennifer 
 
Jennifer Liggett (she/her)| Jacobs | Global Principal for Drinking Water Quality  
M:+01.513.703.0182 | jennifer.liggett@jacobs.com 
6312 South Fiddler’s Green Circle Suite 300 North | Greenwood Village, CO 80111 | USA 
Browse our jobs! 
Out of office: December 25 – January 5 
 
 
 
 
NOTICE - This communication may contain confidential and privileged information that is for the sole use of the intended 
recipient. Any viewing, copying or distribution of, or reliance on this message by unintended recipients is strictly 
prohibited. If you have received this message in error, please notify us immediately by replying to the message and 
deleting it from your computer. 
 
 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0751 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
September 18, 2023
To:
Michael Regan, Administrator
Environmental Protection Agency
Regan.Michael@epa.gov
Jennifer McClain, Director
EPA Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water
mclain.jennifer@epa.gov
“The scientific community and many political leaders now recognize that lead poisoning
has been among the most important epidemics affecting children in the United States in
the last century” (Markowitz and Rosner, 2013: 16).
It is widely acknowledged in the peer-reviewed literature, by global public-health professionals,
and by government bodies that there is no safe level of lead exposure, and no safe level of lead
in children’s blood.
The best science available has consistently pointed to the harm of low level exposures of lead,
as measured in blood, to neurological development and health. For this reason, federal
standards for blood lead levels of concern and lead consumption of concern are being continuously
lowered. In 2021 CDC lowered the Blood Lead Reference Value from 5 µg/dL to 3.5 µg/dL. In
turn, in 2022 FDA lowered the Interim Reference Level for lead consumption from 3 µg/day to
2.2 µg/day for children and from 12.5 µg/day to 8.8 µg/day for females of childbearing age.

While some actions have been taken to prevent childhood lead poisoning, the delayed
regulatory response to this epidemic of childhood lead poisoning is very much an issue of
structural racism, the legacy of redlining Black communities, and racial segregation, as the
lead-paint, tetraethyl lead, and lead plumbing manufactures created messaging that shifted
responsibility away from industry and onto the parents of poor families in urban areas. Children
deserve every opportunity to become successful in life, regardless of race or family income.
Their ability to reach their potential should not be hindered by environmental toxins in their
homes, communities, schools, and drinking water.
Lead poisoning is cumulative and results in lifelong and intergenerational health, behavior,
learning, and economic impacts. Because the half-life of lead in blood is a mere 1 to 2 months,
the timing window of detecting an exposure in blood is narrow. Because lead is also stored in
bone and released back into blood during pregnancy, the children of individuals who are (or
were previously) exposed before becoming pregnant or during pregnancy can be poisoned in
utero or from drinking breast milk. It is for this reason that the FDA separately considers its
Interim Reference Limits for “females of childbearing age”.
Infants who are served infant formula may consume a disproportionately greater amount of tap
water than other children or adults compared to their body weight. In the preamble to the Lead
and Copper Rule (Federal Register - Volume 56, Issues 110-115 - Page 26470), EPA maintains:
"EPA estimated in the proposal that the typical drinking water contribution to total lead
exposure for an average 2-year-old child is about 20 percent (EPA, 1988c). The
proportion of exposure due to lead, however, will vary with different levels of lead in the
water and with variations in other lead exposures. For children with high levels of lead
exposure from lead paint, contaminated soils and dusts near roadways or lead smelters,
or other point sources of airborne lead, drinking water contributes a much lower,
although still relevant, proportion of total exposure. For residents of houses and
buildings with relatively new lead solder or lead service lines, drinking water can be the
primary source of exposure, especially if the water is corrosive. As such, the total
drinking water contribution to overall lead levels may range from as little as 5
percent to more than 50 percent of children's total lead exposure. Infants
dependent on formula may receive more than 85 percent of their lead from
drinking water. As exposures decline to sources of lead other than drinking water, such
as gasoline and soldered food cans, drinking water will account for a larger proportion of
total intake."
Lead was integrated into the built environment despite knowledge of its toxic effects. Due to the
early adoption of lead plumbing in many communities in the United States, and through the
efforts of organizations such as the Lead Industries Association (LIA), which managed to
convince cities to require lead service through building codes, lead is now ubiquitous in drinking
water distribution systems and premise plumbing, and can be found in water mains, service
lines, soldered joints, goosenecks and pigtails, galvanized steel pipe, and fixtures.

This lead can become available for consumption though various processes, including the
chemical corrosion of the pipes, fixtures, or soldered joints; particulates loosened due to
vibrations or mechanical means; aging of the plumbing materials; chemistry and temperature of
the water, water age, and use practices; and even through electrolysis resulting from
pipe-grounded electrical systems. Numerous variables can affect the amount of lead at the tap
on any given day, including water pH, temperature, duration time in pipes, road traffic, nearby
construction, and pipe condition. This variability and the erratic nature of lead release
(especially lead particles) makes water sampling problematic for identifying lead concentrations
in tap water.
The EPA has failed to protect public health in the Lead and Copper Rule. By ignoring the EPA’s
own health-based standards for lead in water (the Maximum Contaminant Level Goal) which is
zero, EPA has permitted millions of children to drink dangerous levels of lead in their drinking
water while allowing water utilities to claim that the water they deliver is “safe”.
Lead poisoning is cumulative and can come from a variety of sources. The role of drinking water
as a source of lead has been minimized by EPA and health agencies. While other government
agencies have also failed on lead and have refused to establish health-based standards, the
EPA has an added responsibility to act to improve the Lead and Copper Rule now. Examples of
federal deficiencies include EPA's "lead free" standard for plumbing, which continues to allow for
the insertion of some lead in brand new plumbing materials, FDA’s antiquated standard for lead
in bottled water, the EPA’s lead dust standard for homes and childcare facilities, HUD guidelines
for home risk assessment that make water sampling optional, the continued use of lead in
aviation fuels, and the lax timeline for product recalls by the Consumer Products Safety
Commission.
EPA has the responsibility, as required by Executive Order 12898 (1994), to “make achieving
environmental justice part of its mission by identifying and addressing, as appropriate,
disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental effects of its programs,
policies, and activities on minority populations and low-income populations.”
Correcting the wrongs of the past, including looking aside while lead devastated the health of
millions of Americans over more than a century, must begin now. We cannot continue to allow
lead to pollute drinking water.
We therefore demand a strong health-based approach in the Lead and Copper Rule
Improvements, which must include the following:
1.
An enforceable health-based standard for lead at the tap, with a clear timeline for
intermittent benchmarks that must be met to achieve full implementation. There
are two health-based standards available: EPA’s Maximum Contaminant Level Goal
(MCLG) of zero, and the American Academy of Pediatrics Council on Environmental
Health of 1 ppb.

2.
Mandate a Filter-First Strategy for all schools, childcares, hospitals, corrections
facilities, juvenile detention facilities, after-school programs, and camps. The sole
responsibility of water testing in these facilities should be to verify that the filters are
installed and appropriately maintained. Testing should not be required in these facilities
to justify the installation of filters.
3.
Specific health-based standards and required actions for schools and childcare
facilities, including a health-based Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) of no greater
than 1 ppb for all childcare facilities and schools, immediate blood lead screening of all
children in schools, regardless of age, and childcare facilities where the lead in drinking
water is found to exceed the health-based MCL. The rationale for immediate screening
is the narrow window required for blood lead testing to identify an exposure. This is due
to the short half-life of lead in blood, and the time-consuming process of taking water
samples, performing the analysis, verifying results, and notifying schools, childcare
facilities, and families.
4.
Transparency measures that include making the results of all water samples
publicly available, including all historic samples, in their raw form (not aggregated).
5.
Public education measures, including an EPA-provided fact sheet to accompany
every drinking water report that explains 1) how to interpret water sample results, 2)
that there is no safe level of lead in drinking water or in blood, 3) follow-up steps to
request with a healthcare provider if there are concerns, including blood lead screening,
and 4) the limitations of blood lead screening and water testing.
6.
Transparency requirements for state agencies responsible for the oversight of
implementation of all testing performed by water systems, including reporting of all
sampling results, the posting of all sample results online, defining the protocols followed
for selection of sample locations and sample collection, and requiring clear and
consistent definitions for all qualifiers used in the reporting of results.
7.
Requirements for water systems performing routine sampling, including reporting
all sampling results in their raw form (not aggregated), notifying residents and property
owners of their sample results, providing information about how to interpret the sample
results, steps to take to mitigate water results, and follow up steps to request with a
healthcare provider if there are concerns, including blood lead screening.
Sincerely,
ACLU of Delaware
Mike Brickner, Executive Director
Black Mothers in Power
Shané Darby, Founder

Central Delaware NAACP Education Committee
Dr. Terri Hodges, Chair Education Committee, NAACP
Civic League for New Castle County (CLNCC)
Charles C. Stirk Jr., CLNCC President
Delaware Coalition for Open Government (DelCOG)
John Kowalko III, President
Delaware Concerned Residents for Environmental Justice (DCR4EJ)
Linda Whitehead, Co-facilitator, DCR4EJ
Dora Williams, Co-facilitator, DCR4EJ
The Delaware Public Preschool Coalition (DPPC)
Dr. Patricia Dallas, Co-Founder
Dawn Alexander, M. Ed, Co-Founder
Delaware Nurses Association
Christopher E. Otto, MSN, RN, CCRN, Executive Director,
Delaware PTA
Purnima Montagne, President
Delaware State Education Association (DSEA)
Stephanie Ingram, President
Green Delaware
Alan Muller, Executive Director
HELP Initiative, Inc.
Gene Dallahan, Outreach and Marketing Manager
Lead-Free Delaware
Sarah Bucic MSN, co-chair
Amy Roe Ph.D., co-chair
Newark Branch NAACP
Dr. Freeman Williams, President
Peace and Justice Work Group of Westminster Presbyterian Church
Lynne Kielhorn
Red Clay Consolidated School District
Board of Education

Sierra Club
Sonya Lunder, Senior Toxics Policy Advisor
Representative Paul Baumbach
Delaware State Representative, 23rd District
Representative Krista M.Z. Griffith
Delaware State Representative, 12th District
Representative Larry Lambert
Delaware State Representative, 7th District
Representative Sean M. Lynn
Delaware State Representative, 31st District
Representative DeShanna Neal
Delaware State Representative, 13th District
Representative Ed Osienski
Delaware State Representative, 24th District
Representative Stell Parker Selby
Delaware State Representative, 20th District
Representative Sophie Phillips
Delaware State Representative, 18th District
Representative Cyndie Romer
Delaware State Representative, 24th District
Representative Kimberly Williams
Delaware State Representative, 19th District
Representative Madinah Wilson-Anton
Delaware State Representative, 26th District
Senator Kyle Gay
Delaware State Senator, 5th District
Senator Stephanie Hansen
Delaware State Senator, 10th District
Senator Kyra L. Hoffner
Delaware State Senator, 14th District

Senator S. Elizabeth Lockman
Delaware State Senator, 3rd District
Senator Sarah McBride
Delaware State Senator, 1st District
Senator Marie Pinkney
Delaware State Senator, 13th District
Senator Bryan Townsend
Delaware State Senator, Majority Leader, 11th District
Senator John J Walsh III
Delaware State Senator, 9th District
Alabama State PTA
Arizona PTA
California State PTA
Colorado PTA
Connecticut PTA
European PTA
Florida State PTA
Free State PTA
Illinois PTA
Kentucky PTA
Louisiana Parent Teacher Association
Massachusetts PTA
Michigan PTA
Minnesota PTA
Missouri PTA

Montana PTA
New Hampshire PTA
New Jersey PTA
New Mexico PTA
NYS (New York State) PTA
North Carolina PTA
Ohio PTA
Oklahoma PTA
Oregon PTA
Pennsylvania PTA
Puerto Rico PTA
South Carolina PTA
Texas PTA
Utah Congress of Parents and Teachers Association
Virginia PTA
Washington State PTA
Wisconsin PTA
Cc:
Yu-Ting Guilaran, Deputy Director, EPA OGWDW guilaran.yu-ting@epa.gov
Adam Ortiz, EPA R3 Administrator ortiz.adam@epa.gov
Ruby Stanmyer, EPA R3 stanmyer.ruby@epa.gov
Anne Lausier, U.S. EPA Lausier.Anne@epa.gov
Karrie Crumlish, EPA R3 Drinking Water Branch Chief crumlish.karen@epa.gov
Angus Welch, EPA R3 Environmental Justice Program welch.angus@epa.gov
Ying Tan, US EPA, Office of Water Tan.Ying@epa.gov
Eric Burneson, US EPA Office of Groundwater and Drinking Water, Lead and Copper Rule

Improvements burneson.eric@epa.gov
Leslie Gillespie-Marthaler, EPA R3 Deputy Director for the Water Division
GillespieMarthaler.Leslie@epa.gov
Michael McPeak, EPA R3 attorney advisor McPeak.Michael@epa.gov
Bill Richardson, EPA R3 Drinking Water Section Chief Richardson.william@epa.gov
Yvonne Gonzalez, EPA Office of Groundwater and Drinking Water Gonzalez.Yvonne@epa.gov
Jeff Landis, EPA R3 Press Chief Media Relations Landis.Jeffrey@epa.gov
Cindy Mack, EPA Mack.Cindy-Y@epa.gov

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1343 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
280 Shuman Blvd, Suite 100, Naperville, IL 60563 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
Dear Environmental Protection Agency, 
 
The United States Environmental Protection Agency is proposing provisions to the Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI) that could significantly impact the financial viability of community water systems 
across the country. Most notably, the mandated 10-year replacement cycle as currently proposed within 
LCRI would severely stress already limited utility resources, negatively impact water affordability, and 
burden the most vulnerable of populations within communities. The Illinois Section American Water 
Works Association strongly opposes this change for several reasons. 
 
Mandating that communities replace all lead service lines within their water system within 10 years is not 
feasible. Water systems already face many regulatory/operational pressures and no two systems are alike 
in terms of total cost for lead service line replacement, administrative capacity, labor market constraints, 
size of the rate-base, and total number of lead service lines. For our members, a 10-year replacement 
cycle for lead service lines is not enough time for characterization and development of a sustainable lead 
service line replacement program. Additionally, other regulatory demands are competing for already 
limited utility resources. A mandate of this size and scale would risk further non-compliance on other – 
real or emerging – regulatory standards that have equal adverse effects on health.  
 
According to the Environmental Protection Agency data, it is suggested that the 1,000 lead service lines 
per year is a realistic expectation for replacement. Based on our member’s experience, it is more 
reasonable to assume that individual crews will on average, replace 2-3 lead service lines per day in a 
span of 180-200 working days. It is important to note that this assumption is dependent on a water 
system’s ability to coordinate a host of different variables, namely: customer access, labor, materials and 
equipment, and financial resources. Within this list, the latter cannot be understated as for some Illinois 
communities, a mandated 10-year replacement cycle would cost nearly $500 million to complete.  
 
The Illinois Section American Water Works Association respectfully requests that you reconsider the 
feasibility of the 10- year replacement requirement and propose a replacement cycle inclusive of more 
realistic scenarios in terms of total cost, administrative capacity, labor market constraints, size of the rate-
base, and total number of lead service lines within the water system. 
 
Please feel free to contact my office at annie@isawwa.org or 866-521-3596 x1 with any questions regarding 
this request. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Annie Storey 
Executive Director 
Illinois Section American Water Works Association

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1349 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
New Jersey is an Equal Opportunity Employer.  Printed on Recycled Paper and Recyclable. 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
Mail Code 401-04Q 
Division of Water Supply & Geoscience  
401 E. State Street - P.O. Box 420 
Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0420  
Tel #: (609) 292-5550 - Fax #: (609) 292-1654  
http://www.nj.gov/dep/watersupply/ 
 
 Submitted via Regulations.gov 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
EPA Docket Center, 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket,  
Mail Code 28221T, 1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW,  
Washington, DC 20460. 
 
 
Re: State of New Jersey’s Comments on Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements LCRI  
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
On behalf of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (Department), I am 
pleased to submit these comments on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) 
proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper Rule: 
Improvements (LCRI), 88 Fed. Reg. 84,878 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
As the Federal SDWA establishes a comprehensive regulatory scheme for providing potable 
water, the revisions to the Federal Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) aim to decrease lead exposure in 
drinking water and strengthen implementation and procedural requirements for the protection of 
public health. The Department supports EPA‘s efforts to strengthen the Revised Lead and 
Copper Rule (LCRR), 86 Fed. Reg. 4198 (Jan. 15, 2021) to further reduce lead levels in drinking 
water. 
Beginning in 2015, the Department began reviewing its implementation of the 1991 LCR, 
focusing on water quality parameters (WQP), corrosion control treatment (CCT), and source 
water monitoring and treatment. The Department took measures to improve its oversight of the 
LCR to ensure that the residents of New Jersey receive the maximal amount of protection that it 
is able to offer from exposure to lead and copper in drinking water. Since then, major changes 
PHILIP D. MURPHY 
GOVERNOR 
 
TAHESHA L. WAY 
LT. GOVERNOR 
SHAWN M. LATOURETTE 
COMMISSIONER 

both in legislation and regulation in New Jersey has provided the Department with unique 
insights into the most effective measures for protection from these materials, as the Department 
has gained significant experience in implementing lead service line replacement (LSLR), 
establishing sampling procedures, reviewing corrosion control treatment, public notification, 
funding of LSLR projects, and working with affected parties to achieve compliance. 
The Department supports EPA’s proposal to require the replacement of all lead service lines 
(LSL) in the country within ten years. It also supports other revisions EPA has made to 
strengthen the LCRR, including lowering the lead action level, increasing protections for 
customers of small water systems, improving public education on the dangers of lead, and 
broadening the scope of school lead sampling to better protect our children.  
The Department appreciates the opportunity to comment on this proposal and provides the 
attached detailed comments based on its experience and expertise in implementing the Federal 
SDWA and State programs, regulations, and policies related to the control of lead and copper.  
Respectfully submitted, 
Patricia Ingelido, Director  
 
NJ Department of Environmental Protection
Division of Water Supply and Geoscience   

 
 
Page 3 of 29 
 
General Matters 
 
EPA is requesting comment on whether the proposed revisions to the LCRR treatment technique are 
effective to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible in accordance 
with the SDWA.  
The Department recommends the following and additional comments thereafter. 
1. Every public water system regardless of size and history of action level exceedances (ALE), should 
be required to demonstrate their corrosion control treatment is optimized. This should be a 
phased in approach starting with community water systems most at risk of lead release. 
2. Additional water quality parameter sampling should be required during follow-up monitoring to 
ensure proper installation and maintenance of corrosion control treatment. 
3. Continual optimal water quality parameter monitoring for all systems under the Lead and Copper 
Rule should be required.  
4. Additional sampling requirements should be established for when a system changes source or 
treatment. 
5. Flexibility by primacy agencies, or public water systems to modify public education language 
should be clearly defined in the regulation. 
6. Allow for the extension of lead service line replacement (greater than 10 years) in other instances, 
such as if the water system is addressing other water quality concerns with specific stipulations 
outlined in the rule. 
 
EPA is requesting comment on whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the complexity of 
the regulatory approach used to address lead in drinking water consistent with the statutory standard 
for a treatment technique rule in section 1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. Specifically, EPA requests comment on 
ways that the proposed LCRI could be simplified and ways that burden, including paperwork burden, 
could be reduced without affecting the ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse health 
effects.  
 
The Department acknowledges that the LCR, LCRR, and proposed LCRI are complex and pose 
implementation challenges to both primacy agencies and public water systems. The Department does 
recognize EPA’s efforts to streamline certain aspects of the rules within the LCRI proposal. To further these 
efforts, the Department recommends EPA consider the following: 
 
1. Develop a mechanism for water systems to report LSL information, upload public education, and 
submit monitoring related documents. 
2. Develop detailed flow/decision chart for corrosion control treatment steps. 
3. EPA should provide guidance on how to data manage and report these requirements. Update the 
current version of SDWIS will not support much of the proposed LCRI as is and DW-SFTIEs will not 
be available until 2026 at the earliest.  Due to this, Interim updates to SDWIS, FEDREP and/or 
other data management tools will be needed. 

 
 
Page 4 of 29 
 
Service Line Replacement 
 
EPA requested comments on all aspects of the proposed scope of the replacement requirements, 
including the criteria used to define a full service line replacement and which lead sources are subject 
to replacement under the mandatory program.  
 
The Department suggests that EPA consider “full lead service line replacement” to mean the removal of 
all lead piping and materials containing lead (such as lead fittings) from the service line. The Department 
agrees this could mean only replacing a portion of the service line if a portion is made of another material 
(such as copper).  
 
The Department also recommends including all galvanized service lines as lead service lines, not just those 
that are or were downstream of a lead service. Based on the Department’s experience, many water 
systems have difficulty maintaining comprehensive records of service line inventories and, consequently, 
struggle to determine whether a galvanized line was downstream of a lead component. It is also very 
difficult to determine if the galvanized line was dipped in lead, or if the zinc lining in the galvanized line is 
adequately prohibiting the lead from leaching. Thus, EPA should require the removal of all galvanized 
service lines.  
 
EPA should clearly define “building inlet” for purposes of lead service line replacement. Based on the 
Department’s experience, water systems define the building inlet differently. For example, an inlet could 
be defined as where the service line enters the building, or after it enters the building and connects to the 
premise plumbing. In some cases, a lead service line may extend into the property at a minimum of three 
(3) feet after the inlet. The Department advises that in properties where the meter extends beyond three 
(3) feet, the lead line should be replaced past the meter and up to the shut-off valve. 
 
EPA requested comments on whether to prohibit reconnection of any disconnected LSL or Galvanized 
Requiring Replacement (GRR) service line.  
 
The Department supports such a prohibition. The LCRI should explicitly prohibit water systems from 
reconnecting to any LSL or GRR service line. 
 
EPA is requesting comment on whether the Agency should include lead connectors or galvanized service 
lines that are or were downstream of a lead connector as part of mandatory replacement.  
 
As stated above, the Department supports including all lead materials and all galvanized service lines as 
part of the lead service line inventory and mandatory replacement. 
 
 
 

 
 
Page 5 of 29 
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent should be 
more than four times.  
 
The Department believes four attempts to obtain property owner consent is sufficient. However, the four 
attempts should be for each event, including infrastructure upgrades, lead service line replacements, and 
emergency events. The Department also agrees with the provision as it relates to any new property 
owner. The Department recommends that multiple unique methods should be used in this effort (e.g. 
mailings, door hangings, phone calls, and door-to-door visits); as well as including notification to the 
occupants. Pursuant to New Jersey’s Safe Drinking Water Act, N.J.S.A. 58:12A-40 et seq., public 
community water systems must send a letter annually to property owners who are served by a lead 
service line. In this letter, water systems must include information about its lead service line replacement 
program. The Department also supports requiring water systems sending an annual letter to property 
owners to inform them of their service line materials and to solicit participation in the replacement 
program as well. 
 
EPA is requesting comments on whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets “control” for the 
purposes of the mandatory replacement provision (i.e., require systems to conduct full service line 
replacement in situations where the system has access to conduct the full replacement).  
 
Though the Department recognizes the difficulties associated with delineating the prerequisites or 
elements of ‘‘access’’ that a system would need to conduct full service line or connector replacement, the 
Department nevertheless urges EPA to provide more specific guidance on what it would consider to be 
“access.” Doing so would assist states in taking the “guessing” out of compliance determinations. If a 
water system does not have access to the full service line, the Department would seek to strongly 
encourage the system to take extensive steps to replace it, including the aforementioned “four 
attempts.”. Any lead service line that is not replaced should remain in the water system’s inventory, and 
the water system should continue to offer replacement on an annual basis until the replacement is 
completed.  
 
EPA is seeking comment on the proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement deadlines.  
 
Since July 2021, water systems in New Jersey have been required to replace, on average, 10 percent of 
their lead service lines annually, with a requirement for all lead service lines to be replaced by July 2031. 
The LCRI is similar and adds an extra step for ensuring water systems are on track by evaluating each water 
system’s replacement rate every three years. The Department supports the notion of evaluating each 
system every three years as it identifies water systems on track and those failing to meet the replacement 
requirements. 
 
Though New Jersey, through its regulatory initiatives and recent amendments to its statutory authorities, 
has had successes in implementing lead service line replacement, the Department notes there may be 
certain challenges to similar success nationwide.  These challenges could include the identification of both 
known and unknown service lines, time and labor resource considerations, replacement plan 

 
 
Page 6 of 29 
 
development and implementation, and property owner consent. All while maintaining other obligations 
under the Safe Drinking Water Act. Limited funding sources, contractor availability and supply chain 
considerations are also other concerns.  
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether it is feasible for systems across the nation to complete service line 
replacement in a shorter timeframe than ten years, such as in six, seven, or eight years.    
 
While it is possible for water systems to complete replacements in a shorter timeframe, especially those 
that own the entire service line or have minimal lead service lines within the distribution system, the 
Department has concerns that a shorter timeframe may not be feasible on a nationwide basis. 
 
EPA is seeking comment on the rate construct approach, including how to calculate compliance with a 
given service line replacement deadline and average annual rate calculated across a rolling three-year 
period.  
 
The Department supports EPA’s proposed compliance calculation of a rolling 3-year compliance period, 
averaging out to 10 percent replacement per year. EPA should allow for some flexibility for the first year 
as many water systems will still be putting together their inventory and replacement plan. Additionally, 
water systems need time to plan their lead service line replacement programs. This includes designing 
projects, determining phasing, acquiring funding, as well as conducting customer outreach which is a 
component of this effort. 
 
EPA also seeks comment on whether systems should be required to meet a minimum replacement rate 
in the first three years after the compliance date to give States an opportunity to enforce replacement 
rate progress sooner than three years after the compliance date.  
 
In lieu of a minimum replacement rate, EPA should consider building required milestones for water 
systems to reach within the first three years rather than lead service replacement, including the 
completion of inventories, development of replacement plans, and implementation of such plans.  
 
EPA also seeks comment on the complexity of the rate construct.  
 
Although the Department supports the proposed rate construct it recognizes that it may be difficult for 
water systems to calculate as the construct may be a “moving target” for systems due to certain variables, 
such as changes in service line inventories. As stated previously, the Department recommends that EPA 
require systems to first consider identification and planning milestones, not solely replacement rates. 
Additionally, the Department is concerned that without improvements to SDWIS, it will be difficult for 
states to calculate and ensure compliance with the rate construct.  
 
EPA is taking comment on whether States, as a condition of primacy, or EPA when it is directly 
implementing the program, should be required to set initial shortened deadlines by a certain timeframe, 
such as no later than 60 days after the compliance date.  

 
 
Page 7 of 29 
 
 
The Department believes compliance timeframes should be uniform, but states should be afforded the 
flexibility to implement shorter timeframes if necessary. This flexibility should not be limited to 60 days 
after the compliance date.  
 
EPA is seeking comment whether to require the State, as a condition of primacy, to approve the use of 
the deferred deadline provision where the water system qualifies for it and/or whether to require the 
State, as a condition of primacy, to assess whether it would be feasible for a system to meet the 10-year 
deadline or a shorter deadline even if the system meets the regulatory criteria for the deferred deadline. 
 
The Department supports requiring states to assess whether it would be feasible for a system to meet the 
10-year replacement deadline or shorter deadline even if the system meets the regulatory criteria for the 
deferred deadline.  Pursuant to the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, the Department may extend the 
10-year replacement deadline to a maximum period of 15 years if: (1) a public community water system 
demonstrates that the extension is necessary to meet a service reliability demand or public health need, 
not related lead abatement, within the system; or (2) a government entity that owns a public community 
water system demonstrates that the extension is necessary because the system or the municipality is 
experiencing financial distress.  Additional assessment criteria would assist in the implementation of both 
provisions. 
 
EPA is requesting whether there are additional data on service line replacement rates achieved by water 
systems in proactive programs.  
 
The Department has been implementing the state-specific lead service line replacement requirements 
since 2021 and has observed replacement rates for all public community water systems in New Jersey and 
can provide this data to EPA.   
 
EPA is seeking comment on the proposed use of a maximum threshold of 10,000 annual service line 
replacements for systems with atypically high numbers of LSLs and GRR service lines as well as seeking 
comment on the alternate threshold of 8,000 annual service line replacements. EPA is also seeking 
feedback on other thresholds and supporting data.  
 
The Department agrees with the proposal of a maximum threshold and recommends EPA allow states the 
flexibility to determine the maximum threshold based on system specific conditions.  
 
EPA is also seeking feedback on if there’s data available that would inform if the maximum threshold 
for annual service line replacement could increase after ten years, such as if replacement rates could 
double.  
The Department does not have this data at this time. The Department expects some systems to have a 
replacement rate higher than 10 percent to replace at the end of the 10-year cycle as they spent the first 
year or so compiling a lead service line inventory, developing replacement plans and securing funding for 
replacement.  

 
 
Page 8 of 29 
 
EPA is requesting comment on whether systems conducting deferred service line replacement should be 
subject to any additional requirements beyond those for systems that are not replacing service lines in 
accordance with a deferred deadline.  
 
The Department believes that deferred systems should be required to submit additional documentation 
throughout the replacement schedule demonstrating they are on schedule, and continuing to 
demonstrate and certify that the deferment criteria are met. The rule should allow for a state to reverse 
the deferment in the event a water system is not meeting the agreed upon milestones.  
 
EPA is seeking comments on the requirement for systems to install a dielectric coupling when conducting 
a partial replacement of an LSL or GRR to separate the remaining LSL or GRR service line and the 
replaced service line unless the replaced service line is made of plastic and other recommended risk 
mitigation activities.  
 
The Department supports this requirement. 
 
EPA is requesting comment on the proposed requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line 
replacement unless it is conducted in accordance with emergency or planned infrastructure work 
(excluding planned infrastructure work solely for the purposes of replacing lead and GRR service lines 
as part of a service line replacement program).  
 
The Department supports this requirement.  Pursuant to the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, water 
systems may not conduct a partial lead service line replacement unless during an emergency (such as a 
water main or service line break), or during a water main replacement.  Additionally, New Jersey water 
systems must make a good faith effort (in terms of gaining property owner consent) to replace the entire 
lead service line. However, the Department notes that, in certain circumstances, property owners may 
refuse to provide consent. Similar to its “four attempts” proposal, EPA should consider whether additional 
dispensation is appropriate in these circumstances. 
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether partial service line replacement should be prohibited during 
“planned infrastructure work” or with certain types of planned infrastructure work.  
 
The Department recognizes the cost savings, planning efforts, and necessity to allow a water system to 
be able to conduct service line replacements when the roads are open. The Department does not support 
prohibiting partial replacements during planned infrastructure work but recommends planned 
infrastructure work be clarified in the definitions as it can be interpreted in many ways. The Department 
agrees with prohibiting partial lead service line replacements solely for replacing lead and GRR service 
lines as well as during routine servicing (e.g., meter change outs). 
 
 

 
 
Page 9 of 29 
 
EPA is requesting comment on the ability of the market to correct for potential shortages in workers 
and materials to conduct service line replacement, as well to provide sufficient quantities of filters to 
comply with the service line replacement and other relevant provisions in the proposal. 
 
EPA should consider prioritized filter distribution to those most at risk based on the water systems filter 
plan and alternatives to the remedial measures in the event filter supplies are not available and the water 
system can properly document.   
 
EPA is seeking comment on the extent to which property owner consent, if required by State or local law 
or water tariff agreement, might complicate full-service line replacement and whether there are 
additional measures EPA can take to facilitate access through the LCRI.  
 
Property owner consent is an issue that has come up many times in New Jersey. Many property owners 
do not want to or cannot afford the several thousands of dollars it would cost to replace their portion of 
the service line. The Department suggests expanding federal funding opportunities to address property 
owner side replacements. New Jersey’s water systems have had much more success with replacements 
when the system is paying the cost of the full replacement. Pursuant to the New Jersey Safe Drinking 
Water Act, municipalities may enact an ordinance to enable water systems to access private property with 
appropriate notice to conduct lead service line replacement. This was instrumental in places like Newark 
where many of the properties are occupied by tenants with landlords that may have been hard to get in 
contact with or the owner refusing to participate as it was not their primary residence. There are also 
nuances in the way that a New Jersey water system can recover the cost of replacement, based on its 
ownership type. Investor-owned water systems can only recover the cost of LSL replacement through 
rates established across their entire service area, but water systems which are publicly owned may elect 
to recover the cost of replacement on the individual residences which have LSLs. It is too soon for the 
Department to evaluate what impact this is having on replacement speed, but it is a consideration. 
 
In the Department’s experience, the best way to get property owners to participate is to make it 
mandatory and at no direct cost to them and have a robust outreach program.   
 
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
 
EPA is seeking comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of the proposed sites should be 
included in Tier 3, if additional sites should be included, or if some should be included in a different, 
lower priority tier, such as Tier 4. Specifically, comment on whether sites served by galvanized service 
lines or containing galvanized premise plumbing that are identified as ever being downstream of an 
LSL or lead connector should be included in the same tier as other sites with a current lead connector 
(e.g., copper service line downstream of a lead connector).  
 
The Department disagrees with categorizing galvanized lines as Tier 3 and disagrees with only including 
galvanized lines that were or are downstream of a lead service line or connector. Galvanized lines are a 

 
 
Page 10 of 29 
 
potential source of lead; coated with zinc, this coating corrodes and may cause lead to leach into the 
drinking water. 
 
The Department  recommends EPA modify the Tier definitions as follows; defining a Tier 1 sampling site 
as a building that is served by a service line which is known to contain lead; a Tier 2 sampling site as a 
building served by a galvanized service line; a Tier 3 sampling site as a building that contains copper 
piping with lead solder or a building that contains internal lead pipes; a Tier 4 sampling site as a building 
that contains copper piping with no lead solder; and a Tier 5 sampling site as a building not captured 
under the definitions of a Tier 1, 2, 3, or 4 and is representative of plumbing materials commonly found 
throughout the distribution system. The Department recommends including all buildings, residential and 
non-residential, in each Tier of sampling sites, with single family and multi-family residences required to 
be prioritized for sampling before non-residential buildings. 
 
Furthermore, the Department recommends excluding lead status unknown service lines from Tier 1,2, 
and 3 classifications to prevent the dilution of the sampling pool with potential lead status unknown 
service lines, which aligns with the Federal Rule. However, the Department recommends permitting 
water systems that are completing their sampling pool with Tier 4 sampling sites to include sites with 
lead status unknown service lines. Based on the Department’s assessment, many public water systems 
have service lines of unknown or uncharacterized materials; therefore, the inclusion of lead status 
unknown service lines for Tier 4 sampling sites allows for the sampling of the most at-risk sites for 
copper. These modified Tier definitions prioritize and focus sampling on the most at-risk sites; first from 
lead corrosion, second from copper corrosion, and last, from buildings with mainly non-lead and copper 
plumbing materials. 
  
EPA is seeking comment on the proposed updated definition of wide-mouth bottles that is “bottles 
that are one liter in volume with a mouth, whose outer diameter measures at least 55 mm wide,” and 
specifically on the availability of qualifying bottles.  
 
The Department agrees with the updated definition of wide-mouth bottles under the condition that 
these bottles are readily available from laboratories for distribution however, the Department believes 
that the EPA should specify the sizing as an inner diameter to be consistent with how vendors list their 
sizing. As the current definition is worded, it may cause confusion when using the outer diameter, as 
most sample bottle vendors provide an inner diameter measurement. For absolute clarity, an inner 
diameter instead of outer diameter should be specified. The Department suggests using “bottles that 
are one liter in volume with a mouth, whose inner diameter measures at least 53 mm wide” to be 
consistent with information available to labs and systems. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Page 11 of 29 
 
EPA is seeking comment and any relevant data on the number and tiering of samples used to calculate 
the 90th percentile lead and/or copper levels for systems with LSLs for purposes of assessing CCT 
efficacy. Specifically, whether samples from non-LSL sites that have higher lead concentrations than 
samples from LSL sites should be included and whether these higher values should replace lower 
values from LSL sites in the 90th percentile calculation.  
 
The Department believes that samples from lower-tiered sites which have higher lead concentrations 
should be included in the 90th percentile but should not replace lower values from LSL sites. The highest 
sample result from each sample site should be used; based on New Jersey’s experience, larger 
community water systems often sample more than the required number of sites to ensure they meet 
the minimum number required.  
 
In addition to the above, the Department has concerns about the ability to accurately calculate the 90th 
percentile values.  Currently the Department relies on SDWIS to do these calculations, which will not be 
possible with the proposed requirements.  As the 90th percentile will now need to be calculated 
manually for every water system, and DW-SFTIES will not be available until 2026, EPA will need to 
provide guidance and tools to states to enable accurate, timely calculations. 
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether State authority to specify sampling locations when a system is 
conducting reduced monitoring should apply regardless of the number of taps meeting sample site 
criteria.  
 
The Department agrees with this suggestion.   
 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
 
EPA is proposing a threshold of systems serving greater than 50,000 persons to host the inventory and 
plan online, which is the required threshold under the LCRR. EPA is seeking comment on the size 
threshold at which systems must host their publicly accessible inventory, inventory summary data, 
replacement summary data, and service line replacement plan online, and whether it should be 
lowered relative to the LCRR requirements.  
 
New Jersey law requires all community water systems serving 3,300 or more to have the inventory 
posted on their website. Systems under that threshold are required to make it available in a publicly 
accessible location if they do not have a website. Some smaller CWSs, such as a mobile home park, have 
it readily available in their main office or in a community recreational room. 
 
Many of New Jersey’s CWS serve tens and hundreds of thousands of people. The Department recognizes 
nationally there are many smaller systems that serve less than 10,000. New Jersey recommends systems 
with a population of 3,300 or more be required to have their inventory posted online. All populations 
should be able to easily access and be informed about their water service line material.  

 
 
Page 12 of 29 
 
 
EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of non-lead service lines in their 
inventory that were categorized using methods other than records review or visual inspection of at 
least two points along the line. EPA is requesting comment on the number of validations required, the 
proposed 95 percent confidence level approach used to develop the number of validations required, 
the criteria for which methods used to categorize non-lead service lines should be included in the 
validation pool (including whether non-lead lines categorized based on records should be subject to 
validation), and the seven-year timeline for systems on a 10-year replacement deadline to complete 
the validation requirements.  
 
New Jersey supports EPA’s requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of non-lead service lines. 
The number of validations required should be based on a system’s population to achieve the proposed 
95 percent confidence level. Some systems in New Jersey have found historical records to be inaccurate. 
For this reason, the Department supports having some, but not all, of the validations be identified by 
records. In fact, techniques to model locations of lead service lines are often more accurate than using 
historical data alone1.  
 
EPA is requesting comment on establishing a deadline for systems to identify all unknown service lines 
prior to their service line replacement deadlines.  
 
Though the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act allows water systems to identify and replace all their 
service lines by 2031, the Department supports an earlier deadline for systems to identify service line 
materials in their distribution system. Based on New Jersey’s experience with community water systems 
that trigger the 7 percent LSLR rate requirement under the LCR, it is very difficult to enforce 
replacement when water systems have not properly identified and planned. This requirement would 
encourage systems to be more proactive and provide them with time to plan for replacement.  New 
Jersey also supports a 7-year timeline for systems to identify all service lines for systems on a 10-year 
replacement schedule. This will provide systems with time to prepare for the replacement of the 
remaining LSLs and potentially those of unknown material. 
 
EPA is seeking comment on a requirement for systems to update their service line replacement plans if 
there are any changes, such as changes to laws and policies applicable to full service line replacement.  
The Department supports this requirement.  
 
 
 
 
 
1 Lester, Lori (2022). Rationale for Utilizing Predicative Modeling to Identifying Lead Service Lines. NJDEP. 
https://dep.nj.gov/wp-content/uploads/dsr/lsl-predictive-modeling-rationale.pdf 

 
 
Page 13 of 29 
 
Lead Action and Trigger Levels 
 
EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of 0.010 mg/L, as well as comment and 
supporting data on alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, with regards to generally effective 
corrosion control treatment and identifying systems most at risk of elevated levels of lead in drinking 
water.  
 
The Department agrees with the proposed lead action level of 0.010 mg/l. The lower action level, in 
conjunction with the other remedial measures proposed in the LCRI (such as site assessment and 
remediation), will allow water systems to optimize corrosion control treatment while targeting specific 
sites with higher lead release.  The proposed lead action level will not pose additional obstacles to 
analysis as conventional analytical instrumentation can detect lead at the proposed action level.  
 
EPA is also seeking comment on the use of the action level to determine when additional public 
education is required, and the use of the same action level for public education as for the CCT 
provisions.  
 
The Department agrees with the prosed use of the action level to determine when additional public 
education is required, and the use of the same action level for public education as for the CCT 
provisions.   
 
EPA is seeking public comment, data, and information on the anticipated benefits and tradeoffs, 
including for public health and administrative burden on systems and States, if more small and 
medium systems are required to conduct a detailed OCCT demonstration and take other actions if they 
exceed the proposed action level of 0.010 mg/L or other lower values, while water systems are 
simultaneously required to mandatory conduct full service line replacement.  
 
The Department supports the proposal to require small and medium systems to conduct demonstration 
studies, as long as they meet certain criteria. In some cases, it may be determined by a demonstration 
study that replacing all lead service lines will resolve most of the high levels of lead more effectively than 
installing corrosion control treatment.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
Page 14 of 29 
 
Compliance Alternative for a Lead Action Level Exceedance for Small 
Community Water Systems and Non-Transient Non-Community Water 
Systems 
 
EPA is proposing that small system flexibilities be limited to CWSs serving 3,300 persons and fewer 
and all NTNCWSs for the remaining compliance alternatives of point-of-use devices and plumbing 
replacement. EPA is seeking comment on whether the Agency should allow systems serving up to 
10,000 persons (or another threshold) to be eligible to use the small system compliance flexibility 
provision.  
 
Small system flexibility should be limited to non-community water systems and only community water 
systems serving less than 3,300 persons that own and control their entire distribution system and 
premise plumbing. While point of use devices have beneficial protections in reducing exposure to lead in 
drinking water for defined purposes or durations (such as during an ALE, or after LSL replacement), the 
Department has concerns about the use of such devices as a long-term compliance alternative especially 
for systems serving larger populations. In many cases it is difficult for a community water system that 
serves 3300 and does not own and control their entire distribution system and premise plumbing, to 
properly maintain point of use devices or ensure all plumbing materials have been replaced. The 
Department recommends limiting the small system flexibility when the system does not own or control 
the distribution system and premise plumbing to very small water systems serving populations less than 
500.  
Water systems that choose to install point of use devices or complete plumbing replacements should be 
required to demonstrate ongoing compliance. In addition, systems using point of use treatment should 
be required to have records of installation and maintenance plans. Lastly, this remedial measure should 
only be allowed once as an alternative to corrosion control treatment. If a system has additional ALEs, 
after installing point of use devices or completing plumbing replacements, it should not be allowed to 
continue with these alternate measures and should be subject to the corrosion control treatment 
requirements.  
 
EPA is also seeking information, data, and analysis on whether point-of-use devices and plumbing 
replacement are as effective as OCCT at systems serving up to 10,000 persons (or another threshold).   
 
The Department does not have data or analysis on whether point of use devices or plumbing 
replacement are as effective for a system serving up to 10,000 persons. The Department believes that, 
for most public community water systems, central corrosion control treatment from the point of entry is 
more effective and comprehensive at reducing lead and copper release than point-of-use (POU)devices 
and plumbing replacements.  
 
As water quality parameter monitoring assists in evaluating whether CCT is being maintained and 
effective, the only way to evaluate whether point of use treatment is effective is through lead and 

 
 
Page 15 of 29 
 
copper tap sampling. Therefore, systems that opt to install POU devices should remain on standard 
monitoring. Monitoring of POU devices should alternate each year to show effectiveness and 
maintenance of all devices installed.   
 
POU devices in systems serving up to 10,000 can be difficult for the system to maintain and any delays in 
maintenance could impact the effectiveness of device.  
 
EPA is requesting comment on the ability and practicality of point-of-use devices to address multiple 
contaminants. 
 
Point-of-use devices, whether for lead or multiple contaminants, should be limited to non-community 
water systems and for small community water systems that control and own the distribution system and 
premise plumbing, and very small water systems that serve populations of 500 or less. Increased 
monitoring of all taps with point of use treatment, maintenance requirements and certification to 
address the contaminant of concern are essential. 
 
Public Education 
 
EPA is seeking comment on the proposed determination that the public education treatment 
technique is feasible and prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible. 
 
The Department agrees that the seven (7) public education/notification requirements in the proposal 
are feasible and may prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible. 
However, the Department proposes the below amendments to content, delivery, and outreach activities 
discussed below should be considered. 
 
• 
The Department recommends that systems with lead connectors or unknown connectors 
include all the outlined service line with lead material information listed in 40 CFR 
141.85(a)(1)(A) to (G) in public education materials consistent with the requirement for systems 
with lead service lines. This will streamline public education content requirements. 
 
• 
EPA is proposing to include an “an optional public education activity to contact organizations 
representing plumbers and contractors to provide information about lead in drinking water, 
sources of lead, and the importance of using lead free plumbing materials.” The Department 
agrees that this is a targeted audience that should be educated and proposes that clarification 
on the quantity of organizations or location of these organizations be identified. For example, at 
least one local organization representing plumbers and contractors. Additionally, since this is a 
targeted audience that would not receive this education via the other delivery methods, the 
Department proposes that this be considered as a required public education delivery method as 
opposed to an optional activity.   
 

 
 
Page 16 of 29 
 
• 
EPA is retaining the requirement from the LCRR for community water systems to distribute 
public education materials to local public health agencies that are not located within the water 
system’s service area. EPA should provide clarification on the expectations on how the state is 
to implement this requirement as well as how the water system is to meet this requirement, 
such as how far outside of their service area is necessary.  
 
• 
EPA is proposing outreach activities that systems failing to meet the LSLR rate must complete. 
The Department agrees with the requirement for conducting an outreach activity to discuss the 
system’s mandatory LSLR plan and opportunities for replacement and distribute public 
education materials outlining this information. The purpose of this outreach activity is to 
provide further information on plumbing containing lead, including possible health effects, and 
promote participation in the system’s LSLR plan to reduce lead exposure caused by service lines 
containing lead, the audience targeted at these outreach activities should be populations with 
lead services lines, GRR, unknown lead status or with low LSLR participation rates.  
 
• 
EPA identifies conducting a townhall meeting as an outreach option. The Department agrees 
with including townhall meetings as an outreach activity. However, to make this an effective 
outreach activity, EPA should clarify the location and number of townhall meetings may be left 
up to the State. Townhall meetings should be conducted in a town(s) that have a significant 
amount of lead service lines, GRR, or lead known status or a low LSLR participation rate and the 
number of townhall meetings be dependent on the population or municipalities with lead 
service lines, GRR, or lead unknown status.  Additionally, EPA should consider the option for 
water systems to conduct virtual town halls to potentially reach a larger audience.  
 
• 
 The Department agrees with including participation in community events as an outreach 
activity. However, to make this an effective outreach activity, EPA should clarify the location and 
number of community events that the system must participate in may be left up to the State. 
Community events should be conducted in communities with a significant amount of lead 
service lines, GRR, or lead known status or a low LSLR participation rate and the number of 
community events required be dependent on the population or municipalities with lead service 
lines, GRR, or lead unknown status.  
 
• 
The Department agrees with including contacting customers by other delivery methods than the 
previous mailing LSL notification. However, to make this an effective outreach activity, EPA must 
clarify the customers to contact and the distribution method of the required public education 
materials that meet the content requirements. The customers contacted should be the 
consumers with LSLs, GRR, or lead unknown status, which are the consumers directly impacted 
by the systems failure to replace LSLs. Public education materials should be provided as an 
attachment, or link, if the email method is used by the system, or provided as a link if a text 
message or door hanger is used by the system.  
 

 
 
Page 17 of 29 
 
• 
In addition, EPA should clarify public access to the required public education materials. Since the 
system would not be able to provide the required distribution of public education materials via 
the phone call, the Department recommends additional provisions that enable consumers to 
access the public education materials on the system’s website or social media platforms. 
 
• 
The Department agrees that using social media platforms allows for the system to reach a large 
audience and can be a vital outreach tool. However, EPA should confirm the number of social 
media platforms used (e.g., Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, or “X” formerly known as Twitter), the 
number of posts required, the frequency of post, and the content of the post for the activity to 
be considered a social media campaign.   
 
• 
The Department agrees with including outreach via media. However, to make this an effective 
outreach activity, EPA should clarify the content of what the announcement must include as the 
required public education materials content may not be permitted due to size limitations and 
that this is separate from the broadcast media public education requirement due to an incurred 
lead ALE. 
 
• 
The Department agrees that visiting targeted customers is an effective outreach activity. 
However, EPA should clarify the number and location of the targeted customers that must be 
visited or allow the State to determine. A system’s population and number of municipalities 
served with LSLs, GRR, or lead unknown status should be considered, as well as vulnerable 
populations.  
 
 
EPA is seeking comment and supporting data on the capacity of water systems to conduct some or all 
of the required public education activities in 30 days, or another period of time that is less than 30 or 
60 days, after the end of the tap sampling period in which a systemwide lead action level exceedance 
occurs. 
 
The Department recommends the deadline to complete some of the initial public education 
requirements to be 30 days after a system is made aware of the 90th percentile sample result. All 
compliance determinations should be made at the end of the monitoring period once all samples 
collected have been analyzed and received, and quality assurance has been performed. Currently, 
SDWIS will not be able to calculate the 90th percentile of more than one result collected per site and 
additional time may be necessary. 
 
Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water systems are capable of 
providing consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three calendar days of obtaining 
those results, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or copper action level, or if a longer 
time frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 calendar days). 
 

 
 
Page 18 of 29 
 
The Department believes this timeframe is feasible for community water systems if it specified business 
days rather than calendar days. For non-transient non-community water systems to streamline the 
required notification and to issue with public education, as applicable (if the water system incurs a lead 
ALE), the Department recommends requiring lead consumer notification within 30 calendar days after 
the system is made aware of the 90th percentile value. 
 
 
EPA is also requesting comment on the requirement for water systems to deliver consumer-initiated 
test results within three days of obtaining those results. 
 
The Department finds this proposal feasible but recommends that EPA clarify the requirements to state 
“three business days.” 
 
Whether the types and timing of outreach activities proposed for systems failing to meet the 
mandatory service line replacement rate are appropriate and whether other activities should be 
considered. 
 
This public education outreach activity should be in addition to any other existing public education 
activity. Furthermore, this outreach activity should be targeted to the impacted consumers, which are 
the consumers with LSLs, GRR, unknown lead, or lead connectors.  
 
EPA should clarify when the outreach activities can cease. Currently it is stated that outreach activities 
can cease when the water system meets the replacement rate. EPA should provide clarification on 
whether the replacement rate must be determined after a subsequent, or following rolling 3-year 
period, or anytime that the rate is met. 
 
The Department believes that the requirement to conduct outreach via media outlets, such as 
newspaper, television, or radio, should be consistent with the lead ALE public education requirements.  
 
The Department recommends a three-month deadline for the initial outreach activity that is required 
when a system fails to meet the replacement rate.  A three-month deadline may also result in earlier 
outreach which may encourage participation in the water systems replacement program; therefore, 
assisting the system to return to compliance with the LSLR rate.  
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether EPA should require systems to annually notify consumers if they 
are served by a lead connector, in addition to notifications for sites with lead, GRR, or lead status 
unknown service lines. 
 
The Department supports annual notification of consumers that are served by a lead connector. Under 
the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act (N.J.S.A. 58:12A-40 et seq.), annual notification is required until 
the lead service line is replaced. Note all galvanized service lines, and lead connectors are included in the 
definition of a lead service lines under the NJ Safe Drinking Water Act. The Department recommends 

 
 
Page 19 of 29 
 
that if a lead service line, GRR, or lead connector, is newly discovered, water systems must conduct 
notification to the consumer of said service line with 30 calendar days of becoming aware of the service 
line material. 
  
EPA is seeking comment on whether EPA should require additional public education requirements to 
further encourage swift service line replacement faster than the 10-year replacement deadline. For 
example, should water systems that have LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines five years 
after the compliance date for the LCRI be required to increase the frequency of the notification of 
service line materials from annual to once every six months? 
 
The Department does not believe an increased frequency of notification to consumers with LSL, GRR 
service lines, or unknown service lines to six months from annually to be a feasible measure. 
Consideration should be given to other forms of existing public education in addition to the annual LSL 
public notification, such as requiring a LSL statement on all water bills. In addition, similar to public 
education, water systems with lead, galvanized requiring replacement, or lead status unknown service 
lines in the system’s inventory, should place continuous and updated public education information on 
the water system’s website and on their social media channels.  
 
EPA is seeking information and data on when a system provides translated materials to consumers 
with limited English proficiency, what resources are used to translate materials (e.g., State resources, 
community organizations), and what barriers water systems may face in providing accurate translated 
materials. 
 
The New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act (N.J.S.A. 58:12A-40 et seq.) established requirements for 
communications with consumers with limited English proficiency. The law requires that public 
community water systems which serves a municipality in which the primary language of 10 percent or 
more of the residents is a language other than English, the public community water system shall provide 
the notification to be issued in both English and the other language(s) spoken by at least 10 percent of 
residents in that municipality. 
 
The Department requires water systems to use the most recent census data to determine if a 
municipality meets this requirement, using the following instructions 
https://www.nj.gov/dep/watersupply/pdf/secondary-language-directions.pdf.  
 
The Department currently offers a limited number of public notification templates in Spanish and is 
actively working on increasing the number of translated public notification template available to water 
systems. Water systems are responsible for translating the required public education statement to the 
appropriate language. The Department is not aware of specific funding resources or barriers that water 
systems face when providing accurate translated materials. 
 

 
 
Page 20 of 29 
 
EPA is seeking comment whether the Agency should require States, as a condition of primacy, to 
provide translation support to water systems that are unable to do so for public education materials 
to consumers with limited English proficiency. 
 
The Department does not find it feasible to hold States accountable for providing translated public 
education materials to consumers with limited English proficiency without additional assistance from 
EPA. The Department recommends EPA provide translated versions of public education materials and 
templates for States to utilize. EPA should consider providing translation services for states as one of its 
technical assistance programs, including the provision for this assistance on an emergent basis.  In order 
to meet the requirement for 24-hour public notification during an ALE, States would need to have access 
to translation services on an emergent basis in order to craft, translate, and distribute the notifications 
in all requisite languages. Due to New Jersey’s unique diversity and dense population, materials may not 
always be able to be realistically developed ahead of time. 
 
 
EPA is also requesting comment on additional ways to streamline public education and associated 
certification requirements (e.g., combine deadlines for systems to conduct public education or submit 
information to the State). 
 
The Department provides the following recommendations to streamline public education and associated 
certification requirements. 
1. The proposed public education requirements at 40 CFR 141.85 should have a deadline of within 
30 calendar days after the system is notified of the 90th percentile. Certification and reporting 
to the State should correspond with the public education deadline, specifically, 10 days from the 
deadline of the public education requirements. For example, if the deadline is 30 calendar days 
after the system is notified of the 90th percentile then the reporting to the State should be 40 
calendar days after the system is notified of the 90th percentile. 
 
2. Service line information to consumers with a lead, GRR, or lead status unknown service line is 
dependent on the system’s service line inventory. Therefore, the deadline to conduct the 
notification and submit the certification to the State should be consistent with the deadline to 
submit the updated service line inventory to the State. This would streamline the due date for 
state reporting.  
 
3. Outreach activity for failing to meet the LSLR rate should occur sooner than a year. A 3-month 
deadline would be consistent with the multiple ALE ongoing outreach activity and assist in 
efforts to streamline public education. 
 
4. Water systems that meet the criteria of multiple lead ALEs, and that must distribute pitcher 
filters or POU devices, should have a deadline that is consistent with the public education 
requirements for an ALE that marks their third ALE within a 5-year rolling period. This will allow 

 
 
Page 21 of 29 
 
the system to include the availability of these pitcher filters or POU devices in the public 
education materials and not require a separate notification to the same consumers. Certification 
can then be provided at the same deadline as the public education material requirements for 
the ALE.  
 
5. Outreach activity for systems meeting the multiple lead ALE criteria certification to the State 
should use the same deadline as the certification for public education requirements for ALE.  
 
Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level 
Exceedances 
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether water systems should be required to take additional actions when 
the system exceeds the lead action level multiple times and if so, what actions are appropriate and 
feasible, and when these additional actions should be required under the LCRI.  
The Department would recommend additional actions for a water system that has multiple ALEs after it 
has completed the treatment technique requirements. For a water system that incurs action level 
exceedances multiple times, additional measures should be taken. EPA should consider the following 
measures: 
1. The evaluation of all sources and treatment plants, such as: 
a. Identifying any change source or treatment which took place without notification to the State, 
b. Simultaneous compliance considerations, or 
c. A site visit by the primacy agency. 
2. A demonstration study if one has not already been conducted. 
3. Expedited LSL identification and LSLR schedule. 
4. Evaluation of lead and copper sampling sites. 
b. For systems with 5 lead and copper sampling sites, it may only take one sample above the 
action level for the system to exceed (the two highest lead values are averaged to obtain 
the 90th percentile). This is usually a site-specific problem (lead in faucet or fixtures, 
physical disturbance of the plumbing, high stagnation time at that tap, etc.); therefore, 
require physical remedial measures of those sites (e.g., LSL replacement, or if the system 
owns the plumbing, replacement of plumbing and tap, etc.). 
1. Evaluation of lead and copper sampling instructions, collection, and chains of custody. 
2. Additional water quality parameter monitoring, frequency, and number of sample site locations. 
3. For consecutive systems, evaluation of purchase agreement with bulk sellers; additional Water 
WQP monitoring at interconnections, and CCT evaluation for interconnections. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Page 22 of 29 
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether EPA should use three action level exceedances in a five-year 
period for identifying systems with multiple action level exceedances where additional action is 
warranted and, whether additional actions should be required sooner, or later, than the five-year 
period, or whether EPA should use a modified metric (number of consecutive action level exceedances 
in a set time period) or a different metric entirely (i.e., based on one or more factors other than the 
number of action level exceedances in a set time period).  
 
The Department agrees with this concept, but EPA should provide states with the flexibility to establish 
what additional remedial actions are appropriate based on system specific conditions (e.g., additional 
public education, and issuance of point of use filters). However, the three ALEs should be separate 
events and not consecutive ALEs that may occur as a water system is undergoing CCT or source water 
treatment steps. 
 
EPA is seeking comment on the proposed public education activities after a system exceeds the lead 
action level multiple times. EPA is specifically seeking any information, data, or analysis on whether 
the proposed public education activities support preventing adverse health effects in this situation.   
 
The Department recommends that any filter distribution program include education for consumers on 
how to properly install, use, and maintain. Based on the Department’s experiences in the city of Newark, 
many consumers were not initially installing, maintaining, and/or using them properly in accordance 
with the manufacturer guidelines. 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5ad5e03312b13f2c50381204/t/5dd70e112421805afa68ebd9/15
74374964737/Newark+Point-of-Use+Filter+Study+-+Aug-Sept+2019+Final.pdf. 
 
EPA is also requesting comment on whether systems should be required to conduct more than one 
(e.g., two or three) of the public education activities proposed.  
 
The Department recommends additional language to the public education requirements to cover the 
point of use filters and the fact that the water system has recurring ALEs.  
 
If additional public education is warranted, the Department recommends requiring some of the ongoing 
public education activities to reoccur on a more frequent basis (e.g., town meetings every six months 
versus annually, and development of brochures or pamphlets). 
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether EPA should require water systems to make filters certified to 
reduce lead and replacement cartridges, along with instructions for use, available to all consumers 
within 60 days of a system having multiple action level exceedances and whether there are any 
supporting or contrary data on whether the proposed filter requirement would be protective of public 
health.  
 
The Department supports the proposed requirement.  However, based on the Department’s experience 
with the city of Newark, it is essential for a water system to properly educate its consumers on the 

 
 
Page 23 of 29 
 
installation, use and maintenance of these filters for them to be fully protective of public health. Water 
systems should also provide detailed hands-on instructions at their town meetings, or filter distribution 
centers to address any questions. An important consideration in implementation is ensuring that water 
systems are not sampling from those taps fitted with point of use filters.  
 
EPA is seeking comment on the proposed requirements for systems to develop a filter plan and submit 
to the State after the system has multiple action level exceedances for the first time, and whether EPA 
should require systems to take additional actions to facilitate filter distribution.  
 
The Department acknowledges communities have implemented successful filter programs, including the 
city of Newark. The Department recommends that EPA either develop guidance as to what an 
acceptable program should contain or provide more specifics in the adoption of LCRI. These include 
considerations such as: 
• 
Defining an adequate operating distribution facility. 
• 
Establishing how many filters a water system should make available to consumers. 
• 
Information on how consumers may contact the water system with specific questions about 
filter operations and maintenance, and detailed instructions on how to install, operate, and 
maintain the filter. 
 
Providing a state with 15 days to review and approve a filter program plan, may not be an adequate 
amount of time in situations when multiple plans are being submitted along with other ALE 
requirements (e.g., public education) for the state to review and approve. The Department recommends 
EPA consider 30 days for review and approval.  
 
EPA is seeking comment on alternative requirements for systems with multiple action level 
exceedances to provide filters to their consumers, such as requiring water systems to provide filters 
and replacement cartridges to consumers served by an LSL, GRR service line, or unknown service line 
or to all consumers, or to require systems to consult with the State upon meeting the criteria for 
multiple action level exceedances, after which the State determines the appropriate action to reduce 
lead exposure.  
 
The Department recommends that water systems develop a filter distribution plan with review and 
input from the State. This plan may include as appropriate prioritization of issuance of filters to those 
most at risk customers. Additionally, providing states the flexibility to determine if there are other 
appropriate actions to reduce lead exposure.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Page 24 of 29 
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether an additional provision providing discretion to States to allow 
systems with multiple action level exceedances to discontinue the proposed required actions sooner if 
the system takes actions (e.g., installs optimized or re-optimized CCT, completes mandatory service 
line replacement) and is at or below the lead action level for two consecutive monitoring periods.  
 
The Department supports the concept of providing States this discretion.  
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether, in addition to the proposed requirements, EPA should provide 
States discretion to determine appropriate action following a multiple action level exceedance that is 
tailored to meet specific system needs.  
 
The Department agrees that EPA should provide States discretion to determine appropriate action 
following multiple action level exceedance that is tailored to meet specific system needs.  
 
Lead Sampling in Schools and Childcare Facilities 
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or to 
sample more frequently in schools and childcare facilities. 
 
Number of samples:  
The Department advises that samples collected should be representative of the schools and childcare 
facilities. For schools all the required 5 sample locations could be located in the same part of the 
building, even though the school may have multiple floors that provide water for human consumption. 
To remedy this, the Department recommends that sampling should be conducted consistent with the 
criteria at 40 CFR 141.92(f)(1)(i) from at least one outlet on each floor or building. These outlets can 
contribute to the five samples required if the described criteria are met.  
 
The Department recommends that EPA require community water systems to conduct sampling at all 
elementary schools, secondary schools, and childcare facilities that request sampling above the required 
percentage per year. Alternatively, EPA should require community water systems to prioritize those 
additional facilities that have requested sampling in the next sampling cycle.   
 
Frequency of sampling:  
The New Jersey Department of Education has existing rules which require certain schools to conduct 
lead sampling in accordance with an outlined sampling procedure at every outlet used or has the 
potential to be used for human consumption every three (3) years. The New Jersey Department of 
Children and Families has rules which require licensed childcare facilities to conduct lead sampling in 
accordance with an established sampling procedure to renew their license every three years or to obtain 
a new childcare license.  
 

 
 
Page 25 of 29 
 
Due to the elevated vulnerability of young children served by schools and childcare facilities to lead, the 
Department recommends a more frequent sampling frequency of every three years. If a school or 
childcare facility is served by a lead service line, the facility should be prioritized for sampling earlier in 
the rotating cycle. Additionally, EPA should provide guidance as to how school and childcare sampling 
data is identified and stored in a data management system. 
 
EPA is seeking comment on the proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community 
water systems from the requirement for lead sampling in schools and childcare facilities during the 
five-year period after the LCRI compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after January 1, 
2021 but prior to the LCRI compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver 
requirements of § 141.92(h). 
 
The Department agrees with issuing waivers to community water systems from sampling requirements 
at a school or childcare facility that has conducted a lead sampling meeting the specified criteria. 
However, the community water system should still conduct the specified lead sampling monitoring at 20 
percent of the remaining schools and childcare facilities in the water systems service area that did not 
have the lead sampling conducted as these facilities may not be included in states’ school and childcare 
testing programs. For example, in in New Jersey’s private schools are not required to conduct lead 
testing under the New Jersey Department of Education’s requirements.   
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether or not to allow States to waive the requirements of § 141.92 for 
CWSs in schools and childcare facilities that use and maintain filters certified to reduce lead, and if so, 
whether the waiver should only be allowed where schools and childcare facilities are required by State 
or local law to install POU devices and maintain them. 
 
The Department does not agree with allowing States to waive the requirements of 40 CFR 141.92 for 
community water systems in schools and childcare facilities that use and maintain filters certified to 
reduce lead. The Department is aware of situations where point of use (POU) devices, such as filters, 
have not been properly maintained in accordance with their manufacturer’s requirements. In those 
cases, the devices do not operate efficiently and fail to decrease lead in drinking water.  
 
The Department is in support of the monitoring requirement specified at 40 CFR 141.92(f)(1)(iv) to allow 
a community water system to sample at outlets with POU devices if the facility has POU devices installed 
on all outlets typically used to provide water for human consumption. 
 
 
 

 
 
Page 26 of 29 
 
EPA is seeking comment on the minimum requirements for States to provide a waiver (e.g., should the 
waiver be limited to locations where the filter use is required by State or local law; should the waiver 
be limited to locations where State or local law requires periodic sampling or testing to ensure proper 
filter use). 
 
As previously stated, the Department does not agree with granting waivers to community water systems 
for schools and childcare facilities that have filters installed. 
 
The Department does recommend EPA provide States the ability to grant a waiver in cases where 
schools and childcare facilities demonstrate that they do not use any drinking water outlets for 
consumption or food preparation in any of their facilities.  
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and childcare facility 
sampling results publicly available, and if so, how frequently and in what manner. 
 
The New Jersey Department of Education’s existing rules require sampling results be made publicly 
available on the district board of education’s website within 72 hours of receipt. These results must 
remain publicly available until another lead testing is conducted at the school and then replaced with 
the most recent sample results. 
 
The Department agrees that EPA should require a community water system to make school and 
childcare facility sampling results publicly available on the system’s website and remain available until 
future sampling at that school or childcare facility is conducted.  
 
Reporting and Recordkeeping 
The Department would like to reiterate its concern that the current version of SDWIS will not support 
much of the proposed LCRI as is and DW-SFTIEs will not be available until 2026 at the earliest. It is critical 
that EPA provide guidance on how to data manage and report these new requirements. Interim updates 
to SDWIS, FEDREP and/or other data management tools will be needed. 
 
EPA is requesting comment on the expansion of the inventory reporting to include lead connectors and 
non-lead service lines.  
 
The New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, N.J.S.A. 58:12A-40 et seq., defines a lead service line as: 
  
“a water supply connection that is made of, or lined with, a material consisting of lead, and 
which connects a water main to a building inlet. A lead pigtail, lead gooseneck, or other lead 
fitting shall be a lead service line, regardless of the composition of the service line or other 
portions of piping to which such piece is attached. A galvanized service line shall be considered 
to be a lead service line. A lead service line may be owned by the public community water, a 
property owner, or both.” 

 
 
Page 27 of 29 
 
 
The Department agrees that lead connectors and non-lead service lines should be included in a water 
system’s service line inventory and recommends that EPA consider lead connectors in the definition of 
lead service line.  
 
EPA has heard concern over the ability of States to review all required site sample plans and provide 
approvals in time for the first tap monitoring period and is requesting comment on whether EPA 
should consider a phased approach or alternate approach to reduce the burden on States following 
the rule compliance date.  
 
The Department strongly recommends a phased approach for states to review and approve lead and 
copper sample site plans. New Jersey has almost 600 community water systems which would meet the 
proposed requirement to have sample site plans reviewed and approved. These reviews would not be 
completed in time for the first monitoring period under the LCRI.  
 
EPA should consider requiring water systems to submit their sampling pool upon the effective date of 
the rule, and implement a phased approach to reviewing these plans, potentially based on the 
population of the system or number of lead service lines identified in the system. Even with a phased 
approach for reviews, the burden on current staff would be significant. States would need additional 
staffing resources to review and approve each sampling plan to ensure quality. 
 
EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be required to maintain records related to 
distribution system and site assessments conducted by water systems.  
 
States should not be required to maintain records related to distribution system and site assessments 
due to feasibility and challenges in data management. In addition, new water system information 
becomes available almost daily as water systems conduct routine maintenance, address emergencies, 
and continue records reviews. It should be the water system’s responsibility to maintain these records 
and have them available upon request. 
 
If EPA requires these records to be submitted and maintained by a state agency, an electronic reporting 
mechanism must be developed on the Federal level to allow for updates and changes as well as ensuring 
national consistency. 
 
EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be required to maintain documentation of 
determinations of more stringent implementation, including but not limited to conditions or approvals 
related to reduced compliance monitoring and additional information required to conduct a review or 
designate OCCT.  
 
The Department agrees with this concept. This documentation will support the state’s primacy and 
ensure consistency is conducted throughout the states. 
 

 
 
Page 28 of 29 
 
Compliance Dates 
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether it is practicable for water systems to implement notification and 
risk mitigation provisions after full and partial service line replacement (§ 141.84(h)), notification of a 
service line disturbance (§ 141.85(g)), and associated reporting requirements (§141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) 
upon the effective date of the LCRI. 
 
The Department believes it is practicable for water systems to implement notification and risk mitigation 
based on the timeframes provided.  
 
EPA is seeking comment on whether earlier alternative compliance dates for LCRI are practicable such 
that water systems transition directly from LCR to LCRI in less than three years (i.e., one or two years) 
based on the assumption that water systems would comply with the LCR until the LCRI compliance 
date. 
 
The Department believes that earlier compliance dates may not be practicable. Water systems will need 
adequate time to plan and develop the necessary procedures to implement the various additional 
requirements considered in the LCRI.  
 
Consumer Confidence Report 
 
EPA is requesting comment on the proposed requirement for systems to provide an informational 
statement in the CCR about the school sampling requirements with the information that consumers 
can contact the school or childcare facility about any potential sampling results. 
 
The Department supports the proposed requirement.  
 
Questions from within Preamble 
 
While EPA is not proposing to establish a maximum stagnation time in the LCRI because the Agency is 
concerned about samples being invalidated solely because the sample result it high, EPA is seeking 
comment and data, including modeling and sampling data, on potential maximum stagnation times, 
and specifically how stagnation times inform corrosion rates. 
 
The Department would support establishing a maximum stagnation time, as this measure would 
facilitate representative sampling practices. New Jersey’s lead testing requirements at schools establish 
a maximum stagnation time of no more than 48 hours. This timeframe is intended to be representative 
of a realistic “worst case scenario,” where a student potentially would consume water after a period of 
stagnation. Therefore, a maximum 48 hours of stagnation time would be representative of lead in the 
school’s drinking water. 
 

 
 
Page 29 of 29 
 
Water systems should be required to document the stagnation time or require the collector to support 
the validation of that sample. If it goes beyond the maximum stagnation time, that sample should not be 
analyzed. The Department lacks clear sampling data to support a maximum stagnation time but, to 
capture a representative sample, EPA should consider 12 hours. 
 
EPA is seeking comment about the potential inclusion of samples from lower-priority tiers (i.e., Tiers 3 
through 5) that have a higher lead or copper concentration than samples from Tier 1 and 2 sites for 
calculation of the 90th percentile for systems that do not have a sufficient number of samples from 
Tier 1 and 2 sites. Additionally, EPA is seeking comment on whether to require systems to use samples 
with the highest lead and copper concentration regardless of sampling tiers, such as including samples 
from lower-priority tiers (i.e., Tier 3 through 5) in the 90th percentile calculation for systems that are 
collecting compliance samples from all Tier 1 and 2 sites.  
 
The Department believes that all samples collected based on a water system’s Lead and Copper 
Sampling Plan should be included in the 90th percentile calculation. It is difficult for a state agency or 
laboratory to determine which samples should and which samples should not be used for compliance 
based on tiers on top of the already established requirement of using the highest value available from 
that site (first draw versus fifth liter sample).  
The Department notes that the current version of SDWIS will not be capable of calculating the new 90th 
percentile due to the complexity of determining which samples to utilize and means of simplifying the 
calculation should be considered. 
 
A deadline for inventory completion that precedes the deadline for mandatory service line 
replacement could reduce the possibility of non-compliance with the replacement deadline, but it 
would not have the advantages of a consolidated deadline as described above. EPA seeks comment on 
its rationale for the consolidated deadline approach as compared to an earlier deadline for identifying 
unknown service lines.  
 
The Department supports an earlier deadline for inventory completion.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1127 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
Office of Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE: Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and 
Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
On behalf of the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF), we appreciate the opportunity to provide comments 
to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on its proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI).1 
 
Environmental Defense Fund's mission is to build a vital Earth. For everyone. EDF’s Healthy 
Communities impact area is committed to improving the public’s health by dramatically reducing 
exposures to and health impacts of toxic chemicals and air pollution among communities and individuals 
that bear the greatest burden of exposure and/or health risk. By advancing scientific insights, policies, and 
market-based leadership and working with diverse partners and collaborators from companies, 
researchers, and community-based groups to government agencies and elected officials, we seek to make 
evident inequities in chemical- and pollution-related health impacts, and to develop, support and 
implement solutions that promote healthy communities and individuals. EDF is a member organization 
and on the Steering Committee of the Lead Service Line Replacement Collaborative. EDF is also a 
member of the White House Get the Lead Out Partnership.  
 
Introduction and Statements of Support 
EDF strongly supports EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). We firmly believe 
that everyone deserves access to safe drinking water. There are an estimated 9.2 million lead service lines 
(LSLs) delivering drinking water to families across the nation and we support getting these pipes out as 
quickly as possible. We commend the numerous public health and socioeconomic benefits this proposed 
rule would provide through several key provisions, including: 
 
• 
Replacing 100% of LSLs for most water systems by 2037, and strictly limiting partial 
replacements. 
• 
Lowering the action level, triggering more aggressive action when sampling finds high levels of 
lead. 
• 
Requiring water systems to communicate more frequently and proactively with consumers about 
LSL replacement and the system’s plans for replacing LSLs at the lowest cost. 
 
1 EPA, “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI),” 88 
Fed. Reg. 84878, December 6, 2023, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-
0036. 

 
 
2 
 
 
In addition to correcting past shortfalls of the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR),2 the 
relative success of this rule will turn on the extent to which precautions are taken to fully protect the most 
vulnerable. 
 
EDF urges EPA to finalize this rule no later than October 16, 2024, the effective date of the LCRR, to 
reduce compliance challenges and ensure that water systems begin taking action as soon as possible.  
 
We would like to express strong support for each of the provisions listed below: 
• 
Replacing Lead Pipes in Ten Years: Lead service lines should be removed as quickly as 
possible to protect infants, children, and future generations from the harmful effects of lead in 
drinking water. We strongly support the establishment of a ten-year replacement deadline.  
• 
Mandatory Full Service Line Replacement: We highly commend EPA for requiring mandatory 
full service line replacement and strictly limiting partial replacements to protect public health.  
• 
Lowering the Lead Action Level: Recognizing that there is no safe level of lead in drinking 
water, we support EPA’s proposal to lower the lead action level. We further encourage EPA to 
adopt the strongest possible standard achievable and ensure that water systems are acting sooner.  
• 
Expanded Sampling: At sites served by an LSL, we support the requirement for systems to 
collect first and fifth liter sampling. This will inform systems and regulators about the condition 
of drinking water that resides in the service line. However, sampling can have shortcomings and 
should not be relied upon solely for evaluating a resident’s exposure to lead from drinking water.  
• 
Lead Connectors: Lead connectors are yet another source of drinking water and must be 
replaced. We support EPA’s proposed requirement to remove lead connectors whenever they are 
encountered.  
• 
Multiple Action Level Exceedances (ALEs): We support EPA’s proposal to require water 
systems that experience three ALEs during a five-year period to provide additional outreach to 
affected residents and distribute lead-certified filters to protect consumers. 
Recommendations to Strengthen the Proposed LCRI 
The following are our recommendations for areas of improvement in the proposed LCRI.  
 
I. Access and Consent 
In general, we strongly support many of EPA’s proposed improvements to LCR. To meet EPA’s goal of 
replacing all lead and galvanized requiring replacement (GRR) service lines we strongly encourage EPA 
to modify the definition of “service line” to include ownership type, establish criteria for “access” and 
require a written waiver documenting refusal of access for the purpose of full service line replacement.  
 
a. Modify the definition of “service line” to include reference to ownership. 
EPA’s proposal modifies 40 C.F.R. § 141.2 by simplifying the definition of “lead service line,” removing 
the definition of “full lead service line replacement,” and adding a definition of “service line.” EDF 
supports simplifying the definition of a lead service line, however by removing reference to ownership 
water systems which could define a service line, regardless of its material type, as if it were in multiple 
parts based on ownership. The core function of a pipe is to deliver drinking water from the water main to 
the building it is connected to. The function does not change based on ownership. Additionally, by 
 
2 EPA, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR), 84 Fed. 
Reg. 61684, November 23, 2019, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-0001.  

 
 
3 
 
requiring that systems categorize the entire service line into one of four material types and only count 
each service line once regardless of ownership,3 EPA reinforces the view that the entire service line is one 
single piece. 
 
Therefore, EPA should modify the definition of a service line to include reference to ownership types. 
The same language used to define a lead service line in the LCRR should be included: “…may be owned 
by the water system, owned by the property owner, or both.” 4   
 
We suggest the following changes to Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.2: 
 
Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe which connects 
the water main to the building inlet. Where a building is not present, the service line connects the 
water main to the outlet. A service line may be owned by the water system, owned by the 
property owner, or both. 
 
b. Establish the criteria for determining whether a water system has “access” to conduct full 
service line replacement. 
The proposed rule requires that water systems conduct full lead and GRR service line replacement as long 
as the water system has control of the service line.5 “Control” is based on “access” to the service lines, 
however the proposal specifically does not establish criteria that water systems can follow to determine 
whether they have access to a service line. Without clear criteria established by the rule, the determination 
of whether there is access is left entirely up to the water system. This could result in a narrow definition 
where service lines that are owned in part or in whole by a property owner are not their responsibility. 
This is a critical issue that could potentially undermine the goal of this rule, which is to protect public 
health and address disproportionate impacts of lead in drinking water in communities.6 
 
The EPA states in the preamble that the Agency included “requirements and flexibilities to increase 
access and expedite full service line replacement.”7 While we appreciate that the EPA tries to address this 
by requiring water systems to identify barriers to access in their service line replacement plans, without 
guidance in the rule, this may not help them go far enough. Therefore, we suggest that EPA establish 
criteria that a water system should use to determine if they have sufficient access, and, therefore, control. 
 
We recommend the following changes to Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(d): 
 
(1) All water systems must replace all lead and galvanized requiring replacement service lines 
under the control of the water system unless the replacement would leave in place a partial lead 
service line.  
 
(2) Where a water system has access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full service 
line replacement, the service line is under its control, and the water system must replace the 
service line regardless of ownership of the line or the property on which it is located. Where a 
water system does not have access to conduct full service line replacement, the water system is 
not required by this rule to replace the line, but the water system must document the reasons that 
the water system does not have access and include any specific laws, regulations, and/or water 
tariff agreements that affect the water system's ability to gain access to conduct full lead and 
 
3 Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(6)(iii)(A) 
4 40 C.F.R. § 141.2 
5 Proposed 40 C.F.R.§ 141.84(d)(1)  
6 88 Fed. Reg. at 84878 
7 88 Fed. Reg. at 84920  

 
 
4 
 
galvanized requiring replacement service line replacement identified pursuant to paragraph 
(c)(1)(viii) of this section. The water system must provide this documentation to the State 
pursuant to § 141.90(e)(10). 
 
(i) This rule does not establish the criteria for determining whether a system has access to conduct 
full service line replacement. The criteria for determining whether a water system has access to 
conduct full service line replacement include: whether the water system can safely enter the 
property; whether the water system can safely conduct the replacement; and whether the water 
system has obtained the property owner’s consent, if consent is required for access. Presence of a 
lead service line on private property does not, by itself, determine whether a water system has 
access to conduct full service line replacement for purposes of this rule. Any State or local laws 
or water tariff agreement requirements to gain access to conduct full service line replacement 
must be identified in the service line replacement plan as described in paragraph (c) of this 
section and in the notification provided to persons served by lead, galvanized requiring 
replacement, and unknown service lines as described in § 141.85(e).  
 
c. Require a written waiver documenting refusal of access in cases where the property owner 
refuses full lead service line replacement. 
In general, we support EPA’s proposal to require that water systems contact a property owner four times 
using two different methods, constituting a “reasonable effort.”8 However, we are concerned that if 
systems determine they do not have access and therefore control of the service line, they will likely 
bypass any “reasonable effort” to gain property owner consent, further relinquishing them from the 
responsibility of lead and GRR service line replacement.  
 
Under the proposed LCRI, water systems are relinquished from responsibility for replacing a customer-
owned LSL after four attempts to contact the property owner.9 Resistant and/or absentee landlords may 
elect to simply not respond during this period. This is particularly worrisome given the high rate of rental 
housing in many of the nation’s cities, where a large portion of the known and suspected lead and GRR 
service lines are located. For example, the 2022 American Community Survey published by the U.S. 
Census Bureau found that 70% of residents in Newark and Jersey City are tenants, and that the percentage 
is also high in cities such as New York (67%), Cleveland and Cincinnati (60% respectively).10 This could 
leave a significant portion of vulnerable communities at continued risk of lead exposure. 
 
While four attempts to contact the property owner seems reasonable, the LCRI should require water 
systems to formally notify recalcitrant property owners that their rejection of an offer to have the 
customer-owned LSL replaced does not eliminate their liability for adverse health impacts. And for 
landlords of rental property, this likely increases it. This liability should be made explicit in 
communications to property owners.  
 
If a property owner refuses to have their LSL replaced, EPA could adopt the approach authorized in 
Illinois’ Lead Service Line Replacement and Notification Act (amending the Opportunity Law of the 
Civil Administrative Code of Illinois)11 whereby a waiver is presented to the property owner by the water 
system outlining the consequences of rejecting LSL replacement. The waiver must be signed by both the 
water system and the property owner, and a copy is submitted to the Illinois Department of Public Health. 
 
8 88 Fed. Reg. at 84923 
9 Id. 
10 Gatea, M., “Owning vs. Renting: Ranking the Top 100 U.S. Cities by Homeowner and Renter 
Prevalence,” StorageCafe, April 20.2023, https://www.storagecafe.com/blog/owners-vs-renters-in-the-
100-largest-us-cities/ 
11 Codified at 415 ILCS 5/17.12 

 
 
5 
 
We believe that presenting this type of information signals the weight of opting out of LSL replacement 
to a property owner and forces them to consider the impacts on the residents. This would be a beneficial 
recommendation for all systems to adopt.  
 
We suggest the following changes to Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(d)(3): 
 
Where a water system has legal access pursuant to § 141.84(d)(2)(i) to conduct full service line 
replacement only if property owner consent is obtained, the water system must make a 
“reasonable effort” to obtain property owner consent or written waiver documenting refusal of 
access for the purpose of full service line replacement. If such a water system does not obtain 
consent after making a “reasonable effort” to obtain it from any property owner, then the water 
system is not required by this rule to replace any portion of the service line at that address. 
 
II. Deferred Deadlines  
We recognize the careful thought and analysis that EPA used to arrive at the two eligibility criteria 
specified in proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84 (5)(v). We firmly believe that all systems should be on the same 
ten-year timeline to replace all lead and GRR service lines and recommend that EPA finalize the rule with 
that requirement. However, if EPA determines that they will allow certain systems to go beyond the ten-
year timeline, we urge EPA to consider the following.  
 
EPA is proposing to use this eligibility criteria to set annual replacement rates that remain static for the 
entire duration of the deferral period based on what is believed to be feasible under existing conditions. It 
is unreasonable to assume that existing conditions will persist ten years from the compliance date. It is, 
however, reasonable to assume that trained workforce, contractor availability, new technology, and 
operational efficiencies will be gained over time. Furthermore, operational efficiency will likely result in 
lower costs. Where affordability is a concern, market forces may shift to make service line replacement 
more affordable. Ultimately, what is seen as “feasible” today should be easier to achieve with time. The 
focus should be on efficiency and incentives, rather than on deferrals. 
 
a. Set a minimum annual replacement threshold with a framework to reevaluate replacement 
rates over time. 
Determine eligibility. EPA should only use the proposed eligibility criteria of systems with more than 
100,000 lead and GRR service lines to identify the systems that would need more time. Communities 
determined to be eligible for a deferred deadline would be strongly encouraged to participate in the EPA’s 
Lead Service Line Replacement Accelerator Program where they would receive an intensive level of 
technical assistance. In addition, EPA and States should explore creative ways to direct federal funding, 
such as unobligated dollars from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) and/or American Rescue Plan 
Act (ARPA), towards these communities.  
 
Increase the annual replacement threshold. The proposed 10,000 annual replacement threshold is 
based on the flawed assumption that cities with more than 100,000 lead and GRR service lines such as 
Chicago or Cleveland cannot do better than Denver or Newark. Service line replacement is not typically 
complex work relative to other capital improvement projects. Programs will likely prove to be scalable 
operations that can grow to meet the need in most localities. Contractor capacity can be expected to 
increase over time in response to the number and extent of contracts issued by local water systems, 
particularly if water systems proactively engage contractor associations and unions. It is reasonable to 
conclude that future improvements in technology will sharpen the efficiency of the system’s replacement 
efforts. Mayor Johnson of Chicago set a goal to “achieve replacement of 40,000 LSLs” by 2027, scaling 
up the number of replacements each year: 8k by end of year 2024, 10K in 2025, 12K in 2026, and 14K by 

 
 
6 
 
end of 2027.12 This shows that cities are committed to scaling up their programs – and this is only the 
beginning. 
 
EPA should consider that water systems can reasonably complete service line replacement at a faster rate 
than the maximum annual threshold of 10,000 service line replacements. In its technical support 
document, EPA assumes that service line replacement can only be completed in a five-month-long season 
(i.e., 20 weeks)13 even though, in many states, far more time is available based on usual weather patterns. 
To establish an annual replacement rate, two key factors must be considered: contractor availability and 
construction season length in any given year.  
 
EPA’s proposed maximum annual threshold of 10,000 service line replacements is based on Newark’s 
peak daily replacement rate of 100 confined to a five-month construction season (20 weeks). For most 
states, this limits work to a very small portion of the year, even when weather-related restrictions in some 
regions are considered.  
 
Our recommended approach is more closely aligned with the statutory requirement established by the 
Safe Drinking Water Act that EPA’s proposal “prevents known or anticipated adverse effects on the 
health of persons to the extent feasible.”14 The calculation below conservatively and realistically assumes 
Newark’s average daily replacement rate of 81 would be sustained for eight months (32 weeks):15 
 
𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝐿𝑆𝐿 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑑𝑎𝑦 (𝐽𝑎𝑛−𝑀𝑎𝑟 2020) = 𝟖𝟏 
𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑑 𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑠𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 = 32 𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑘𝑠∗5 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠= 𝟏𝟔𝟎 
𝟖𝟏 𝑎𝑣𝑔 𝑑𝑎𝑖𝑙𝑦 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠∗𝟏𝟔𝟎 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑑= 𝟏𝟐, 𝟗𝟔𝟎 𝐿𝑆𝐿 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 
 
The calculation above uses a similar rationale to EPA. It supports a higher annual replacement rate by 
extending the construction season from five months to eight months, a much more realistic timeframe and 
one that more accurately reflects what is “feasible” and “technically possible.” We believe that systems 
can do better. Therefore, we strongly suggest that EPA increases the replacement rate for these water 
systems from 10,000 to at least 13,000.  
 
Remove the per-household replacement rate eligibility criteria. The LCRI proposal notes that EPA 
lacks evidence that the ten-year deadline would be affordable for water systems with a high proportion of 
lead and GRR service lines relative to households served.16 However, the availability of a record amount 
of federal funds, including from BIL, State Revolving Fund, and Water Infrastructure Finance and 
Innovation Act, as well as appropriations put forth by many states should help address the affordability 
issue. Just because there is little data on which to judge long term performance among states does not 
mean that they cannot achieve reasonable annual targets while building a program that is cost efficient 
 
12 Chicago for the People, “Building Bridges and Growing the Soul of Chicago: A Blueprint for Creating 
a More Just and Vibrant City for All; Transition Team Report to Mayor Brandon Johnson,” July, 2023, 
https://www.chicago.gov/content/dam/city/depts/mayor/TransitionReport/TransitionReport.07.2023.pdf, 
at page 78.  
13 EPA, “USEPA (2023) Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements,” December 6, 2023, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-
0709 at page 14.  
14 42 U.S.C. § 300g–6 (d)(1)  
15 Brune, G., “Lead Service Line Replacement at a Blistering Pace Newark, New Jersey.” Jersey Water 
Works, February 10, 2022, https://www.jerseywaterworks.org/latest-news/lead-service-line-replacement-
at-a-blistering-pace-newark-new-jersey/.  
16 88 Fed. Reg. at 84913 
 

 
 
7 
 
and responsive to public health concerns. We recommend that EPA removes the per-household 
replacement rate criteria. EPA should set a rate that does not impede the achievement of 100% 
replacement of lead and GRR service lines as quickly as feasible. 
 
Set a minimum replacement rate, require regular assessments, and increases to the replacement 
rate. As opposed to setting an annual maximum replacement rate for these systems, EPA should consider 
a minimum starting rate in the first three years. At the end of the first three years and after technical 
assistance resources have been provided and more is known about the system’s relative performance, the 
relevant state agency should determine if the minimum target can be increased. Every three years 
thereafter, the system will calculate an increased replacement rate based off an analysis of efficiencies 
gained, not to exceed 20 years based on these improved efficiencies.   
 
We suggest the following changes to Proposed 40 C.F.R. §141.84 (5)(d)(v): 
Deferred deadlines and associated replacement rates. Subject to the State determination in 
paragraph (d)(5)(iv) of this section, a water system may defer service line replacement past the 
deadline in paragraph (d)(4) of this section not to exceed 20 years if the system meets one or both 
of the following conditions: (A) If 10 percent of the total number of known lead and galvanized 
requiring replacement service lines in a water system's replacement pool as described in 
paragraph (d)(6)(i) of this section is greater than 10,000 service lines, the system is eligible may 
complete replacement of all lead and galvanized requiring replacement service lines by a deadline 
that corresponds to the system replacing 10,000 lead and galvanized requiring replacement 
service lines annually.  
(A) In the first three years after promulgation of the final rule, the system must replace a 
minimum of 13,000 lead and galvanized requiring replacement service lines annually. At the end 
of the third year and annually thereafter, the system must increase the annual replacement rate via 
a reassessment framework set forth in the replacement plan subject to EPA and State 
determination.  
(B) If a water system replacing 10 percent of the total number of known lead and galvanized 
requiring replacement service lines in a water system's replacement pool, on an annual basis, 
results in an annual number of replacements per household served by the water system that 
exceeds 0.039, the system may complete replacement of all lead and galvanized requiring 
replacement service lines by a deadline that corresponds to the system replacing 0.039 average 
annual replacements per household served calculated over a rolling three-year period in 
accordance with paragraph (d)(5)(iii) of this section. To calculate the minimum average annual 
replacement rate, the system must divide 100 by the number of years needed to achieve replacing 
0.039 average annual replacements per household, expressed as a percentage. 
We also suggest the following changes to Proposed 40 C.F.R. §141.90(e)(13): 
No later than the compliance date in § 141.80(a)(3), Aany water system eligible for either of the 
following deferred deadline conditions in accordance with § 141.84(d)(5)(v) must submit the 
following information to the State and EPA: 
(i) Within 90 days following promulgation of the final rule, notification of eligibility for a 
deferred deadline and public hearing details including date, time, location, and methods used to 
advertise notice of the hearing to the public. The number of years needed to reach the deferred 
deadline when the system replaces 10,000 lead and galvanized requiring replacement service 
lines annually in accordance with § 141.84(d)(5)(v)(A); or 

 
 
8 
 
(ii) No later than the compliance date in § 141.80(a)(3), documentation of the outlining a 
framework to regularly reassess and update the annual replacement rate, not to exceed 20 years. 
Documentation that shows that ten percent of the known lead and galvanized requiring 
replacement service lines in the inventory results in the annual number of replacements per 
household served by the system to exceed 0.039 as well as the number of years needed to reach 
the deferred deadline in accordance with § 141.84(d)(5)(v)(B). 
 
b. Deferred systems should be subject to additional requirements to ensure maximized protections 
to public health.  
There is an important tradeoff between deferred deadlines and prolonged lead exposure. The prevalence 
of lead and GRR service lines is not evenly distributed among states, and we understand the need for 
some degree of flexibility in setting compliance deadlines. However, the basic goal is to replace lead and 
GRR service lines as quickly as possible. Prolonged deadlines will increase the risk of lead exposure for 
residents living in areas with higher concentrations of lead and GRR service lines, which is particularly 
worrisome for young children.  
 
If EPA must choose to adopt a deferred deadline provision, eligible systems should be subject to 
additional requirements to ensure maximum protections to public health. We recommend that EPA 
include the following requirements: 
 
• 
Require public notification of the system’s eligibility for a deferral. Specifically, the system must 
hold a public hearing within 60 days of notifying the State and advertise details of the public 
hearing via its website and press release to local media outlets. The intention of this is to increase 
transparency and engagement with customers and the public across the region. 
 
• 
Require that disadvantaged neighborhoods according to the relevant Intended Use Plan under the 
relevant State Revolving Fund program are prioritized for full lead and GRR service line 
replacements under such a deferral. Otherwise, wealthy, owner-occupied homes are likely to be 
addressed first, particularly in communities that do not cover the full cost of replacement, pushing 
those who cannot afford to pay to the end of the line. 
 
• 
Offer free, lead-certified point-of-use (POU) filters and filter replacements to residents living in a 
home served by a lead or GRR service line until the line can be replaced. Denver Water’s Lead 
Reduction Program is an excellent example of successful implementation of this practice. This 
measure would protect public health and create an incentive to accelerate LSL replacement.   
 
III. Lead Action Level 
We support EPA’s proposal to reduce the lead action level from 15 ppb. The current lead action level is 
not a health-based standard, it is based on what is achievable by water systems through corrosion control 
treatment for compliance purposes.17 There is no safe level of exposure to lead, and the American 
Academy of Pediatrics recommended that water fountains in schools do not exceed a maximum lead level 
concentration of 1 ppb for drinking water.18 We recommend that EPA pursues the strongest protections 
possible by lowering the lead action level to 5 ppb.  
 
 
17 EPA, “Lead and copper Rule Revisions White Paper” October 26, 2016, 
https://www.epa.gov/sdwa/lead-and-copper-rule-revisions-white-paper, at page 6.  
18 Lanphear, B. P., Lowry, J. A., Ahdoot, S., Baum, C. R., Bernstein, A. S., Bole, A., Brumberg, H. L., 
Campbell, C. C., Lanphear, B. P., Pacheco, S. E., Spanier, A. J., & Trasande, L. (2016). Prevention of 
Childhood Lead Toxicity. Pediatrics, 138(1), 1-15, https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-1493.    

 
 
9 
 
IV. Full Service Line Replacement 
a. Prohibit the reconnection of lead and GRR service lines. 
We agree with EPA’s proposal to allow disconnections of lead and GRR service lines to be counted 
towards full service line replacement.19 However, EPA mentions that water systems are only precluded 
from reconnecting the service line subject to State or local law or written policy. 
 
The LCRI should ensure the elimination of all sources of lead in drinking water, including an explicit ban 
of reconnection of LSLs, regardless of State or local law or written policy for the following reasons:  
 
• 
Field work that cuts, bends, or reshapes the service line can release lead20 – disconnection falls 
under this category, constituting a disturbance. If it is reconnected, the risk for exposure to lead 
greatly increases. 
 
• 
In 1986 Congress amended the Safe Drinking Water Act, prohibiting the use of pipes, solder or 
flux that were not “lead free” in public water systems or plumbing in facilities providing water for 
human consumption.21 Once an LSL is disconnected, it is no longer “in use”. By reconnecting the 
LSL after it has been disconnected, it potentially poses a violation of the federal SDWA.   
 
EPA should remove mention of state, local, or written policy and outright prohibit the reconnection of 
lead and GRR service lines once they are disconnected from service.  
 
We recommend the following changes to the Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84 (6)(iii): 
(B) A full service line replacement is counted where a non-lead service line is installed for use 
and the lead or galvanized requiring replacement service line is disconnected from the water main 
or other service line. If the lead or galvanized requiring replacement service line is disconnected 
from the water main or system-owned portion of the service line but not removed, the water 
system must be subject to a State or local law or have a written policy to preclude the water 
system from may not reconnecting the lead or galvanized requiring replacement service line to 
the water main or other service line. 
(C) A full service line replacement may be counted where a system physically disconnects a 
service line that is not in use and the water system does not install a new non-lead service line 
because there is no service line in use (e.g., at an abandoned property). If the disconnected lead or 
galvanized requiring replacement service line is not removed, the water system must be subject to 
a State or local law or have a written policy to preclude the water system from may not 
reconnecting the disconnected service line (i.e., a new non-lead service line must be installed if 
active use is to resume). 
 
19 Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84 (6)(iii)(B) 
20 Lead Service Line Replacement Collaborative, “Disturbing Lead Service Lines,” (Accessed [January 5, 
2024]), https://www.lslr-collaborative.org/disturbing-lead-service-lines.html.    
21 42 U.S.C. § 300g–6 (1)(A)  
 

 
 
10 
 
b. Require full lead and GRR service line replacement in all circumstances, except during 
emergency repairs. 
We understand how partial replacement of LSLs is often necessary during emergency repairs and support 
that aspect of the LCRI. In all other cases, EPA should require full replacement, especially during planned 
infrastructure work.  
 
When a system works on aging water mains that have LSLs attached to them, we appreciate the obstacles 
that would prevent a system from securing approval from some homeowners to replace their portion of 
the LSL. However, it is extremely inefficient to plan infrastructure work in this way and the practice is 
inconsistent with recent EPA guidelines and federal goals.  
 
Specifically, the practice raises three serious concerns: 
 
Health risks: Disturbance of LSLs releases lead into the drinking water. With partial LSL replacements, 
residents have significantly increased risk of exposure to lead without the long-term benefit of full 
replacement. And when the remainder of the line is replaced in the future, they are at risk – albeit a much 
lower one – of exposure again. 
 
Recent studies highlighting the costs associated with lead exposure strongly suggest that the benefits from 
avoiding partial replacements far outweigh the projected additional costs of replacing the full service line 
during planned infrastructure work. This work should address the lead in drinking water problem, not 
help perpetuate it. 
 
Environmental justice issues: Partial replacement of LSLs poses serious environmental justice issues. 
Customers who are expected to pay to replace the portion of the LSL running from the property line to 
their house may not be able to afford the cost when the system comes down their street. They are then left 
with little choice but to accept higher risk of lead exposure because of partial replacements. This can 
result in discrimination against low-income communities of color, which is prohibited by the Civil Rights 
Act of 196422 if the entity receives any federal funds. EPA is currently investigating this situation against 
Providence Water. 
 
As evidenced in the Lead Pipes and Environmental Justice report, communities that require water 
customers to pay a share of the cost of replacing the privately-owned portion of LSLs put low-income and 
African American households at greater risk of lead exposure. In fact, residents in wealthier areas are over 
two times more likely to pay to have their lead pipe fully replaced in such programs.  
 
In the case of absentee landlords, this approach will also put vulnerable tenants at risk, particularly in the 
nation’s urban areas where older rental housing is likely to be served by LSLs. There are strong legal 
arguments relating to rental properties. As described in Lead and Landlords,“...the accepted practice of 
requiring the consent of the landlord before replacing the lateral service line is at least questionable 
law.”23  Property rights are subject to limits affecting a landlord’s autonomy concerning LSL replacement, 
particularly given the associated public health risks.  
 
Waste of limited funding: When you have already dug up the street to replace a water main, fully 
replacing attached LSLs at the same time is the most efficient use of funding. In 2018, Indiana American 
Water demonstrated that they were able to reduce the cost of LSL replacement by 25% or more by 
 
22 42 U.S.C § 2000d.   
23 Czapanskiy, Karen, “Lead and Landlords”, Belmont Law Review, University of Maryland, Legal 
Studies Research Paper No. 2022-14, December 9, 2022,  https://ssrn.com/abstract=4298512, at page 2.     
 

 
 
11 
 
replacing the full service line in one visit. This estimate primarily reflects the benefit of having the 
requisite equipment on site as other LSLs are replaced in the same neighborhood. Indiana American 
Water estimated that having to de-mobilize and re-mobilize field crews as different customers gradually 
agree to participate in the LSL replacement program could increase replacement costs up to $2,000 per 
site based on 2017 costs. 
 
To maximize efficiency, programs that typically include a customer cost share should pay to replace the 
entire lead or GRR service line when the replacement is part of a standard water main replacement 
project. Through future distribution of BIL funding, EPA should provide financial incentives to 
communities that adopt ordinances mandating service line replacement, since that approach is the most 
efficient use of federal funds.   
 
We recommend the following changes to Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(g): 
 
Requirements for conducting partial service line replacements —(1) Partial service line 
replacement. This rule prohibits water systems from conducting a partial lead service line 
replacement or a partial galvanized requiring replacement service line replacement as defined 
under § 141.2 unless it is conducted as part of an emergency repair or in coordination with 
planned infrastructure work, excluding planned infrastructure work solely for the purposes of lead 
or galvanized requiring replacement service line replacement. Where a water system conducts 
partial service line replacement, the system must comply with the notification and mitigation 
requirements specified in paragraphs (h)(1) and (2) of this section. 
 
V. Service Line Inventory 
One of the most important and least expensive tools for protecting public health is to share critical 
information appropriately. We support EPA’s proposal to require a subset of water systems to host their 
service line inventory and replacement plan online, however, we recommend lowering the threshold for 
water systems subject to this proposed requirement from 50,000 to 10,000 to include small and medium 
systems, which comprise the vast majority of water systems.  
 
a. Lower the threshold for mandatory online publication of service line inventory from 50,000 to 
10,000 customers served.  
We support EPA’s proposal to require a subset of water systems to host their service line inventory and 
replacement plan online. We recommend lowering the threshold for water systems subject to this 
proposed requirement and an alternative method of compliance. EPA's threshold of 50,000 customers 
served for mandatory online publication of inventories and plans should be lowered to 10,000 customers 
served (i.e., a medium water system).24  
 
Both documents are critical for public transparency and educating the public on the harmful impacts of 
lead in drinking water. As an alternative method to compliance, States should be authorized to post these 
documents on their own website for individual water systems that agree to this approach, serving as a 
central database. These documents are already submitted to the state for compliance purposes,25 therefore 
the extra step that state would need to take to post these online is minimal. Systems could post an external 
link to the state’s website on their own website for their customers to easily access. Transparency is vital 
to maximize customer participation and to alert tenants about the condition of rental properties. Public 
awareness of the lead in drinking water issue is still lacking in many communities across the country, 
 
24 Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.2  
25 Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84 (7)(b)  

 
 
12 
 
therefore one the most important and least expensive tools for protecting public health is to share critical 
information appropriately. 
 
We recommend the following changes to Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(a)(5)(ii)  
 
Water systems serving greater than 50,000 10,000 persons must make the publicly accessible 
inventory available online. 
 
We also recommend the following changes to Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(c)(2) 
 
The service line replacement plan must be made available to the public. Water systems serving 
greater than 50,000 10,000 persons must make the plan available to the public online. 
 
VI.  Lead-Lined Galvanized Steel Service Lines  
In the proposed rule, EPA defines LSLs to include all or a portion of service lines composed of lead 
(excluding lead connectors) and galvanized iron or steel pipe that was or is presently located downstream 
of an LSL.26 Some communities, however, are served by a unique type of pipe: lead-lined galvanized 
steel. These pipes can be difficult to detect because they may appear to be galvanized steel at first glance 
but lead coats the interior of the service line.  
 
While there is limited information on this type of service line and its prevalence, it has been unearthed in 
at least one system. As noted on Trenton Water Works website, lead-lined galvanized steel pipe was 
commonly installed in Trenton until 1960 and is thought to account for nearly one-third (approximately 
20,000) of the system’s 62,000 total residential service lines.27  
 
The LCRI considers lead-lined galvanized service lines to be LSLs as noted in its “Guidance for 
Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory”:28   
 
“A lead-lined galvanized service line is covered by the definition of an LSL under the LCRR and this 
remains true under the proposed LCRI. Therefore, any lead-lined pipe would be required to be 
categorized as an LSL in the inventory and would be subject to the same proposed LCRI requirements as 
other LSLs in the inventory, such as mandatory service line replacement, public education, tap sample 
tiering, and risk mitigation.”  
 
EPA also states in the “Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory systems that 
attempt to identify lead-lined pipes by visual observation (such as excavation) may not see an interior lead 
lining, and the guidance contains recommendations for systems to consider information available that 
indicates the possible presence of lead-lined service lines when categorizing their service lines and 
choosing material investigation techniques.”29 
 
 
 
 
26 88 Fed. Reg. at 84965  
27 Trenton Water Works, “Trenton Water Works Lead Service Line Replacement Program” (“Accessed 
[February 4, 2024]”), https://www.twwleadprogram.com/.   
28 EPA, “USEPA, 2022b Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory,” August 4, 
2022,https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/202208/Inventory%20Guidance_August%202022_50
8%20compliant.pdf, at page 2-7.  
29 Id. 

 
 
13 
 
Lead-lined galvanized steel service lines will be the most difficult material type to verify. Therefore, EPA 
should implement the following measures to ensure public health is protected: 
 
• 
In cities where at least one lead-lined galvanized steel service line is uncovered, all galvanized 
pipes should be assumed to be lead and categorized as such. These lines should be replaced 
regardless of their location. 
 
• 
Require water systems and contractors to check for lead lining in galvanized steel service lines by 
using handheld technology, such as x-ray fluorescence (XRF) and laser analyzers, and by visually 
inspecting the inside of service lines after they are cut. 
 
• 
Update the EPA guidance to incorporate lessons learned from Trenton Water Works and identify 
additional affected systems.  
 
VII. 
Enforcement  
Past problems with gathering comprehensive compliance data from states and water systems reinforce the 
notion that the LCRI should require that enforcement-related data be submitted electronically. 
a. Mandate electronic reporting of compliance data to ensure proper enforcement.  
Even with a reduced action level, enforcement is expected to remain weak without a universal 
requirement for water systems to report test results and violations electronically. While enforcement 
efforts typically focus on health violations, poor reporting can mask serious health issues. Past audits of 
EPA’s data found that 92% of lead-related health-based violations and 71% of lead-related 
monitoring/reporting violations were not reported to EPA by states30. This does not consider potential 
underreporting by water systems to the states. 
 
This is summarized in EPA’s 2013 National Drinking Water Compliance Report:  
 
“EPA has evaluated state and regional program data quality by conducting data verification audits and 
national data quality assessments, comparing primacy agencies’ files and records with information in 
SDWIS/FED to verify accuracy, completeness and whether appropriate compliance determinations are 
made (that is, in accordance with federal regulations). These audits and assessments have shown that 
violation data are substantially incomplete.”31 
 
Without reliable and accurate data reporting, EPA’s efforts to implement a successful LCRI may fall 
short. By maximizing existing information technology tools, EPA can improve effectiveness and 
efficiency while ensuring it has the full picture on compliance.  
 
• 
Change the current system where water systems report directly through their primacy agencies. 
Water systems should conduct mandatory electronic reporting of compliance information directly 
into a database shared by states and EPA. Direct reporting will eliminate data lags and potential 
underreporting of serious violations that pose a public relations problem. As noted in GAO’s 
2011 report, many states and water systems will only use electronic reporting if required to. 
 
 
30 EPA, “2006 Drinking Water Data Quality Analysis and Action Plan For State Reported Public Water 
System Data in the EPA Safe Drinking Water Information System / Federal Version (SDWIS/FED),” 
March, 2008, https://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPURL.cgi?Dockey=P1001KJO.txt, at page 20.  
31 EPA, “2013 National Public Water Systems Compliance Report,” (“Accessed [February 4, 2024]”), 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-06/documents/sdwacom2013.pdf, at page 3. 

 
 
14 
 
• 
Implement a modern database such as upgrading the existing Safe Drinking Water Information 
System (SDWIS) to provide the following benefits: 
o Effectiveness: the system will assess data quality, automate violation determinations, flag 
the most serious problems, and expand transparency. 
o Efficiency: save money by minimizing manual processing and data input by state 
agencies, water systems, and affected laboratories.  
 
• 
In 2015, EPA established a similar electronic reporting system for its NPDES program which 
monitors companies discharging water pollutants to surface waters. 
 
Additional Points for Consideration 
In addition to the major issues raised above, EDF recommends the following.  
 
a. Consider measures to facilitate consent for service line replacement. 
EPA should encourage water systems to engage with customers to secure access to private property for 
LSL replacement. Improvements to how water systems communicate with water customers could help 
secure access to private property for service line replacement work. A report Tapping into Success: 
Strategies for Effective Lead Service Line Replacement Communications by Elevate, found that 
persistence is key, as it often takes several touch points to convince residents to participate in a LSL 
replacement program.32  
 
The strategies and lessons learned in the report should be taken into consideration by both EPA and water 
systems. 
 
EPA should also encourage states to adopt laws that facilitate consent in environmental justice 
communities. To address negative impacts on environmental justice communities, the rule should require 
full service line replacement whenever the system is performing work in “disadvantaged communities” 
(according to relative state definitions), either as part of a replacement program or in conjunction with 
planned water infrastructure work. This could be limited to communities that are currently operating 
under or have experienced an action level exceedance in the past. Working with individual states, EPA 
should prioritize federal BIL funds for this purpose.  
 
As noted in the LCRI, states should be encouraged to adopt laws similar to those enacted by the State of 
New Jersey and the City of Newark, as highlighted below: 
 
• 
State of New Jersey: Authorized municipalities to adopt an ordinance allowing water systems to 
enter private property to conduct LSLR (P.L. 2019, c.291, enacted January 9, 2020). The state 
also authorized the replacement of LSLs on private property if the work is an environmental 
infrastructure project and funded either by loans from the New Jersey Infrastructure Bank or by 
loans issued through the Department of Environmental Protection. (P.l.2021, c.184) 
 
• 
City of Newark: Local ordinance authorized access to private property for LSLR purposes and, to 
handle instances where property owners refuse to participate, conditioned the issuance of 
certificates of occupancy and code compliance for property that is sold or transferred on proper 
LSLR. 
 
 
32 Elevate, “Tapping into Success: Strategies for Effective Lead Service Line Replacement 
Communications,” December 7, 2023, https://www.elevatenp.org/publications/tapping-into-success/ at 
page 10.  

 
 
15 
 
b. Reduce barriers to full service line replacement at tenant-occupied buildings.  
EPA should encourage states to adopt legislation that requires water systems to provide filters to residents 
in tenant-occupied buildings where the property owner refuses LSL replacement. For rental properties, 
section 605-870(ff)(1)(D) of the Illinois law also requires recalcitrant landlords to install lead-certified, 
point-of-use filters: 
 
“If complete repair of a lead service line cannot be completed due to denial by the property owner, the 
community water supply commencing the repair shall request the affected property owner to sign a 
waiver developed by the Department. If a property owner of a nonresidential building or residence 
operating as rental properties denies a complete lead service line replacement, the property owner shall be 
responsible for installing and maintaining point-of-use filters certified by an accredited third-party 
certification body to NSF/ANSI 53 and NSF/ANSI 42 for the reduction of lead and particulate at all 
fixtures intended to supply water for the purposes of drinking, food preparation, or making baby formula. 
The filters shall continue to be supplied by the property owner until such time that the property owner has 
affected the remaining portions of the lead service line to be replaced.”33  
 
c. Service line replacement plans should be updated regularly. 
Service line replacement plans should be seen as a “living” document, the same way inventories are used. 
Regular updating of plans is necessary to account for statutory or policy changes, updated service line 
inventory records, and lessons learned from risk communication in the affected communities. More 
specifically, most programs will be somewhat fluid as service lines of unknown composition are resolved, 
financial resources are pursued, and practical obstacles (e.g., property access) are identified and 
eventually resolved. See section 5 of the New Jersey Statute for an example.  
 
d. To ensure the accuracy of inventory data, historic records of service line composition should be 
randomly checked. 
As proposed, the service line inventory process outlined includes a validation process that requires water 
systems to confirm the accuracy of service line composition by visually inspecting a random sample of 
pipes at a minimum confidence level of 95 percent.34 The LCRI would require this by year seven of the 
replacement program. However, the rule does not take a similar approach to historic service line records. 
In keeping with the LCRR, EPA continues to assume that states are best positioned to judge the 
appropriateness and accuracy of historic records.  
 
The LCRR does not require systems to track the records, methods, and techniques they use to categorize 
individual service lines. By maintaining continuity, EPA understandably seeks to avoid complications as 
water systems seek to update their inventory while also providing flexibility for them to adopt new 
methods and technologies. However, because of the extent to which communities rely on historic records 
when developing their service line inventory, the LCRI should be amended to require a random sampling 
of that data. This measure would help maximize efficiency of that effort because the data in the service 
line inventory forms the bedrock for all service line replacement programs. 
 
e. Consider incidents of non-compliance with local policy regarding reconnections. 
Relying on state and local policy is not a sufficient mechanism to ensure residents are not unnecessarily 
exposed to lead from the reconnection of disturbed lead and GRR service lines. EPA must consider 
incidents of self-report non-compliance with local policy on reconnections. Otherwise, there is not 
enough disincentive to ensure that the LSL is not ultimately reconnected.  
 
33  Codified at 415 ILCS 5/17.12 
34 Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84 (5)  

 
 
16 
 
 
Some existing LSL replacement contracts unrealistically expect contractors to self-report violations of 
local policy on reconnections, and related water main inspections are unlikely to cover all such instances. 
In recent years, EDF has noticed that some systems replace aging drinking water mains without 
addressing customer-owned LSLs. Homeowners often refuse to accept the water systems’ offer to replace 
the LSL because they are asked to pay a cost share to replace their portion of the line. In such cases, 
contractors may bend the customer-owned LSL out of the way when the old water main is replaced and 
then reattach it to the new main. This action could trigger a lead spike into the drinking water. Often, the 
customer is not formally notified about this possibility or its potential health impacts.  
 
For example, New York City, where the entire water service line is owned by individual property owners, 
provides a case in point. A typical water main replacement contract with the NYC Department of 
Environmental Protection (NYCDEP) includes the following provision: 
 
“If the damaged or cut water service pipe is lead, galvanized steel, or galvanized iron, the service pipe 
must not be partially replaced, but fully replaced from the main to the house control valve. If the service 
pipe was damaged, cut, or otherwise interrupted due to the Contractor’s actions or means & methods 
(including selection of shoring systems), the water service pipe will be replaced at the Contractor’s own 
cost.”35 
 
The NYCDEP does not consistently inspect customer-owned LSLs for damage before they are reattached 
or require contractors to report when damage occurs. Since they incur the cost of replacement, even if 
proper precautions are taken, it seems highly unlikely that contractors would unilaterally flag instances 
where a water service line was cut, bent, or disrupted during normal water main work. It stands to reason 
that such instances are not reported and the existing LSL or GRR is simply reconnected. Thus, EDF 
recommends that there be a general prohibition in the final rule on reconnecting such lines. 
 
Conclusion 
We ask that EPA consider our recommendations to strengthen the proposed LCRI by:  
 
• 
Modifying the definition of a service line by including: “A service line may be owned by the 
water system, owned by the property owner, or both” to explicitly include reference to ownership 
types. This change will prevent water systems from defining a service line as only the portion 
they own or is on public property.  
• 
Establishing clear criteria for determining whether a water system has “access” to conduct full 
service line replacement. This is a critical issue that could potentially undermine the goal of this 
rule, without this clarification, whether there is access is left entirely up to a water system to 
determine, which could result in a narrow definition where LSLs that are owned in part or in 
whole by a property owner are not their responsibility. 
• 
Requiring a written waiver documenting refusal of access for the purpose of full service line 
replacement. We believe that presenting this type of information signals the weight of opting out 
of LSL replacement to a property owner and forces them to consider the impacts on the residents.  
• 
Only using the proposed eligibility criteria for systems with more than 100,000 LSLs to identify 
the utilities that need more time. Communities determined to be eligible for a deferred deadline 
would be strongly encouraged to participate in the EPA’s Lead Service Line Replacement 
Accelerator Program. 
 
35 Oriental Boulevard Between Corbin Place and Pembroke Street, Manhattan Beach Area, Brooklyn 
(Volume 3 – Specifications; Project ID: BED819, Nov 5, 2021), page SW-13, subsection 10.24 

 
 
17 
 
• 
Increasing the minimum starting replacement rate threshold: Water systems can reasonably 
complete service line replacement at a faster rate than the maximum annual threshold of 10,000 
service line replacements. We recommend that the minimum starting rate is increased to 13,000 
lead and GRR service lines replaced in the first three years after promulgation of this rule.   
• 
Pursuing the strongest protections possible by lowering the lead action level to 5 ppb. 
• 
Lowering the system size threshold for mandatory online publication of service line inventory 
from 50,000 to 10,000 customers served.  
• 
Prohibiting the reconnection of lead and GRR service lines and require full lead and GRR service 
line replacement in all circumstances, except during emergency repairs. 
• 
Considering the instance of lead-lined galvanized steel service lines. 
• 
Mandating electronic reporting of compliance data to ensure proper enforcement.  
 
 
* 
 * 
 *  
 * 
 *  
 
  
EDF appreciates EPA’s consideration of these comments. If you have any questions, please contact Roya 
Alkafaji at ralkafaji@edf.org.  
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Roya Alkafaji 
Manager, Healthy Communities 
 
 
 
Maria J. Doa, Ph.D. 
Senior Director, Chemical Policy 
 
 
 
Sara Hull 
Project Manager, Safer Chemicals 
 
 
 
Gary J. Brune 
Consultant

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1325 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements
Comments:
We believe the “full replacement” definition in the LCRI to include the property owner’s portion of a 
service line exceeds the legal authority of any such water system and the legal authority of the Safe 
Drinking Water Act.
The Safe Drinking Water Act as amended by The Safe Drinking Water Act of 1996 states in Section 1400, 
Part A, Section 1401
Section 1401.  For the purpose of this title:
(1) The term “Primary drinking water regulation” means a regulation which –
(A) Applies to public water systems;
and,
(4) Public Water System
(A)(i)  any collection, treatment, storage and distribution facilities under control 
of the operator of such system and used in primary connection with such 
system, 
In one part of the LCRI, it states that water systems replace service lines and connectors “under control 
of” that water system. In Texas, that would be the portion of the service line up to the meter. However, 
later in the LCRI, it states that the EPA has proposed “requirements and flexibilities to increase access 
and expedite full service line replacement”.   This certainly contradicts with the first portion of that 
proposed rule. 
The private, property owners portion of the service line is not owned by the public water system and 
therefore not “under the control” of the public water system.  Therefore, it is not within the legal 
authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act to regulate this portion of the private connection to the public 
water system.  If a water system is expected to replace the property owner’s portion of the service line, 
that would require an easement, and the water system now being responsible for that service line, I.e. 
“taking” ownership of it. In Texas “Taking” is defined in the Property Rights Act section 2007.002(5) as: 
(A) a governmental action that affects private real property, in whole or in part or temporarily or 
permanently, in a manner that requires the governmental entity to compensate the private real 
property owner as provided by the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States 
Constitution or Section 17 or 19, Article I, Texas Constitution.
Furthermore, the LCRI seems to push water systems to ask for changes to any legislation that would 
update property rights to meet those set forth in the LCRI. Legislation should not be a bottom-up 
requirement. Water systems have no authority to propose property rights bills in any State, or especially 
Federal legislature. 

Finally, if property owners are required to replace their portion of the service line, the EPA should 
provide a funding mechanism for property owners, similar to the CDC’s grant program for individual 
cities, that came out of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Act of 1971, followed by the Maternal and Child 
Health Services Block Grant Program and the Lead Contamination Control Act of 1988. Grant funding 
should be appropriated for States to allow its residents to apply for funding in order to replace their 
portion of the service line.  This proven methodology would allow the homeowner to be responsible for 
acquiring the money for private service line replacement in the form of a grant that does not 
accumulate interest nor has to be paid back to the funding agency.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1115 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
WaterNow Alliance | 1016 Lincoln Blvd | San Francisco, CA 94129 | 415.360.2999 
www.waternow.org 
February 5, 2024 
 
Ms. Jennifer McLain 
Director 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460  
 
RE: Proposed Rule: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements (LCRI), Docket ID: No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
Dear Ms. McLain: 
 
WaterNow Alliance (WaterNow) commends the Biden Administration for its historic 
commitment to achieving 100% replacement of lead service lines, and we appreciate this 
opportunity to comment on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, EPA–HQ–OW–
2022–0801 (LCRI).1 WaterNow is a nonprofit network of 700+ local water leaders in 43 states 
nationwide advancing sustainable, affordable, equitable, and climate resilient water strategies. As 
such, we share EPA’s goal of eliminating all lead service lines (LSLs) in 10 years or less. In this 
regard, WaterNow is particularly focused on helping water utilities and municipalities to develop 
funding and financing strategies to achieve this objective.  
 
While the LCRI is for the most part an improvement, the lack of clarity and guidance about 
whether and when water systems are required to replace LSLs on private properties risks 
undermining the goals of the revised regulation. As EPA is aware, the bulk of LSLs likely fall, at 
least in part, on private properties nationwide. The LCRI as currently drafted eliminates the 
current definition of full lead line replacement which expressly includes private property. It also 
excuses water utilities from replacing lead lines whenever the system “does not have access” to 
conduct a full lead service line replacement (LSLR), but then declines to establish criteria for 
determining when the utility has such access.  
 
In our view, the vagaries and ambiguities embedded in this approach are problematic. As drafted, 
the LCRI’s lack of clarity potentially opens the door to large exceptions to the lead service line 
replacement mandate that threaten to undermine EPA’s public health goals and the LCRI’s 
fundamental objective of 100% eradication of lead lines. For these reasons, WaterNow 
recommends the following language changes to the LCRI revisions of 40 C.F.R. sections 
141.2 (Definitions) and 141.84 (replacement requirements). Suggested edits to EPA’s proposed 
rule, and suggested strikeouts, are in red text (black text reflects the current LCRI draft 
language): 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Proposed Rule, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, Docket ID 
Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801.  

 
WaterNow  
LCRI Comments 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
WaterNow Alliance | 1016 Lincoln Blvd | San Francisco, CA 94129 | 415.360.2999 
www.waternow.org  
40 C.F.R. § 141.2 (Definitions) 
88 FR 85053 -- n. Adding in alphabetical order a definition for ‘‘Service line’’ 
Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe which 
connects the water main to the building inlet. Where a building is not present, the service line 
connects the water main to the outlet. Service lines may be owned by the water system, owned by 
the property owner, or both. 
 
40 C.F.R. § 141.84 (See 88 FR 85064) 
(d) Mandatory full service line replacement.  
 
(1) All water systems must replace all lead and galvanized requiring replacement service lines 
under the control of the water system unless the replacement would leave in place a partial lead 
service line.  
 
(2) Where a water system has access (e.g., legal access, physical access) pursuant to 
§ 141.84(d)(2)(i) to conduct full service line replacement, the service line is under its control, 
and the water system must replace the service line regardless of ownership of the line or the 
property it is on. Where a water system does not have access to conduct full service line 
replacement, the water system is not required by this rule to replace the line, but the water 
system must document the reasons that the water system does not have access and include any 
specific laws, regulations, and/or water tariff agreements that affect the water system’s ability to 
gain access to conduct full lead and galvanized requiring replacement service line replacement 
identified pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)(viii) of this section. The water system must provide this 
documentation to the State pursuant to § 141.90(e)(10).  
(i) This rule does not establish the criteria for determining whether a system has access 
to conduct full service line replacement. The criteria for determining whether a system 
has access to conduct full service line replacement include: whether the system can safely 
enter the property; whether the system can safely conduct the replacement; and whether 
the system has obtained the property owner’s consent, if consent is required for access. 
Presence of a lead service line on private property does not, by itself, determine whether 
a system has access to conduct full service line replacement for purposes of this rule. Any 
State or local laws or water tariff agreement requirements to gain access to conduct full 
service line replacement must be identified in the service line replacement plan as 
described in paragraph (c) of this section and in the notification provided to persons 
served by lead, galvanized requiring replacement, and unknown service lines as 
described in § 141.85(e).  
(ii) [Reserved]  
 
(3) Where a water system has legal access pursuant to § 141.84(d)(2)(i) to conduct full service 
line replacement only if property owner consent is obtained, the water system must make a 
‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain property owner consent or written waiver documenting refusal of 
access for the purpose of full lead service line replacement. If such a water system does not 
obtain consent after making a ‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain it from any property owner, then the 
water system is not required by this rule to replace any portion of the service line at that 
address.  
(i) A ‘‘reasonable effort’’ must include at least four attempts to engage the property 
owner using at least two different methods of communication (e.g., in-person 

 
WaterNow  
LCRI Comments 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
WaterNow Alliance | 1016 Lincoln Blvd | San Francisco, CA 94129 | 415.360.2999 
www.waternow.org  
conversation, phone call, text message, email, written letter, postcard, or information left 
at the door such as a door hanger) before the applicable deadline of mandatory service 
line replacement as described in paragraph (d)(4) of this section. The State may require 
systems to conduct additional attempts and may require specific outreach methods to be 
used.  
(ii) Within six months of any change in ownership of the property, the water system must 
offer full service line replacement to any new property owner and make a ‘‘reasonable 
effort’’ to obtain the property owner’s consent as described in paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this 
section within one year of any change in property ownership. If the water system is 
unable to obtain consent from the current property owner after making a ‘‘reasonable 
effort’’ to obtain it, the water system is not required under this rule to replace the line. 
This paragraph continues to apply after a system completes its mandatory service line 
replacement program.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments and recommendations. We look forward to 
working with you and the EPA team going forward. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Cynthia Koehler  
 
 
 
Executive Director  
 
 
 
WaterNow Alliance

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2268 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
EPA Public Hearing on the Proposed Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
Overview 
On January 16, 2024, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) held a virtual public 
hearing to provide an opportunity for the public to share their input on the proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). Members of the public were notified of the public hearing 
on December 6, 2023 through the Proposed LCRI Federal Register Notice and on EPA’s LCRI 
website. EPA requested that members of the public wishing to provide oral comments during 
the hearing register in advance to ensure all those interested would be able to provide their 
input to EPA. The Agency also held time during the public hearing for comments from 
unscheduled speakers. Additionally, during the public hearing, EPA recommended that all 
members of the public provide written comments on the proposed LCRI through the public 
docket. Please see Appendix A for the public hearing agenda. A recording of the meeting is 
provided on EPA’s LCRI website. 
The meeting began with a welcome by the facilitator from Ross Strategic with instructions on 
how to use the Zoom interface and access language captioning. This was followed by an 
introduction from EPA representative, Eric Burneson, Director of the Standards and Risk 
Management Division (SRMD) in the Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water (OGWDW). A 
representative from EPA’s OGWDW presented a brief overview of lead in drinking water, a 
summary of some of the key provisions in the proposed LCRI, and information on how to 
provide written comments on the proposed rule and where to find additional resources. EPA’s 
presentation can be found on EPA's LCRI website. Following EPA’s presentation, the facilitator 
opened the first public comment period. There were five public comment periods in total. 
During each public comment period, the facilitator reviewed the ground rules and logistics to 
provide public input. All speakers were given two and a half minutes to provide their oral 
comments to EPA. The oral comments are provided below in this document which is divided 
into different sections for each of the five public comment periods. Please note that the 
comments, information, and opinions provided in this document represent those of commenters 
only. At the end of the public hearing, EPA representative, Hannah Holsinger, Supervisor of the 
Regulatory Assessment and Development Branch of SRMD in OGWDW provided closing remarks 
and thanked attendees for their participation in the public hearing. 
Public Comment Period #1 
Yanna Lambrinidou (Campaign for Lead Free Water): Hello! Good morning, EPA. Good 
morning, everybody. I'm Yanna Lambrinidou, with the Campaign for Lead Free Water. I'd like to 
start by thanking you for the many welcomed improvements to the LCRR that you have 
proposed. In the interest of time, I will focus on one requirement that, although improved, is 
still strikingly deficient for no convincing reason. That is public education, what the preamble 
correctly refers to as a cornerstone treatment technique. Indeed, proper public education can 
plug the gaps in the LCR’s other three treatment techniques and bring lead in water levels at or 
very close to the MCLG of zero right away. EPA acknowledges that taps can and do dispense 
1 

lead even when utilities meet LCR requirements, lead service lines are not present, and 
standard testing detects no contamination. This means that the proposed public education 
provisions which center on lead action level exceedances, lead service lines, and standard 
testing results are both insufficient and misleading. Among other things, they miss the vast 
majority of people who drink and eat lead on a regular basis, because they have not been told 
that lead-bearing plumbing is present in almost every building, and that it places them at risk of 
exposure at any and all times. We urge you once again to overhaul public education 
requirements so that they can maximize health risk reduction benefits, meet public right-to-
know requirements, respect the fundamental EJ right to self-determination, and align with the 
statutory standard for a treatment technique rule. We've already brought to your attention 
serious deficiencies in EPA's smorgasbord of recommendations for self-protection, some of 
which can prolong and even worsen exposures. We've also called for public education that 
urges everyone to be concerned about lead in their water, and encourages the precautionary 
use of lead certified filters. EPA's claim that a filter first recommendation to everyone would 
lead to inconsistencies, confusion, and possibly a reduction in confidence in tap water is difficult 
to understand. According to a recent study by GW, for example, the provision of filters, 
together with filter training, actually increased public trust in and use of tap water. We have the 
technology. What we're missing is truthful messaging. Without it many more generations will 
continue to be unnecessarily exposed, and will continue to suffer harm without their knowledge 
or consent. Thank you. 
Madison Dennis (Plastic Pollution Coalition): Hello! Thank you to the EPA for taking steps 
to decrease the rampant water inequality in the U.S. that leaves many primarily Black, Brown, 
and low-income communities with toxic drinking water. My name is Madison Dennis, and I'm 
speaking on behalf of Plastic Pollution Coalition. We are grateful to see the proposed rule 
requiring filters be made available to communities with multiple lead level exceedances. We 
know these filters are critical to ensure families have clean drinking water, as there is no safe 
level of lead, and it will be up to 10 years before many families have their pipes replaced, and 
up to 40 years in cities like Chicago. However, the language must be strengthened to make 
filters available as soon as possible. EPA must require water systems to distribute water filters 
to customers at no cost, provide in-depth education materials on filter efficacy and 
maintenance, and reduce the number of lead action level exceedances in the time period 
needed to require filter distribution. Water systems must actively distribute water filters to 
impacted homes. Making filters available as currently mandated in the LCRI is simply not 
enough. Cities such as Denver that have actively distributed filters have seen much, much 
higher success rates by reducing the financial and time burden necessary to access the filter. 
Education materials must also be distributed on filter efficacy and filter use and maintenance. 
Community trust in water filters and accurate servicing of the filter is critical to ensure families 
don't turn to costly, polluting water bottles, or improperly use the filter resulting in exposure to 
unsafe water contaminants. The EPA must also lower the trigger event for filters. With the 
current language, communities would have to wait three years for implementation, and up to 
another five years for a water system to distribute filters, which is eight years too long. Plastic 
Pollution Coalition also calls on the EPA to recommend safe pipe materials and advise against 
dangerous alternatives, such as PVC plastic pipes. And we also support the many other groups 
calling for a reduction in the lead action level to five parts per billion, requirements for water 
systems to pay for full lead service line replacement, increased education and more to protect 
impacted communities. Thank you for your time and consideration.  
2 

Brad Cole (Chief Executive Officer, Illinois Municipal League): I'm Brad Cole, Chief 
Executive Officer of the Illinois Municipal League, which represents 1,294 cities, villages, and 
towns throughout our state. We also submitted written comments on December 15th, 2023. In 
2021, the state of Illinois enacted its Lead Service Line Replacement Notification Act, which 
created statutory deadlines for municipalities and community water supplies to undertake 
multiple aspects of lead service line replacement. The State Act requires owners and operators 
of those water supplies to develop complete material inventories and then implement a 
comprehensive plan for their replacement. The timeline is based on the number of lead service 
lines found within each specific municipality, with requirements to complete the work between 
15 and 50 years from the Act’s effective date. It is not a one-size-fits-all mandate like this rule. 
The Illinois EPA is responsible for receiving and reviewing and improving those plans. Initial 
submissions occurred in 2022, additional plans submitted in 2023, and final material inventories 
are due in April of 2024. Annual reports are then required to be submitted to the Illinois EPA. 
Some may think the 15- to 50-year timeline is too long. Keep in mind that the State Act, just 
like these proposed federal requirements, does not come with any grant funding to actually 
accomplish this massive task. In Illinois alone, this is estimated to be an $8 billion mandate. 
That $8 billion estimate assumes that we will be able to actually find the skilled workers 
necessary to complete the work. If this is a public health crisis, like the government says it is, 
and which we want to remedy, the federal government should assess these costs across all 
taxpayers nationwide, and provide grants, not loans, to fully cover the costs. To this specific 
proposed rule, we understand that the largest of communities will be exempt. We appreciate 
that, but exempting the communities that have the biggest problems, while rapidly reducing the 
time allowed for other communities to comply, just doesn't make sense. Illinois established a 
reasonable although still aggressive timeline to replace lead service lines. The proposed federal 
rules that will force us to be done in 10 years are quite frankly impossible and almost ridiculous. 
No one would propose replacing the entire interstate highway system in 10 years, so why would 
we suggest replacing hundreds of thousands, if not millions of water lines in a similar way or 
timeline. I mean no offense by that statement, but the work just can't be done. If there are 
enough workers to do the work, there won't be enough money to pay for them. Please be our 
partner to help us, not a hindrance. This proposed rule, while well-intentioned, cannot be 
implemented. Please exempt states that have already acted and are implementing their own 
plans. Thank you.  
Erik Olson (Senior Strategy Director, Natural Resources Defense Council): Thank you 
very much. I'm Eric Olson and I'm a senior strategic director for health with Natural Resources 
Defense Council. I wanted to highlight, first of all, that we thank EPA for proposing many 
improvements in the Lead and Copper Rule, including the 10-year mandate, the better sampling 
for lead, the improved inventories, the lower action level from 15 to 10 and the small systems 
provisions. I wanted to focus on a few items that really do require improvement. First of all, 
water systems should be required to pay for full lead service line replacement. This is going to 
be a major environmental justice issue, since low-income consumers and many landlords simply 
will not be able to or will refuse to pay, which could mean millions of lead service lines might 
not be replaced as a result. Similarly, there is a provision that defines “control” of a service line 
in a way that is much narrower than EPA defined it back in 1991. Public water systems 
generally required or approved the use of lead, often installed the lead pipes themselves, and 
water systems can always cut off water. This is going to become a major loophole if water 
systems can simply say that they don't control a lead service line and fail to replace the lead 
3 

service line, which again could result in millions of lead service lines not being replaced. I 
wanted to also highlight our concern with some of the extensions, including the extension for 
cities like Chicago, that could get generations of extensions, 40 to 50 years or more, and there's 
a separate provision that could exempt from 700 to 2,100 water systems across the country 
from lead service line replacement in 10 years. We have concerns about that. I wanted to also 
suggest that the action level be reduced to five parts per billion. We have highlighted that in 
our separate comments, and we'll continue to highlight it. I wanted to also support what Yanna 
said earlier about public notification, consumer confidence reports, and public education. They 
really need to be fixed, and we'd like to see filters be provided directly at the expense of the 
public water systems. In sum, we appreciate the improvements, and we'll submit detailed 
comments in addition, as well as on the schools and daycare center provisions. Thank you very 
much for the opportunity. 
Jason James (Assistant Attorney General, Office of the Illinois Attorney General): Hi, 
I'm Jason James, an Assistant Attorney General in the Office of the Illinois Attorney General 
Kwame Raoul. I'm here speaking today on behalf of the people of the state of Illinois. First of 
all, thanks for EPA for providing opportunity to comment on the new proposed Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements. Illinois has a vital interest in ensuring strong federal regulation of lead 
service lines for drinking water. Illinois has more lead service lines than any other state, with 
over 650,000 known lead service lines and over a million lines consisting of galvanized steel or 
an unknown material. But these service lines must be replaced, as EPA has set its MCLG for 
lead at zero – no lead in drinking water. Our Office, the Illinois legislature, and Illinois agencies 
have taken major steps to address the serious health hazards presented by lead in drinking 
water. For instance, our Office has brought legal action against a water utility in University Park, 
which is in Will County, Illinois, that failed to provide residents with safe drinking water 
uncontaminated by lead. Furthermore, the Illinois General Assembly recently adopted the Lead 
Service Line Replacement and Notification Act. This law requires complete replacement of lead 
service lines in Illinois, while prioritizing replacement in high-risk communities, such as 
preschools, daycare centers, parks, playgrounds, and hospitals. Our Office strongly supports 
EPA's new LCRI proposal. The existing rule is in some ways less protective than the original 
1991 rule, and the improvements are vitally important. Most importantly, we support EPA's 
proposal to require full replacement of lead service lines. As demonstrated by Illinois's recent 
legislation, the goal is achievable. We also commend EPA for examining impacts of lead in 
drinking water to environmental justice communities. These communities, including 
communities of color and low-income communities, have worn a disproportionately high burden 
of environmental and public health harms. This is especially true in Illinois, where communities 
of color are disproportionately exposed to lead in drinking water and the health risks posed to 
these communities must be addressed. Thanks again to EPA for providing the opportunity to 
provide verbal comment. We’ll follow up these comments with detailed written comments in 
response to the proposal, along with several other state attorneys general. Thank you.  
Dionna Brown (National Director of the Youth EJ Programs, Black Millennials for 
Flint): Greetings, representatives from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and other 
stakeholders. My name is Dionna Brown, D-I-O-N-N-A, national director of the Youth EJ 
Programs for Black Millennials for Flint and a proud native of Flint, Michigan. I am one of the 
children poisoned by the Flint water crisis of 2014. As a survivor of lead poisoning, I grapple 
with irreversible cognitive and behavioral challenges, conquering them daily to succeed 
4 

academically and professionally. Additionally, as a young adult, I now bear the grief of losing 
my beloved and respected grandmother to chronic kidney disease caused by high lead levels in 
her blood. As a resident, I appreciate the progress with the proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements. While EPA advocates for lead service line replacements in 10 years, the 
proposed rule has certain faults. No amount of lead in drinking water is deemed safe. Hence, 
remediation should be lowered to 5 parts per billion from 10. The Centers for Disease Control 
sets an action level at 3.5 parts per billion revealing conflicting standards among agencies. EPA 
should consider establishing a national lead service line inventory reported by cities and states 
and integrate it into EPA EJScreen Tool and the Climate and Economic Justice screening tool. 
There is still much work to be done to protect frontline communities like mine that have far too 
often been overburdened with unsafe drinking water and mistrust and neglect from government 
agencies. Centering on the 17 Principles of Environmental Justice and aligning with Executive 
Order 14096, Revitalizing Our Nation's Commitment to Environmental Justice for All, we believe 
this administration can state in the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, reducing harm to 
vulnerable populations. We urge you to finalize the LCRI by October 2024 as communities like 
Flint cannot afford further delays. Thank you for your time, and I implore you all to stand on 
the side of environmental justice.  
Doris Cellarius (Citizen, Portland, OR): My name is Doris Cellarius, I live in Portland, 
Oregon. My drinking water has exceeded the EPA action level for a number of years now, and I 
am speaking today not so much out of concern for myself as for the children in Portland, 
because many homes in Portland do have levels of lead in their drinking water that exceed the 
action level that EPA has set. I would like to thank you for the opportunity to speak. It is very 
important to me that the proposals that EPA has made for the improved regulations be 
implemented but I absolutely insist that EPA should set an action level or hopefully an 
enforceable MCL of five parts per billion. That has been the limit in Canada for since 2019, and 
I would say that the citizens of Canada are better protected than the citizens of the United 
States. To begin to implement the new regulations, it's our highest priority that all lead service 
lines be replaced, beginning with those communities most at risk. While lead service lines are 
being replaced, people should be provided with free water filters and replacements for the 
filters and the pitchers until the lead service lines have been installed and their drinking water is 
at a safe level. Other than this, I encourage EPA to do more to protect children. The amount of 
testing of schools should be increased. You may know that led by Environment America, many 
states are beginning to do this, and it is quite possible, so I encourage EPA to pay much more 
attention to the drinking water in schools. Thank you. 
Eric Lotke (National Education Association): Hi there, I am Eric Lotke with the National 
Education Association. We are the largest labor union in the country with three million 
members, including teachers, parent educators, bus drivers, custodians, food service workers, 
nurses, and lots and lots of other professionals. We are deeply committed to the health and 
safety and education of the 50 million students who attend public schools. So first, I want to 
commend the EPA and thank you for seeking to reduce the hazards of lead in the drinking 
water and creating a long-range plan to get it done. The toxic effects of lead are well known, 
especially for children, as well as the racial disparities and who suffers most and problems of 
environmental justice. So, thank you for making a long-range plan to try to fix these. More 
specifically, I want to talk about schools that are covered by the rule. The American Academy of 
Pediatrics recommends that lead concentrations in water do not exceed one part per billion, and 
5 

since it's a long-range plan, that's the standard EPA should adopt. Secondly, there are short-
term steps that you can take right away. We strongly recommend a “filter first” approach in 
schools. EPA should require installing point-of-use filters on all taps for drinking water, cooking, 
or beverage preparation. Tainted water fountains or fountains that cannot accommodate filters 
should be replaced with new water stations. This is a short-term, low-cost intervention. This is 
an early step that we can do while working on the 10-year long-range plan that requires 
digging pipes and all the rest of it. But right now, filter first – put filters on the on the ends of 
the taps. That's my message. Thank you for the long-range plan and filter first, and thank you 
for your time and attention.  
Steve Via (American Water Works Association): My name is Steve Via. I'd like to offer the 
following comments regarding the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements on behalf of 
the American Water Works Association. AWWA’s approximately 50,000 members are the water 
professionals who lead and assist public water systems in complying with the current Lead and 
Copper Rule, and will play a similar role in implementing future rule requirements. Like the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, AWWA's members have a continuing interest in the provision 
of safe drinking water and in building on our success to date in reducing exposure to lead 
through drinking water. AWWA shares EPA’s commitment to both effective use of corrosion 
control and reducing the remaining sources of lead in contact with drinking water. AWWA 
supports the continuing regulation of lead in drinking water through a treatment technique, and 
supports the proactive replacement of lead service lines as an element of the treatment 
technique. AWWA will be submitting separate written comments to EPA with recommendations 
for ways EPA can simplify implementation of the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements and 
more effectively achieve the rule's objectives. AWWA's comments also address aspects of the 
rule that EPA should revise to better reflect the state of corrosion control science, legal 
considerations, state regulatory oversight capacity, and the logistics of infrastructure 
construction. We ask that EPA give serious consideration to our written comments. Importantly, 
given the substantial changes EPA proposes in Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, AWWA 
asks that EPA immediately, and through a separate action, extend the current compliance dates 
for the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, except for those compliance dates that EPA is 
proposing to leave in place in the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. Currently, water 
systems are expending resources to comply with codified requirements that take effect in 
October 2024. The current rule-making process is not scheduled to be complete until late in 
2024, immediately prior to those compliance deadlines. Water systems will be in jeopardy of 
non-compliance if they do not act today, should EPA not meet the schedule for promulgating 
the LCRI. Thank you for this opportunity to provide input to the Agency for this important 
rulemaking. 
Lynn Thorp (National Campaigns Director, Clean Water Action, Clean Water Fund): 
My name is Lynn Thorpe and I'm the National Campaigns Director for Clean Water Action and 
Clean Water Fund. The Lead and Copper Rule proposal reflects the recognition that we can and 
must continue to reduce lead in drinking water. Our engagement around the Lead and Copper 
Rule updates has emphasized the need to fully replace all lead service lines. We will comment 
on other aspects of the proposal in our written comments. Fully replacing all lead service lines is 
an ambitious undertaking, and we recognize that, but the time has come. We've known a long 
time that lead can harm developing brains of infants and children, but now we know that even 
low-level exposure contributes to cardiovascular disease. This widens the circle of concern, and 
6 

so replacing lead service lines, the largest source of lead when they're present, will reduce lead 
in drinking water. It therefore overall reduces all lead exposure and every bit matters to 
people's health, as we now know. Also because of exposure to all sources lead 
disproportionately burdens people of color and low-income people, any added exposure from 
lead in drinking water compounds that inequity. And of course, lastly, momentum toward the 
goal is greater than it's ever been – and we know that from water system activities, from state 
policy developments, congressional interests, and EPA's own proposal. We've also consistently 
urged EPA to require all water systems to cover the full cost of replacement, regardless of 
ownership or whether lines under private or public property. And the Environmental Justice 
Review that EPA commissioned when doing the LCRR in 2019 found that presuming that 
customers must pay for things, including lead service line replacement costs, leaves low-income 
people with inequitable access to the benefits of reducing the lead in their water, and therefore 
puts them at disproportionately higher health risks. And requiring customers to contribute has 
been a common practice historically, but it's changing. Water systems have been finding ways 
to conduct and finance replacements without the customer contribution. We think that 
perpetuating this sort of antiquated approach will undermine the lead service line replacement 
and public health protection goals of the proposal itself. And we thank you for the opportunity 
to comment on the LCR proposal today. 
Iyana Simba (City Programs Director, Illinois Environmental Council): Good morning. 
Thank you for the opportunity to present today. My name is Iyana Simba, and I'm commenting 
on behalf of the Illinois Environmental Council as a city programs director. IEC represents over 
a hundred environmental organizations and many members focused on water quality issues in 
Illinois. As many are aware, over 700,000 lead service lines, or one-eighth of all in the nation, 
are located in Illinois. Chicago alone has 400,000 lead service lines beneath its surfaces. 
Moreover, in Illinois, 65% of Black and Latinx Illinoisians are living within communities with 
94% of the known lead service lines. With no safe level of lead exposure, there are over 
350,000 children in our state that are at risk of lead poisoning today. Many communities have 
begun to replace their lead pipes, but not quick enough, and we know that adding more 
chemicals simply won’t cut it. That is why we appreciate and applaud the U.S. EPA decision to 
fast-track replacement through the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. Particularly, we uplift 
the following changes: lowering the lead action level from 15 parts per billion to 10 parts per 
billion, the outreach and filtering requirements for water systems that exceed the lead action 
level multiple times, and the updated tap sampling protocol. The Lead and Copper Rule remains 
a crucial pillar for public health protection. As such, we want to highlight the following concerns, 
number one being the alternate service line replacement threshold. We do not accept that 
alternate threshold of 8,000 replacements. If adopted, it would give the city of Chicago up to 50 
years to replace all its lead service lines, an amount of time that we find not only impractical, 
but also dangerous, as another two generations would face lead exposure. We know that 
Chicago has the capacity to replace its lead pipes in a much shorter timeframe. The 2023 
mayoral transition report sets the goal of replacing 40,000 lead service lines by the end of 2027. 
If Chicago could continue to scale up to 16,000 lead service lines replaced annually by 2028, 
this would push Chicago to a much shorter timeline of 25 years as compared to the 50 years 
proposed underneath the Lead and Copper Rule. Additionally, we need the rule to require water 
utilities to cover the full cost of lead service line replacement. In Chicago, it can cost up to 
$30,000 to replace a lead pipe, a price that many residents, especially low-income, cannot 
afford. As such, low-income residents may opt out from lead service line replacement and 
7 

continue to consume contaminated water. In summary, we implore the Agency to make 
necessary changes to ensure that the finalized Lead and Copper Rule Improvements truly 
protect water quality for all across the nation in generations to come. Thank you for your time. 
Yvette Jordan (Founding Member, Newark Education Workers Caucus): My name is 
Yvette Jordan and I'm a founding member of Newark Education Workers Caucus, which is a 
social justice caucus in Newark, New Jersey, and my journey into activism was really from the 
lead water crisis in Newark in 2018. As you know, every day in every state across America, our 
children, especially our children of color, are exposed to lead and other toxic chemicals in their 
tap water, home, community spaces, and schools because of lead service lines. And that's why 
I am so thankful the Biden administration has really taken a significant step to protect our 
children by introducing the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements that require replacement of 
lead service lines within 10 years and introduce a better lead testing and treatment of water, 
lead pipes. The stats are really alarming, and so many Black adults in particular expressed 
concern about drinking polluted water. And this is not a problem confined to certain parts of the 
country – it's a crisis all throughout America, and it affects us all. When Newark experienced its 
water crisis, we took, “we” meaning Newark Education Workers Caucus as well as NRDC, we 
took legal action against city and state officials violating the Safe Drinking Water Act, and the 
Newark water crisis serves as both a stark and sobering reminder and also highlights how we 
can ameliorate this issue. Thousands of residents, including children, have lived through years 
of drinking water that contained illegal lead levels, and the crisis is impacted every day, and 
even in our schools – as I said, I'm an educator, so I know this. It’s heartening to see the Biden 
administration and the EPA to have taken a critical step with the updated rule to get lead out of 
our communities, and this important action follows years of work. But, there is still more work 
to be done in all cities that are held to the 10-year timeline. Our schools and child care facilities 
are protected, and the water systems are required to pay the full cost of removing dangerous 
lead service lines instead of placing the burden on our communities. You and the entire 
administration have a unique opportunity to tackle this urgent health crisis. It is on the EPA to 
listen to our voice and finalize the most strongest, equitable, Lead and Copper Rule that puts 
impacted communities like mine first and by replacing every single lead service line in the next 
10 years, and requiring utility companies to pay their fair share for the cleanup, not the 
residents. And now is the time and the Biden administration has the means, the mandate, and 
the momentum to lead us into a future where clean and safe drinking water is not a privilege, 
but a right available to every American. Thank you.  
Tracy-Ann Jennings (Benton Harbor, MI): Good morning. My name is Tracy-Ann Jennings, 
and I'm a mother, resident of Benton Harbor, Michigan, and a community and social justice 
advocate representing Project Me Foundation in Benton Harbor. Thank you for this opportunity. 
I appear before you today to address a critical issue that demands our immediate attention and 
collective commitment: environmental justice. Throughout history, federal agencies have 
unfortunately been entangled in discriminatory practices that disproportionately impact 
marginalized communities. One glaring instance of such historical injustice is exemplified by the 
lead piping issues in Flint and Benton Harbor, Michigan, underscoring the severe consequences 
of systemic neglect and environmental justice. In these communities, the distribution of 
resources, particularly in terms of access to clean and safe drinking water, has been marred by 
discriminatory policies. The lead contamination crisis, notably in both Flint and Benton Harbor, 
exposed a failure in the provision of a basic human necessity: safe water. The repercussions of 
8 

these crises extend beyond immediate health concerns, leaving indelible scars on the affected 
communities, and amplifying existing systemic disadvantages. The lead piping issues in Flint 
and Benton Harbor serve as contemporary examples of how federal agencies can perpetuate 
disparities among racial, ethnic, and low-income communities. The inadequate response to the 
water crises exacerbated the challenges faced by these communities compounding their 
historical struggles and contributing to a sense of environmental injustice. It is imperative that 
we recognize the interconnectedness of historical discrimination and contemporary 
environmental issues. The lead piping problems in Michigan highlight the need for a 
comprehensive and equitable approach to environmental policy. These communities deserve 
more than just acknowledgment of their struggle. They deserve proactive measures to rectify 
the injustices that they have endured. Preventing disparate impacts is not just a regulatory 
requirement; it's a moral imperative, and it involves dismantling systemic barriers, fostering 
inclusivity, and ensuring that environmental policies do not perpetuate or deepen existing 
inequalities. The EPA must adopt policies and practices that prioritize the well-being of 
environmental justice communities, ensuring that they are not disproportionately burdened by 
environmental hazards or deprived of the benefits of a healthy environment. Thank you so 
much and have a nice day. 
Marcus Elmer (Copper Development Association): Marcus Elmer, with the Copper 
Development Association. I want to thank the EPA for the opportunity to comment on the LCRI. 
I want to start out by saying that in the LCRI proposal, I do like and support the continued 
timeline of state inventory requirements, especially determining the unknown service lines that 
are out in our community. However, I do have concerns around the 10-year timeline and 
available funding. As we saw on the previous slide we kicked off this forum, that the estimated 
annual cost and timeline just don't add up, not even considering the lead service line $15 billion 
and $11.7 billion supplemental. For expected cost, I would reference the 10-year to 15-year 
lead service line replacement to be closer to $50 billion. So I would encourage the EPA to start 
escalating that with the current administration and beyond. I also have concerns with the 
number of extension opportunities, too, that will have efforts or available funding left to those 
communities that are underserved, those communities that need to do infrastructure to set up 
for lead service line replacement as they have to the maximum five-year extensions having 
available funding when needed. So again, more funding available. I do want to emphasize 
we've heard a few times today that full service line replacement, knocking down the barrier on 
what is public- versus private-owned. We do see the last EPA study of over twelve million 
service lines, but the combination of lead service lines and galvanized service lines need 
replacement. That's going into the home, looking at premise plumbing, whether it be from the 
meter or from the street, making it all one service line in all communities and households. 
Thank you for allowing me to comment.  
Jorge Vazquez (Volunteer, NRDC Action Fund): Thank you for the opportunity to testify 
today. My name is Jorge Vazquez, and I'm here as a volunteer for the NRDC Action Fund. I'm a 
game designer working from home in my hometown of Whiting, Indiana. This past September, 
I learned that I have lived most of my life just one block away from a newly designated 
superfund for lead contamination: Federated Metals Corporation in Whiting. This is just one of 
the many reasons why I volunteer to push for better and stronger environmental protection 
policy. Growing up in Whiting, I spent a lot of my time with my family and friends in the parks 
and in our backyards, not knowing that we were possibly exposed to dangerous amounts of 
9 

lead in the soil. In communities like mine, multiple sources of pollution add up. Through no fault 
of our own, lead can leach into our drinking water, and smelters can spew it into our yards. I'm 
surprised to find that we have long known the effects of lead, yet we have over nine million 
lead pipes still in use today. There's no safe level of lead. These pipes are providing 
contaminated water to places like schools, child care centers, and other places that provide 
services to the people that are the most vulnerable to lead. All children deserve clean drinking 
water and a clean environment. I urge you to set the strongest standards possible that leave no 
one behind, and we need you to set them as quickly as possible. I urge you to require utility 
companies to cover the cost of the lead service lines replacement and keep them to a 10-year 
timeline. With these standards, I hope we can finally provide safe drinking water for everyone 
in this country, especially children. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. 
Matthew Cutrona (Resident, New York State): Thank you. My name is Matthew, and I am 
a New York resident, and a Laudato Si’ Advocate, an internship program for young adults under 
the guidance of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, aimed at promoting 
environmental justice through advocacy and education. I am grateful for the opportunity to 
testify today about the new proposed LCRI EPA standards. Far too long are low-income 
neighborhoods discriminated against in society. Whether it be economically, politically, they are 
not fairly represented. Most of all, they are disproportionately discriminated against in the bare 
essentials of life: access to drinking water. How can it be that a first world country, the leader 
of the free world, has trouble ensuring that the basic needs of sanitary water are met? Our 
infrastructure is failing us, and we need to do better. Ensuring our pipes that carry our water do 
not contaminate lead will see ripple effects for years to come. I implore you to work diligently 
and swiftly to replace the over nine million lead service lines still in use. Enough is enough when 
those issues have been present for over 40 years. I want to positively stress the importance of 
fighting against environmental justice which these standards significantly do. Low-income and 
minority populations, especially those with high adverse human health or environmental effects, 
always get the short end of the stick. At the same time, that was the reality, and that need not 
no longer. On September 1st, 2023, His Holiness Pope Francis challenges us to affect public 
policy to care for the environment so that it cares for us. So, I continue to pass that challenge 
to you; act with preserving and protecting the environment. Thank you for the opportunity to 
testify, and I hope you have a great day. Thank you. 
Michaela Jackson (Water Quality and Regulatory Compliance Manager, City of 
Greeley, CO): Hello. Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment verbally on the 
improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule. My name is Michaela Jackson, and I'm 
representing the City of Greeley in Colorado as the water quality and regulatory compliance 
manager. As a representative of a water utility, I acknowledge the importance of the EPA’s Lead 
and Copper Rule Improvements to protect public health. However, we are concerned about the 
feasibility and resource implications for smaller and mid-sized utilities where a lot has been 
previously found, and large-scale investigations may be required in the absence of accurate 
historical records. The requirements to document all service line materials, particularly non-lead 
pipes, proposes significant, logistical, and financial challenges. The requirement to classify the 
material of non-lead service lines in the same timeline as replacing known or recently 
discovered lead lines further burdens utilities on already stretched schedules. Therefore, we 
propose reconsidering the timeline and scope of the non-lead material classification 
requirements. Prioritizing the identification and replacement of lead service lines should be our 
10 

immediate focus. We suggest a phased approach, allowing utilities more time to address non-
lead materials. This approach would enable us to allocate resources effectively, ensuring the 
most urgent public health concerns related to lead exposure are addressed first, without 
overburdening our operational capabilities. We urge the EPA to consider these challenges and 
provide adequate support and flexibility, particularly for smaller systems with limited resources, 
to ensure effective compliance without compromising service, quality, or financial stability. 
Thank you.  
Marcell Simmons (Lead Prevention Ambassador, Black Millennials for Flint): Hello. My 
name is Marcell Simmons. I am from Flint, Michigan, and I am a lead prevention ambassador 
from Black Millennials for Flint. I have lived in Flint, Michigan all of my life, and I have dealt with 
the Flint water crisis firsthand. There's a good chunk of my life ever since I was 14 years old in 
high school, drinking out of water bottles, still doing it right now, so that way I don't have lead 
exposure. Everybody in my city has. What I want from the EPA is to help ensure that we do not 
continue this anymore. It is common knowledge that lead exposure causes brain damage to the 
nervous system, slow breath and development, learning and behavioral problems, and hearing 
and speech problems. All of these things are things that happen a lot coincidentally in lower 
poverty communities, in which those lower poverty communities are always minority, no 
minority-poverty, communities. It's just a pattern that happens. We are the United States of 
America. We need our people of the next generations to succeed and be greater, so that way, 
we can continue being the United States and continue being great for everybody. That is our 
mission. We cannot do that if our children right now are having developmental issues that 
started from the day that they were born in things that are being done to their bodies, and 
because of the environment around them. It has nothing to do with outside things. This all has 
to do with what's coming into them right now inside of their bodies, and it's happening every 
single day. So, I just urge the EPA to please consider this, and please go forward with this. 
Thank you. 
Shellie Chard (Water Quality Division Director, State of Oklahoma): Hi, good morning 
or afternoon, everyone. Thank you for allowing the state of Oklahoma to make these 
comments. I am Shellie Chard. I am the water quality division director. I run the state water 
programs. I think we all appreciate the need to regulate lead and reduce that in our 
environment, and particularly in our drinking water. However, we do have some concerns that 
we need to address, and we will be submitting written comments for the record. One of the first 
comments that I would make is setting regulatory standards do not protect public health. It is 
the implementation of those standards that protect public health, and we need to make sure 
that we can properly and adequately do that. This rule is very complex from a regulatory 
perspective. We do not feel that it has gotten any easier to implement, and based on the 
comments we are receiving from small, rural, and underserved communities, our drinking water 
systems feel this way as well. We have heard comments about the fact that we need to make 
sure that the utilities are paying the full cost. Just a reminder, utilities pass on those costs to 
their ratepayers. So that's something that we definitely have to keep in mind. We have some 
very technical issues that we would like EPA to consider, and we will include those in our 
written comments. But I think something that bears seeing the light of day in this forum, as we 
are increasing the number of samples that are required, we need to consider laboratory 
capacity. In my state, we're already seeing some of those impacts. So, we want to make sure 
we can address that record keeping and reporting. We know that EPA is going through an 
11 

update or an upgrade of its data system. Without that data system in place, it's going to be 
very challenging for some states to implement all of these requirements and adequately track 
them. We have concerns about workload related to all of the sampling plans and corrosion 
control plans coming in at the same time. So, the state looks forward to working with EPA to 
address all of these issues. So, thank you for allowing me to be here today and offer these 
comments. 
Deandrah Cameron (Policy Manager, New Jersey Future): Good morning, and thank 
you. I’m on the list for later on, so I can be removed from that. My name is Deandrah Cameron. 
I'm a policy manager at New Jersey Future. We believe that every New Jerseyan deserves to 
live in a prosperous fair economy, and we promote policies for cost-effective sustainable water 
systems. The New Jersey Future played a pivotal role in crafting a comprehensive lead service 
line replacement law in New Jersey and we're proud to work with our partners across the nation 
to show collective leadership on public health issues. Two years into the implementation of the 
law, we found that a “no customer cost-share” policies are pivotal to the removal of the service 
lines to maximize efficiency and pace of lead service replacement. To ensure that all lead 
service lines are replaced, water utilities need a statutory authority to access private property, 
and they should not be allowed to charge a cost-share. LSLs are typically jointly owned. The 
water system owns a portion of the water from the main to the curb stop, and the property 
owner owns the portion from the curb stop to the home. The places across the nation with the 
highest concentration of lead service lines tend to be lower income communities and 
communities of color, dominated by rental housing. As such, many residents must rely on 
absentee property owners to even consent to make their properties available for work and to 
coordinate LSL replacements. To remove the barriers property owners pose to replacement, we 
recommend a provision that prohibits a customer cost-share and enabling all customers to 
participate in the program. The goal of replacing lead service lines within 10 years will not be 
achieved efficiently and cost effectively unless it's at no cost to the customers. Many lead 
service lines remain without sufficient funding to private side replacements. Since many families 
in disadvantaged areas cannot pay the private side replacement, in most states, water systems 
do not believe they can use BIL funds for private side replacement since they must repay the 
loan with ratepayer funds. A federal or a state statutory requirement is needed to allow water 
systems to use ratepayer funds to remove private side LSLs in the interest of public health. 
Given the option to charge property owners, it sounds fair, but it is not equitable and it is a 
consequence. Water utilities waste time on outreach, replacement process lacks coordination 
and becomes inefficient, resulting in replacements for far fewer pipes at significantly higher 
costs, and only for those who can afford it. Thank you so much for your time. We'll be sharing 
written comments with further information on this policy. 
Boston Snyder (Asset Manager, City of Goshen, IN): Hi! My name is Boston Snyder. I'm 
the Asset Manager for the City of Goshen, Indiana. If I could only provide a little bit of 
comment here. We have never come across a full lead service line within the city. We do, 
however, have a lot of lead connectors all throughout the city. In the recent Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements, lead connectors and lead service lines have clear definitions separating 
themselves apart from each other, where lead connectors no longer classify as a lead service 
line. And all I can hope is that that's reconsidered, and they will be included, because it just 
makes it difficult to get the message across to somebody that they have a lead service line or 
12 

lead in their service line. However, they're not a lead service line, and they don't require 
replacement. Thank you. 
Reverend Edward Pinkney (President, Benton Harbor Community Water Council): 
Reverend Edward Pinkney, the President of Benton Harbor Community Water Council. And we 
are the ones who filed that petition with the EPA to get our lead pipes removed, and I think 
that that is a formula that could be used by other people to make sure they get things done. 
One of the things I want to talk about is the EPA funding strategy requirements that do not go 
far enough to ensure equitable outcome of the lead service line replacement plan. In addition to 
requiring local government to create a funding strategy for the lead pipe service line 
replacement plan, there should be added requirements to assist residents who cannot afford 
the private side of the replacement. We found that out in Benton Harbor. We did get some of 
the private sides done, but unfortunately there's too many who can't afford to do it right now 
because they have left the city of Benton Harbor, the state of Michigan, and they are no longer 
doing this. So we need as much help, and there also should be some funding, some emergency 
funding, for the EJ community emergencies. I am recommending the emergency set aside 
funds for the efficiency excess of doing lead emergency program or lead work done. Stronger 
requirements are needed to protect our children by adding a sampling and public notification 
requirement for schools. Testing should be required for all schools, and also we should be 
making sure that they test the schools at least two times a year, which I know they do not. But 
we should be required to do that for the effect it has on our children. And once those pipes is 
completed, we need to make sure that every single resident is given a water filter and trained 
how to use that water filter, which is very, very important. They got to be trained how to use it. 
You can't just give a person a water filter and expect it to be okay. And also, since we have so 
many pipes that need to be done, we need to be training minorities, Black folks, to know how 
to replace these lines. That’s because here in Benton Harbor, we have the line replaced, but 
none of them are done by the residents that is Black, or anything like that. So, on that note, I 
want to thank you for your time, and I really appreciate the EPA because you came in and you 
helped Benton Harper. Thank you, thank you, thank you.  
Tyler Galyon (Cannon & Cannon, Knoxville, TN): Hi, and good afternoon. My name is 
Tyler Galyon, and I represent Cannon & Cannon in Knoxville, Tennessee. Just a heads up, I'm 
currently scheduled for the 2:50 pm slot this afternoon. You may remove my name from that 
slot. We at Cannon & Cannon recognize the importance of drinking water quality for all 
Americans. The proposed LCRI provides an opportunity for many utilities to modernize their 
existing water systems and improve water quality. But without proper planning and 
collaboration between water systems and state agencies, hasty service line replacement could 
introduce more issues into public water systems. The LCRR and LCRI allow for state agencies to 
enforce stricter requirements for service line inventory development and system-wide non-lead 
certifications. State agencies should be required to publish any non-lead certification 
requirements and service line inventory development requirements publicly and online with a 
period of 30 days for public comment. State guidelines should be published at least two years 
prior to the due date for the proposed baseline inventory. State agencies should also be 
required to hold online and in-person informational events in which submission requirements 
and review parameters are clearly provided for community water system managers. Ten years 
is an ambitious goal to replace all lead service lines. Many water systems believe that they are 
already understaffed and underfunded to complete system modernization projects. Water 
13 

systems who develop system-wide modernization and capital improvement plans should have 
the opportunity to request additional time outside of the proposed 10-year timeframe to identify 
and replace lead service lines if the community water system can provide achievable deadlines 
for goal-based replacement. This method would not only allow water systems to replace lead 
service lines, but it would also allow water systems to better utilize funding for system 
modernization and service line replacement, since planning would be based on larger scale 
improvements and not more expensive isolated replacements. Identification of privately owned 
service lines of unknown materials will be challenging for utility workers and could introduce 
workers to dangerous situations. Many customer-owned service lines will need to be physically 
inspected via potholing. Since community water systems have no authority to access customer-
owned private property without authorization, this could add considerable time to service line 
inventory development. Additionally, citizens who restrict access to private property might 
become hostile toward utility workers, even before workers set foot on private property. The 
EPA should provide further guidance for how water systems are expected to access private 
property. Thank you very much. 
Dave Gilbert (Division Manager, City of Lakewood, OH): Hello, everybody. My name is 
Dave Gilbert. I represent Lakewood, Ohio. I'm a division manager. I've been in water and 
wastewater my entire life – almost 30 years now, started in the military. And while I certainly 
agree with the 100% lead abatement approach, I feel that the logistics are the issue. This 
program is going to be implemented for the entire nation. I'm worried about what that's going 
to do with the supply chain issues, the cost of copper and brass, not to mention that most 
communities do not have the staffing to have the construction crews to replace these lines, and 
that will likely mean that they have to go to contractors. And I worry about the costs of the 
contractors, of the bids, once that happens. Thank you. 
Gladys Bustos: 
[Due to audio and connection issues, the facilitator directed the commentor to the chat for 
information on how to provide comment via the public docket.]  
Allyson Mauck (Lead and Copper Project Manager, McKim & Creed): Good afternoon, 
and thank you for giving us the opportunity to speak today. My name is Allyson Mauck, with 
McKim & Creed. I'm our lead and copper project manager. So, we request that the EPA provide 
clarification regarding custodial requirements of the inventory, statistical reduction of 
unknowns, and then also predictive modeling. We would also like the EPA to clarify the 10-year 
start date: as in when does that 10-year start date happen? Is that upon the adoption of the 
LCRI or of the original LCR rule. Thank you.  
Hilliard Hampton (Former Mayor, City of Inkster, MI): Thank you very much. My name is 
Hilliard Hampton, retired mayor of Inkster, Michigan, also served on the EPA National Drinking 
Water Advisory Council. In regards to our children, stronger requirements are needed to protect 
children by adding sampling and public notification requirements for schools and child care 
centers. Testing should be required for all schools, not just the elementary schools and child 
care centers. Testing should be completed repeatedly on a schedule just like all community 
water systems. On-request testing will not catch changes to lead levels. Not all schools will have 
filters, and those that do may not have maintained them well. The EPA should provide model 
language for public education in schools and child care facilities, and for water utilities, instead 
of putting each state in charge of their templates. It should be standardized with clear 
14 

15 
instructions for safety in the event of lead exposure in drinking water. The new rule makes 
great progress in the public education and notification requirements, but for the safety of 
consumers, it is strongly recommended that this information be provided in a model template. I 
also recommend that EPA mandate water utilities to add the following info to public education 
materials: sharing the compliance sampling locations with results, details on the type of 
corrosion control treatment implemented, the amount implemented, and any changes to those 
parameters. Lead service line replacements, the EPA should not allow exceptions for the 10-
year replacement deadline based on its own reasoning, and to protect future generations from 
lead poisoning. Extended replacement deadlines past the 10-year requirement will only subject 
impacted communities to prolonged exposure to lead in drinking water. The EPA should not 
offer replacement extensions, except for very limited circumstances. The EPA should replace 
“replacement can be done in 10 years.” So let it be a standard. Larger systems have the 
capacity to scale up replacement plans. It also makes no sense that larger regional systems are 
not held to the same standard as cities of same or similar size. Thank you very much. I was 
scheduled for the next series, so you can remove my name. Thanks for this opportunity. 
Mike Furrey (Agra Environmental and Laboratory Services): Thank you. My name is 
Mike Furrey. I own Agra Environmental and Laboratory Services in New Jersey. I'm also working 
with, in New Jersey, on a group, New Jersey Future, Jersey Water Works, and I also work 
directly with the AWWA, the New Jersey section. We are preparing comments; the AWWA New 
Jersey is in the process of preparing some comments on the Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements. Some of the comments that I do want to make. We fully support all the 
changes to the Lead and Copper Rule about the notification requirements upon an action level 
exceedance. That is a short period of time. There is a concern, at least in our section in New 
Jersey, of notification within that 24-hour period. We also have some level of concern with the 
first and fifth draw samples. It's very difficult for any water utility to obtain those first draw 
samples since we're relying on customers to do the sampling. Now we're going to have to rely 
on customers to properly provide first and fifth draw lead and copper samples. So that is a 
concern in New Jersey. We have other comments that we're going to be addressing. As I said 
before. New Jersey is leading the way in terms of lead service line replacement. We do have a 
deadline of 2031 and we really encourage the EPA to use the state of New Jersey and the work 
that we're doing on the lead service line replacement task force and all the information through 
Jersey Water Works to help you provide information to finalize the comments. But that's it, for 
now. I appreciate the comments, and we'll talk soon. 
Randy Brown: Good afternoon. I want to cover a couple of things that we've been discussing. 
Of course, protecting people from the hazards of lead is of paramount importance. However, as 
the previous speaker mentioned about the sampling at the individuals’ homes is an issue as to 
was it done correctly. And as people want the utility to pay for everything, all these costs will go 
back into rates which will raise the water rates. And the capacity of the utility to increase its 
rates is going to be challenged with infrastructure replacement, addressing PFAS issues that are 
coming. You know, there's quite a challenge for all the resources that a utility has, and still keep 
water affordable. So, I think these are things that need to be taken into consideration. The 
schools certainly can start doing any testing that they want, since they're the holders of the 
different facilities inside of school, but I think that there really needs to be some thought given 
as to the timeline due to resources of a utility. 

Farah Najdawi (PhD Candidate, Texas State University): Thank you for a chance to 
provide a comment with the EPA. This is Farah Najdawi, and I’m a PhD candidate at Texas 
State University working with the county line service here in Texas and we are seeking a 
strategy from the EPA to encourage and, if necessary, enforce the participation of individual 
and institutions, especially schools, in these investigations. And we understand that accessing 
private properties for such examinations may pose challenge, and we request the EPA to 
consider implementing or supporting respective rules that facilitate access, while respecting 
individual rights and privacy. We propose exploring the possibility of EPA funding for states, if 
possible, the deployment of EPA employees to aid in the completion of these investigations. 
This support would be significantly contributed to the comprehensive and timely assessment for 
water service lines, ensuring the identification and mitigations of potential lead and copper 
contaminations. And I'm here actually to bring to your attention as a matter of significant 
concern regarding the water chemistry supplied to our water service. While we have made 
efforts to replace the service line, there remains a potential risk of lead concentration exceeding 
the level deemed safe by the EPA for our drinking water. In the light of this, I kindly request the 
EPA assistance in conducting a thorough investigation into the source of water chemistry to 
ensure the long-term service of drinking water. And in our belief that treating the source of 
water, in addition to replacing the service lines, is crucial for maintaining water quality within 
the established safety parameters. And by understanding this investigation, we aim to address 
any potential issues and implement necessary measures to guarantee the safety of drinking 
water provided to our community. Thank you. 
Tim Young (City of Hazel Park, MI): I was looking at the thought of lowering the parts per 
billion to ten. This is going to push a lot of cities into the exceedance levels. But the actions of 
the exceedance level really doesn't seem to change as far as what is to be done, except for 
more notifications and such which comes at a level of cost, which in turn is just going to get 
passed along to the users. As far as funding, there really is no good funding out there that is 
not going to be pulled back, which is again an added cost to the residents or the users. The 
DWSRF is actually going to be charged back with interest, so that's even an additional cost on 
that. But my main one as an operator is the sampling method needs to be corrected to allow 
faucet aerators to be taken off at the time of sampling. This is an item that needs to be 
properly maintenanced on a regular basis. And this type of aerator system, if it has dirt in it, or 
particles from the service line, it is not going to represent the water that is currently being fed 
to the home. The efforts that are being made by the water suppliers will not be shown if this 
aerator is allowed to be tested while not properly maintenanced following, for the actual 
sampling. Then what is funny about this whole thing, too, is if the house fails, then the water 
supplier gets to do every bit of maintenance at the home and resample. So, let's get rid of 
these aerators at the time of sampling to properly show the efforts that the water suppliers are 
making to making the water better for everybody, and that's all I have to say. 
Julie Kenkel (Nurse and Volunteer, Alliance of Nurses for a Healthy Environment): 
Hi, thank you for the opportunity to speak today. My name is Julie Kenkel, and I am a nurse 
from Arizona, and I also volunteer with the Alliance of Nurses for a Healthy Environment. I want 
to thank this administration for acting to address the public health concerns around lead in 
drinking water, and I urge the EPA to finalize the most thorough Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements possible. I'm here out of concern for the equitable access to clean drinking 
water. I work in the hospital system, in fact that services very rural, low-income populations 
16 

and I specifically work with patients who have serious cardiovascular issues, and clean water 
access is an area of high concern for a lot of our patients. I want to vocalize my support for 
mandating the replacement of lead pipes in no more than 10 years without exemptions, and 
doing this, through prioritizing replacements in areas most impacted by these lead service line 
water contamination. I'd also like to urge that the water utilities be mandated to cover the full 
cost of these replacements without putting the cost burden onto households. The replacement 
of lead pipes has already shown great benefits, as previously mentioned, in communities that 
have taken on this challenge. States like New Jersey, Michigan, and Rhode Island have required 
that everyone's service line be removed. This not only has improved the health for their 
citizens, but has created the opportunity for work for lots of jobs across these states. And in 
Newark, replacing all the lead service lines has created this significant workforce, job benefits, 
and transferable skills training. I urge the EPA to prioritize lead service line replacements for 
areas of highest impact. We're continuing to know more and more about the dangers of lead 
contamination, and I know it's a difficult challenge to identify which areas are at highest risk. 
But I think that we're very capable of doing this. There's over nine million households that still 
drink from lead service lines. And lastly, if this is pushed on to consumers, these lead service 
line replacements won't get done in the speed that they need. So that's what I would like to 
support today, that there be no exemptions, and that the cost is not put on to the homeowners. 
Thank you.  
Rob Willis thanked the commenters and closed the first public comment period. He explained 
that after the break, the second comment period would begin.  
Public Comment Period #2 
Rob Willis opened the second public comment period. He reviewed the ground rules and 
logistics to provide public input. During the public comment period all speakers were provided 
two and a half minutes to provide their verbal comments to EPA. 
Cara Cook (Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments): Thank you so much. This is Cara 
Cook, C-a-r-a C-o-o-k. I am a registered nurse and member of the Alliance of Nurses for 
Healthy Environments, the only national nursing organization focused solely on how the 
environment impacts human health. Our organization thanks EPA for acting to address public 
health concerns around lead in drinking water. We strongly urge EPA to quickly finalize the 
most thorough Lead and Copper Rule Improvements as possible. A stronger Lead and Copper 
Rule is an essential step towards reducing harm from lead exposure. There is no safe level of 
lead. Lead can affect almost every organ and system in the human body. Even at very low 
levels, lead can cause serious, irreversible damage to the developing brains and nervous 
systems of babies and young children. Children who are exposed to lead can experience lifelong 
health impacts. Lead is also long recognized to be a cause of hypertension and a risk factor for 
heart disease, stroke, and chronic kidney disease in adults. EPA’s proposed essential 
improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule are a step in the right direction for promoting public 
health for communities across the country. However, the proposed rule falls short. Our 
organization is strongly encouraging EPA to address the following measures to strengthen this 
proposal. The current proposed maximum contaminant level of 10 parts per billion is not a 
health-based standard. While lowering the level from 15 to 10 is an improvement, this lower 
level remains inadequate and still leaves many communities and children unprotected. We 
recommend lowering the MCL to one part per billion. EPA should strive for a goal of replacing 
all lead service lines within 10 years. The proposal allows some water systems to get extensions 
17 

well beyond 10 years to replace their lead pipes. This is unacceptable, and leaves many 
communities at risk. Water utilities should pay for lead service line removals rather than 
charging individuals. Residents have borne the brunt of lead contamination impacts and 
healthcare costs. It is also a health equity issue when utilities insist that individual property 
owners pay for lead service line replacement. Often low-income homeowners cannot, and 
landlords may not, pay to replace them. Communities across the country should be protected 
from exposure to lead. In closing, the Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments strongly 
urges the EPA to quickly finalize the most thorough Lead and Copper Rule Improvements as 
soon as possible. Thank you so much. 
 
Brian Redder (Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies): Hello, everyone. I’m Brian Redder 
and I’m the Director of Regulatory and Scientific Affairs at the Association of Metropolitan Water 
Agencies or AMWA. The Association appreciates the chance to provide verbal remarks today on 
the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. AMWA aligns wholeheartedly with EPA’s 
shared objective to swiftly identify, remove, and replace lead service lines, and agrees that the 
complete removal of all lead service lines is the ultimate goal. Our involvement with the Lead 
and Copper Rule from its inception underscores our appreciation for EPA’s efforts in mitigating 
the public’s exposure to lead via drinking water. AMWA will also be submitting written 
comments that expand upon the points made today. At the root of this proposed rulemaking is 
the goal of removing 100% of lead service lines in 10 years. AMWA appreciates EPA’s 
acknowledgement that this objective may not be universally attainable for every utility. Because 
of this, we urge the Agency to tailor the rule, allowing water systems to primarily focus on this 
vital goal. Overloading systems with multiple concurrent requirements can divert essential 
money, time, and personnel from lead service line replacement efforts. EPA, in this proposal, 
seems to equate access to private property with control of the private side of the service line. 
While AMWA does appreciate EPA recognizing instances that the private side will not be 
accessible by the water system, the Association cautions EPA in putting water systems in the 
untenable position of forcing customers to replace their side of the line. The feasibility of 
ultimately replacing the private side of the line comes down to funding, either the availability of 
state and federal funds to finance the private side replacement or with the entirety of the cost 
in one form or another falling on ratepayers. It is important to note that two major regulations 
under the Safe Drinking Water Act are expected to be finalized this year: this rule and the PFAS 
regulations, both with proposed three-year compliance dates for promulgation. These two 
rulemakings alone are estimated by EPA to cost up to a combined $4.8 billion annually to 
implement. In addition to complying with other regulations, there’s a pressing demand for 
water systems to modernize aging infrastructure. The escalating costs of materials and labor, 
influenced by supply chain disruptions, inflation, and workforce shortages further compound 
these challenges. These challenges are also likely to disproportionately impact low-income 
communities. Thank you again for the opportunity to speak today, and AMWA looks forward to 
providing robust and detailed written comments prior to the February 5th deadline. 
Madeline Voitier (Association of California Water Agencies): Good afternoon. My name is 
Madeline Voitier, and I am a federal relations representative with the Association of California 
Water Agencies or ACWA. ACWA’s more than 470 public water agency members supply over 
90% of the water delivered in California for residential, agricultural, and business uses. We 
appreciate the opportunity to provide feedback on the EPA’s Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements proposal today. ACWA values EPA’s efforts to reduce exposure to lead and 
protect public health. Reducing lead in drinking water requires a collaborative effort by federal 
and state regulators, water systems, consumers, and as well as many others. In California, we 
have taken significant actions to reduce exposure to lead. California's programs to test for lead 
18 

in schools and requirements to inventory utility-owned service lines and replace lead service 
lines are robust, progressive efforts. These efforts, community water systems confirmed, is 
limited to no presence of lead service lives within their system in California. ACWA agrees with 
EPA that removing lead service lines is paramount to protecting public health. However, based 
on California's experience, we urge EPA to make additional changes to the LCRI to improve 
community water systems’ ability to implement the rule. Namely, ACWA recommends changes 
to the lead service line inventory, replacement requirements, as well as some child care and 
school testing elements, as detailed further in our written comments. We appreciate EPA's 
acknowledgement of the legal hurdles and complications regarding customer-owned service line 
replacement and the Agency's goal to find a workable solution to operating on the customer-
owned side of the service line. However, expanding mandatory replacement programs to 
include the customer side is extremely cumbersome and problematic for water systems. Our 
members strongly support voluntary programs and outreach to help and encourage customers 
to replace their lead pipes and fixtures, but we maintain serious concerns with proposal of lead 
service line replacement requirements. As a result, ACWA urges EPA to focus on providing 
sufficient funding for voluntary customers' lead service line replacement programs without 
shifting the burden and liability to community water systems. And I want to thank you for your 
time and look forward to working with EPA. 
Sarah Anderson (City of Columbus, Department of Public Utilities): Good afternoon. I am Sarah 
Bloom Anderson from the City of Columbus Department of Public Utilities. We provide safe 
drinking water throughout 220 square miles in Central Ohio. Through our optimized corrosion 
control plan, we have maintained an exceptionally low level of lead, well below the PQL, for 
over two decades. Columbus agrees that all lead service lines should be replaced. We also 
share the goal of replacing 100% as quickly as feasible but EPA’s determination of what is 
feasible needs another look. To protect public health, and ensure that even the most vulnerable 
among us can afford clean drinking water, we need to strategically allocate resources across the 
country to those with the most risk first. To have every public water system replace their 
service lines simultaneously in 10 years is not feasible. It will result in an artificially high 
demand for resources locally, regionally, and nationally. EPA acknowledges the demand, but 
does not adequately account for how it will affect cost, supplies, and labor overall, and thus 
feasibility. Here we will have to add staff and increase our budget by hundreds of millions of 
dollars without providing additional health benefits, because lead is already so well controlled. 
In some regions there are simply not enough contractors, plumbers, and engineers. Add to that 
the nationwide demand for supplies, and the result is skyrocketing costs. With insufficient grant 
funding, those extra costs created by this artificial demand will be borne by ratepayers. As a 
nonprofit governmental entity, municipal utilities do not make a profit, and we are funded only 
by the amount our residents pay in their water bills. Our utility is bracing for a large rate 
increase to meet the requirements of LCR, as drafted. When all is said and done, the across-
the-board 10-year requirement will burden the people that we are trying hardest to protect, the 
families already struggling to afford their water bills. EPA recognized that some systems will 
need additional time based solely on the quantity or proportion of lead service lines in the water 
system. EPA should expand the ability for an extension based on the risk of harm to decrease 
the demand on limited resources, reduce the resulting inflation of costs, and protect 
affordability, aligning feasibility with long-term affordability while protecting public health. If 
systems where lead is well controlled can roll out the replacements over an extended period, 
those costs can be more readily absorbed, thereby reducing the amount that rates will raise. 
19 

Also, competition will be lower for labor, supplies, and funding, allowing the nation to focus the 
bulk of resources on communities that have the most risk. Thank you. 
 
Julian Gonzalez’s (Earth Justice): Thanks, y’all. My name is Julian Gonzalez, and I am Senior 
Legislative Council for Earth Justice. Thank you for committing significant resources to 
reimagine EPA's lead regulation under the Safe Drinking Water Act. EPA’s proposal to propose a 
10-year mandate for the removal of lead service lines is a landmark decision, and we hope the 
final rule retains this important commitment. Similarly, it's fantastic that EPA has followed 
Michigan's lead and improved sampling protocols in the new rule. In my following time, I’d like 
to offer some suggestions for the final rule to ensure it better protects communities and Earth 
Justice will expand upon these issues and topics in our written comments. First, under this 
proposal, cities like Chicago and my home of New York, that have immense concentrations of 
lead service lines may have decades of extensions up to 40 years to remove all of their lines. 
EPA must eliminate this loophole, which would leave yet another generation of residents reliant 
on lead service lines. Relatedly under this rule under the proposal, all systems can receive a 
three-year extension granted by states which, coupled with a three year wait until the effective 
day, will be most communities closer to a 20-year wait than a 10-year wait to have their lead 
service lines removed. Second topic I’d like to touch on is which lead service lines have to be 
replaced under the proposal. Rather than a presumption that water systems for the purposes of 
maintenance have access, as EPA has done in the past, this rule, instead, requires only lines 
that water systems have control of to be replaced. Control is largely defined as access and 
access is not defined clearly with EPA instead referring to water systems’ interpretation of 
access. If a system doesn't have access, say, because a homeowner doesn't want to pay $5,000 
for replacing their line, and decides not to grant the utility permission to work, then the system 
doesn't have to replace that line. Practically speaking, this means the system can claim they've 
replaced 100% of lines under the rule and still have many lines in people's homes in that 
community. And with thousands of systems, there's no way EPA can ensure that utilities across 
the country don't game this provision by interpreting access as they see fit in order to avoid 
spending money on replacement. A third topic of area for improvement is cost-sharing. Low-
income homeowners are often unable to afford to pay for lead pipe removal, and landlords 
often refuse to do so, meaning that too often those low income communities often drink 
contaminated water. There's enough financing, rate structure and funding solutions available, 
such that EPA should not have any qualms about requiring utilities to pay for replacement, 
avoiding unjustly burdened environmental justice communities. Thanks. 
Annalisa Rocca (Ohio Environmental Council): Good afternoon, and thank you for the 
opportunity to testify before you today on the U.S EPA's proposed improvements to the Lead 
and Copper Rule. My name is Annalisa Rocca, and I speak to you today in my capacity as 
drinking water manager at the Ohio Environmental Council. I want to start by commending the 
EPA and the Biden-Harris Administration for making lead service line removal a priority. Ohio is 
my home, and estimated to have the second largest collection of lead service lines in the 
country, around 650,000 lines. The most critical element of this rule is that it puts an end date 
to when service lines need to be removed and replaced for the first time. This has local 
advocates in impacted communities celebrating. We also believe that the 10-year timeline is 
achievable for the vast majority of cities in Ohio. The rule’s improvements also call for a 
comprehensive inventory of water service lines which must be updated regularly. This is critical 
because it will set up utilities for the work ahead and give communities the information they've 
20 

been asking for. There are two areas of the updated rule that we would like to see 
strengthened to better protect Americans. First, the rule as written will allow utilities to forego 
removing and replacing lead service lines in certain circumstances, such as when the utility is 
not able to gain access to the property, or when the property owner is unable or unwilling to 
pay for the private portion of the replacement. We urge the EPA to continue to work with states 
to address this potential loophole in the rule. Secondly, we urge the EPA to strengthen the 
testing requirements for schools and child care centers. The proposed rule currently requires 
only one lead test to be performed at five locations in each school and in two locations in child 
care centers. This is problematic, because lead can be found in different faucets and fixtures, 
especially in old buildings. The rule should require retesting, testing at more locations and 
results be shared with parents and staff. The $15 billion earmarked for lead service line 
replacement is an essential first step of funding the requirements of the rule. Yet it is just not 
enough. The expected costs associated with replacing just Cleveland, Ohio's 185,000 lines is 
close to $1 billion dollars. We need more federal funding and a commitment from the EPA to 
continue to fight for more dollars and to send them to the communities that need them the 
most. Every Ohioan, every American, deserves safe, clean, and affordable drinking water. We 
thank the EPA and the Biden-Harris Administration for developing an ambitious rule that will 
chart the path forward to finally getting the lead out of our drinking water delivery systems. 
This single rule will have measurable benefits for citizens in Ohio and across the country. Thank 
you. 
 
Adrienne Naumann (Chicago, Illinois): Good day, ladies and gentlemen. My name is Adrienne B. 
Naumann and I am an intellectual property attorney in Chicago, Illinois. I sincerely thank the 
EPA for affirmatively addressing changes in public health problem arising in the regulation and 
from lead in our nation’s drinking water. I’m here today as a private citizen on behalf of NRDC 
to suggest some features to the proposed EPA Safe Drinking Water amended regulation. On a 
personal level, my spouse and I experience chronic high blood pressure which lead aggravates. 
I also reside in Illinois, which is one of the 10 states with the most lead pipes currently used for 
drinking water. The problem, briefly, is the drinking water conduits or pipes comprising lead, 
remain widespread, and are currently in use in every state. Studies confirm there is no safe 
concentration of lead in drinking water. Although the EPA has previously prohibited new lead 
pipes, more than nine million homes currently use lead pipes, water pipes, which were 
grandfathered in by the previous rule. As a result, there’s significant lead in preexisting pipes 
which adversely affects medical conditions, such as brain development, cancers, stroke, heart 
attack, and kidney disease. What is the solution? The best solution? We propose that the best 
solution is removal of all lead types in all United States drinking water systems within the next 
10 years. It was originally local governments and utilities, water utilities’ decision to install these 
kinds of pipes in residences, and so, as a matter of equity, their removal and replacement costs 
should be exclusively borne by water utilities or local government units with federal assistance 
from the federal government. Because it's also a practical matter, most residents and landlords 
either can't afford to replace all these pipes, residential pipes, or are understandably unwilling 
to do so. All lead pipes should be removed within the next 10 years, including pipe connectors, 
which also comprise, lead. 
LaTanya Bell (Wisdom Institute): Hi, I’m LaTanya Bell from Detroit, Michigan. I am the co-
executive director of the Wisdom Institute Detroit, an African-American and women- and girl-
focused nonprofit that works to achieve reproductive justice at the intersection of access to 
clean, safe, affordable drinking water and bodily autonomy. The Wisdom Institute recently met 
with the EPA during Capitol Hill Week to discuss community engagement strategies and how we 
21 

may be able to support them. We would like to thank you for the proposed Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements that requires the vast majority of water systems, including Michigan and 
the City of Detroit, to replace lead service lines within 10 years. Team Wisdom advocates for 
reproductive justice birthing rights. One serious consequence of contaminated drinking water is 
harm to the reproductive health, a cost that is borne disproportionately by women of color, and 
their family. Lead-based paint and lead in water are the primary sources of lead exposure 
among infants and young children, driven largely by the consumption of lead dust and infant 
formula mixed with contaminated water. For children not living at home with lead-based paint 
or pipes, lead-contaminated food is a major source. We urge the EPA to strengthen the 
requirements for filter distribution to obtain compliance of local water systems with multiple 
action level exceedances in five years. Thanks so much for your time, and we look forward to 
your responses. 
 
Andrea Abergel (California Municipal Utilities Association): Good afternoon. Thank you to the 
EPA for providing this opportunity for public comment. My name is Andrea Abergel, Manager of 
Water Policy for the California Municipal Utilities Association (CMUA). CMUA represents over 50 
public water agencies that provide drinking water to over 75% of Californians. CMUA along with 
the Association of California Water Agencies, will be submitting detailed written comments to 
supplement the oral comments we provide today. In addition, our association submitted a 
request for a 15-day written comment period extension due to the release of materials during 
the holiday season. CMUA and our member agencies are very supportive of the EPA’s goals to 
remove lead and protect public health, as is the State of California. For years, California has 
required public water agencies to inventory system-owned lines, replace system-owned lines 
and conduct school and child care facilities testing. Our concerns with the LCRI are regarding 
the replacement requirements and particularly the obligation that falls on public water systems 
to replace customer-owned lines. This is an unnecessarily excessive burden to place on public 
water systems. Performing work on any private property opens up these public water systems 
to myriad liability concerns and increased costs. Instead, we suggest the voluntary replacement 
obligations for customer-owned lines be borne by the customers themselves, and suggest that 
EPA direct states to offer federal funding directly to the customers in the form of grants. The 
public water system can act as the purveyor of information and resources by informing 
customers whether they have lead in their systems and directing them to the state to apply for 
grant funding. If the customer chooses, they can hire a private contractor that is certified by 
the state, receive the grant funding, and those contractors have their own liability insurance 
that is far more expansive than that of public water system contractors. In the alternative, we 
propose some amendments to the definitions of galvanized lines in need of replacement and a 
possible off-ramp for lines that, after testing, show no presence of lead. Those suggestions are 
detailed in the comment letter in an effort to align public benefits with the undue burdens 
placed on public water systems. We support waivers for state programs that are achieving the 
goals of the LCRI. Lastly, I just want to echo affordability concerns here today with the 
obligations from the proposed rule. Public water systems ultimately pass these costs on to the 
customers, further impacting affordability of water in the state of California where the cost of 
living is extremely high. Thank you once again for the opportunity. 
 
Lizzy Duncan (League of Conservation Voters): Good morning, everyone. My name is Lizzy 
Duncan and I am with the League of Conservation Voters (LCV). LCV works to advance 
equitable policy solutions that ensure clean air, clean water, and access to our democracy are 
not a privilege, but a right afforded to every community. So thank you for providing me the 
time to speak today. I’m here to thank the EPA for its commitment to getting the lead out from 
our water and I urge you to finalize the strongest possible LCRI. I'm thrilled that the EPA has 
22 

put out a strong proposal. Requiring lead service line replacement within 10 years is 
unprecedented, and this is the difference between long-term illness and health for millions of 
people. In addition, requiring utilities to complete a comprehensive inventory of lead service 
lines is a major undertaking that will help states determine the scope of their lead problem. 
Lastly, requiring better monitoring and testing requirements along with more in-depth public 
education are pieces of the puzzles that have long since been missing. We are very excited 
about these and thank you for including them. However, there are a few areas of the proposal 
that I would urge you to strengthen before the rule is finalized. First, as the rule currently 
stands, too many water utilities will be allowed to receive exemptions to the 10-year 
replacement timeline, including Chicago, Cleveland, and New York City, which have high 
numbers of lead service lines and are in desperate need to push and move more quickly to 
replace these. These communities can't wait 40 to 50 years that the current proposal would 
allow. We can't push this problem onto the next generation and continue to let families be 
exposed to harmful pollution, and we know that EPA should be protecting people's health so I 
urge the EPA to close these loopholes. Secondly, we'd like to see the final action level set at 5 
parts per billion rather than the current proposed 10. While moving from 15 to 10 is a great 
start, experts, including the American Academy of Pediatrics, are calling for a lower level. Since 
there is no safe level of lead, the action level should be set as low as possible. Lastly, water 
systems aren't required to pay for lead service line replacement. We don't want these costs to 
fall to ratepayers and individual households. This has major environmental justice implications, 
and we cannot let people continue to drink water contaminated by lead pipes, since they can't 
afford to replace their pipes or because their landlords refuse to replace them. So, thank you for 
letting me speak today on this. 
Angela Penermon (Wisdom Institute): Hello. My name is Angela Penermon and I live in Flint, 
Michigan. I’m with the Wisdom Institute, an African American women- and girl-focused 
nonprofit based in Detroit, Michigan. Thank you for providing funding to support upgrades to 
the national water, waste infrastructure, lead service line replacement and provide general 
Drinking Water State Revolving Funds that can also be used for lead service line replacement. 
Our organization, Wisdom Institute, works to achieve reproductive justice at the intersection of 
access to clean, affordable drinking water and bodily autonomy. One of the most important 
reproductive justice issues facing Black communities today is access to clean, affordable water. 
Hundreds of years of racist, social structure, infrastructure neglect in low income communities 
for water regulations and destruction of the Environmental Protection Agency by the Trump-
Pence Administration has put this country at a breaking point for access to clean, affordable 
water. Exposure to lead in water can be particularly detrimental to our health during prenatal 
and early childhood development. Lead exposures can increase the risk of low birth rate, and 
low-level exposure can cause diverse effects in children, including permanent damages to the 
nervous system, and behavioral learning disabilities impaired. The bloodline, the low levels of 
lead can be caused during pregnancy and cause fertility problems and miscarriages. We need 
access to clean, safe, affordable water, drinking water, and we need it now. Prioritizing lead 
pipes replacement is needed in our schools, hospital birth centers, and residential homes to 
protect our children, women, and elderly. We are looking forward to your response to our 
concern, and I thank you for this time today. Thank you. 
Ronnie Levin (Environmental Protection Network): I’m Ronnie Levin, representing the 
Environmental Protection Network, a network of over 600 former EPA employees. There are 
23 

many improvements in the LCRI. Expanding the universe to nine million pipes, reducing the 
timeframe to 10 years, lowering the action level to 10, although we suggest that it could easily 
go to five, requiring both first and fifth liters, with the higher serving, requiring water systems 
to report home testing results within three days, no matter what the reading, using an annual 
replacement rate across a rolling three-year period and requiring disclosure and offering pipe 
replacement whenever there’s a change in building ownership. However, we disagree with 
EPA’s proposal that the utility only replaced the public property part. Utilities should exert the 
same effort to replace lead pipes as they do to install or replace water meters. Partial pipe 
replacement should be illegal. EPA should encourage states to adopt explicit policies, using 
ratepayer funds to replace pipes and GRRs. Last year, OMB changed the discount rate to 2%, 
which is what EPA should use. EPA and the states need a formal working agreement on 
implementation, which should include an underlying assumption that reporting is accurate and 
complete. EPA should assert that each requirement is mandatory and that it constitutes 
compliance. States should assert a statement of public awareness to whether there's 
compliance or not. We object that EPA has omitted the requirements relating to schools and 
child-occupied facilities. These are special potential harms. There should be mandatory 
installation of filters on all faucets in schools. This rule is too complicated. Finally, EPN believes 
that the water system will continue to underreport lead results and exceedances unless the 
regulatory language is strengthened, and state reporting will continue to be incomplete without 
a new SDWIS that is shared between EPA and the states. Thank you very much. 
 
Kayla Shannon (Student, and member of Black Millennials for Flint): Greeting, representatives 
from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and other stakeholders. My name is Kayla 
Shannon, a senior at Spelman College, a member of the youth EJ Griot for Black Millennials for 
Flint, and a proud advocate for the City of Flint, Michigan. I’m here to express my support for 
the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. The changes outlined in the LCRI represent 
a significant and commendable step towards safeguarding the health of both children and 
adults from the harmful effects of lead exposure in drinking water. The key provisions address 
critical aspects of lead contamination in water systems, which is near to my heart considering 
the integral part that lead service lines played in poisoning over 10,000 Flint residents during 
the crisis. Achieving 100% lead pipe replacement within 10 years is a crucial goal and the 
emphasis on locating legacy lead pipes is equally important, as efficient and equitable 
replacement relies on knowing the exact locations of these pipes. Unlike the previous standards, 
they should contribute to a more transparent and accountable process for water systems 
everywhere. Updating tap sampling protocols and lead action levels, informed by best practices 
from local and state levels, demonstrates a commitment to enhancing the reliability of lead-level 
assessments. In the long term, this will save lives because, as we learned in my hometown, 
ultimately no amount of lead is healthy for consumption. These provisions underscore the EPA’s 
commitment to minimizing lead exposure and ensuring access to clean and safe drinking water. 
So, I thank you for your dedication to ensuring the safety and well-being of the public, 
especially our youth, who are most vulnerable and thus most in need of our protection. Thank 
you. 
 
Alfred Brock (City of Wayne, Michigan): My name is Alfred Brock. I’m the Mayor Pro Tem for the 
City of Wayne here in Michigan, and I strongly support these changes and updates to the rule 
as proposed by the Environmental Protection Agency. The 10-year limit is very important. I 
support it. We fought hard in the City of Wayne to increase the rate of replacement when we 
were shocked to find that the state of Michigan was allowing replacements to take place over a 
20-year period, which obviously would have endangered citizens over those two decades, and 
would have placed some children yet unborn in a situation where the lead lines were still in 
24 

operation, in the position of being exposed to lead poisoning for their entire childhood 
development up until the age of 18. We’ve had a long history of problems with lead-lined water 
service lines in the City of Wayne. Currently, we’ve encountered several hundreds of them that 
need to be replaced. This was performed through a combination of citizen response and a 
process initiated by the city departments to discover them, and we expect to find more. This 
work continues, and the public outreach has been slow but steady. I’ve been working to 
introduce the subject of lead service lines and the dangers of water contaminated with lead as a 
regular topic of conversation that contains information about what happened, where we are 
now, and what is being done to correct a situation. I feel that the work that the Environmental 
Protection Agency is doing by updating and amending this rule, and especially tightening the 
allowed levels of detectable lead, are welcomed in my community. As there is no safe level of 
lead exposure, the stricter, the better. I am happy to say that this issue, though unfortunate, 
has become a topic that has spurred conversation, participation, and communication between 
the citizens themselves, as well as between the citizens and their local government. I believe 
the rule changes are clear in intent and the way that it has been worded, and I look forward to 
this rule being put into action because of the positive impact it will have on the citizens in the 
City of Wayne, Michigan, as well as those living in our neighboring communities all across 
Michigan and throughout the nation. Thank you so much for all of your hard work. 
 
Lynda DiMenna (American Water): My name is Lynda DiMenna and I am the Chief 
Environmental and Safety Officer for American Water. As the largest publicly traded drinking 
water and wastewater service provider in the U.S., we support the EPA’s efforts to protect 
public health by proposing the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. Although American Water 
consistently meets water quality lead standards across our footprint, we believe that removing 
the risk of customer-side lead service lines over time is the right thing to do for the health and 
safety of our customers. For this reason, we have begun developing and launching programs 
within our service territories to replace customer service lead service lines across the American 
Water footprint. American Water supports the concept of mandatory replacement programs 
rather than a trigger replacement program. Developing an accurate, comprehensive inventory, 
including identifying the material of service lines where the material is currently unknown, is an 
important first step in eliminating lead service lines. We believe the rule must differentiate 
access from control and that water systems should perform full service line replacements when 
they are granted access. EPA’s new rules should recognize that the lack of customer approval to 
replace service lines can lead to a safety issue and additional regulatory and legal risk. We 
believe the rules should allow water systems to perform partial lead service line replacements 
when customers do not grant access to perform full lead service line replacements. We believe 
all stakeholders must understand the costs associated with the suggested improvements to the 
Lead and Copper Rule. The cost to identify the material of all unknown service lines and 
replacement of all lead service lines, as well as galvanized lines where needed by 2037, will 
require significant investment for all water systems. American Water is currently developing 
preliminary estimates based on the proposed improvements, and actual expenses will be 
dependent upon multiple factors, including the requirements in the final rule, the number of 
unknown service lines identified as lead or galvanized requiring replacement. We anticipate that 
the amounts for replacement are going to be significant, with the total replacement costs 
underestimated by EPA. To realize the full health benefits, we believe that the water systems 
should have financial resources to help them sustain ongoing costs that will arise from the 
replacement process in systems for the safety and benefit of the customers. States should treat 
these expenditures for regulated utilities as federally mandated requirements that are 
recoverable in customers’ rates through expedited needs. We believe that maintaining customer 
affordability is critical and that the additional estimated cost of this rule underscores the 
25 

importance of federal funding the lead service line replacement availability to all water systems, 
regardless of the type of ownership. Finally, American Water urges the EPA to act now to delay 
the compliance date for the portions of the LCRR proposed to be extended by the 
improvements, some of which are currently scheduled to take effect October 16th of 2024. 
Water systems are expending funds and resources now to comply with the LCR revisions, 
although the compliance dates for many of these activities are proposed to be changed by the 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. Water systems cannot stop preparing to comply with the 
existing rule until there is certainty of the new proposed changes. American Water thanks the 
EPA for the opportunity to make these comments and looks forward to working cooperatively 
and collaboratively with EPA regulators and policymakers to protect customers and community 
and the general public. 
 
Alan Roberson (Association of State Drink Water Administrators): Thanks. Good afternoon. 
Thanks for the opportunity to provide input on this rulemaking. My name is Alan Roberson, and 
I’m the Executive Director of the Association of State Drink Water Administrators, otherwise 
known as ASDWA. ASDWA is a national association for the 57 state and territory water agencies 
who co-regulate drinking water with EPA. The agency’s collective workforce of about 3,600 
regulators works tirelessly every day to ensure that the 150,000 water systems nationwide 
provide safe drinking water and protect public health. ASDWA’s most pressing concern with the 
proposed LCRI is increased state workload compounded by the upcoming PFAS regulation and 
the ongoing IIJA implementation. These important new tasks will be in addition to our current 
everyday activities, such as hands-on technical assistance, ensuring compliance with the nine 
standards, systems’ inspections, engineering reviews, operator certification, etc. The proposed 
rule requires 38 new reviews by states, eight new templates to be developed, and five new 
state-to-system consultations across various LCRI components. Our estimate of increased 
burden is a few million additional hours each year for LCRI implementation. States are 
encouraged that EPA incorporated so many recommendations in the proposed LCRI that EPA 
must prioritize feasible implementation. The final rule should balance health, feasibility, and cost 
and should retain the 10 parts per billion action level, stagger the compliance deadlines based 
on system size similar to the approach taken for the Stage 2 DBPR and to provide flexibility in 
CCT implementation, allowing states’ discretion in determining if pipe loop studies are needed 
and allowing systems to make incremental changes when CCT is installed. The final rule should 
also maintain the 30-day consumer notice requirement, ensure that existing school and child 
care testing programs that meet the proposed standard criteria and were implemented after 
2014 will be honored rather than limiting programs to those implemented after 2021. The final 
rule should also prioritize development implementation of a data system that will be able to 
handle all the new tracking requirements. Finally, ASDWA’s members urge EPA to recognize and 
assist communicating with the public with all the public notifications for property owners with 
unknown service lines, disturbing lead service lines on private property, communication 
disruption within the LSL replacements (i.e., tearing up roads, filter disruptions). This is only a 
summary of our issues, as we’ll be submitting detailed comments on proposed LCRI. Thanks 
again. 
 
Cheryl Nenn (Milwaukee Riverkeeper, Wisconsin): Well, thank you for the opportunity today. My 
name is Cheryl Nenn, and I am riverkeeper for Milwaukee Riverkeeper, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. 
We have around 65,000 remaining lead service lines, and my home is one of those. In the last 
seven years, the city has removed around 6,400 pipes or roughly around 900 per year. They 
have been prioritizing daycare facilities and schools for replacement, rightfully so, but it has left 
many residents like me to believe that we’ll not have lead pipes replaced probably in our 
lifetime. So in March 2022, we signed on to comments on the draft Strategy to Reduce Lead 
26 

Exposures. At that time, we were very thankful that EPA and the current administration had a 
strong commitment to protecting people from lead, especially focusing on communities facing 
disproportionately high exposures but urge that commitment is not enough. For decades, we’ve 
been kind of promised that different administrations were going to solve this crisis, only to have 
folks leave office, having accomplished relatively little. So we really urge the Administration to 
identify and implement bold and innovative actions at that time to reduce exposures of lead 
from all sources and we’re very grateful to hear that in EPA’s proposed updates to the Lead and 
Copper Rule that the Agency is recommending full replacement of all lead and galvanized lines 
in 10 years. It’s really the bold action and leadership that we’re looking for. And I’m happy to 
say, I think Milwaukee is now working on a plan to have all of those pipes addressed by 2037. 
And that is a really huge paradigm shift that should be celebrated and so we thank you for that. 
But I also say that the draft rule has had great improvements for public transparency, stronger 
sampling requirements, and increased support for those most impacted communities on which 
we support, but we do feel that more can and should be done quickly. We recommend that EPA 
require water utilities to cover all replacement costs. Many in our cities, even myself, I work for 
non-profit, can’t afford the thousands of dollars that we are being told it would cost to replace 
our pipes, which were constructed at a time when lead pipes were actually required to be put in 
my house by the City of Milwaukee. So our state legislature has allowed for cities to cost share 
pipe replacement up to 50% here in Wisconsin. But we really could benefit from more 
protective federal rules. I also am a bit concerned about the waivers. We recommend that you 
get rid of waivers or other exceptions based on water utility size that result in inequal 
protections, including a 10-year pipe replacement extension or waiver for pipe replacement, 
chemical treatment, and testing in very small communities. I understand why that’s probably in 
there because of the fiscal implications but we need to find a way to pay for this because all 
people, especially children, deserve to be protected from lead. Should consider required 
sampling in all schools and child care facilities. In our area, this is already happening and I 
think, while voluntary testing is commendable, it should really be required nationally. Likewise, 
requiring copper or polypropylene for pipe replacement when copper is not feasible and should 
likely be required. In our case, our city is requiring copper, but I know that is not the case in 
Chicago which is where I am from. Many new pipes are made with cheaper toxic plastics and 
we don’t want to swap one problem for another. And with that I will end my comments. Thank 
you for your time. 
Ray Hall (Wisdom Institute of Detroit): All right. Well what I got to say is, my comment is that, I 
don't know what's much more that the EPA can do for the City of Flint. The mayor's office and 
everything, they refuse to fix the pipes. The money is set aside for it to be done, and since day 
one, we are at the end of it now, probably like the last thousand or a hundred, whatever it is, 
and they just refuse to fix it. They've been taken to court by the ACLU, and no matter what 
goes on, they're not being fined, they're not being, what means of punishment can be placed 
upon the City of Flint to finish the pipe work? And it's not being done at all. The pipes are still 
not fixed here in the City of Flint. Our homes are not, nothing in our homes are being replaced 
at all. The city is in chaos. The city hall can't get along together. The people, we can't get 
anything done here. Like I said, I don't know what else the EPA can do here. I'm really just on 
the line just listening to everybody else, just having something common sense to say, but 
there's nothing common sense going on here in the City of Flint, as far as us having the crisis at 
the start of what goes on with the pipes and, he's still at this time not having no pipes fixed at 
all. Nothing's being done. I don't know who to contact in Region 5, region whatever, no one's 
doing anything. They dropped all the charges from the governor all the way down. Maybe that's 
27 

why the mayor doesn't feel that he has to replace the pipes because the DA has dropped all the 
charges to everyone that did anything with the pipes, the water here in the City of Flint. I 
mean, it's just one thing after another. It is really a cry for help, I don't know what else to say. 
Like I said, I really don't know what else, where to go, what direction to do, who to argue. You 
can't go to your city hall, you can't go to your government, you can't go to the state. What do 
we do here besides sit here and suffer from our homes to apartment complexes? The pipes are 
not being replaced. So it's like we're really the city of the walking dead, walking around here. 
Everybody, you know, no one is listening to us. Nothing's being done. So nobody really feels, I 
even felt for a minute there, not even just to say anything, but since it's based on making a 
comment and speaking on behalf of what's going on here, I just wonder who we can get in 
contact with, who can we can talk to, because we're dying here left and right, we're being 
experimented on. Hurley Hospital, I mean we're just, we're flat out, we're basically, we're dying 
and we're not being heard. If you go to our city hall and you look at our council online, you'll 
see that we’re in chaos, nothing is getting done and especially the pipes are not being fixed 
here in the City of Flint since day one. Everything has come to a complete halt. We got lawyers, 
ACLU and everything and we can't even get the judges to put any kind of penalties or fines or 
anything upon the City of Flint to fix these pipes and get this work done. We don't know what 
eagle, or we don't know nothing. We don't know what's going on. I’m kind of laughing 'cause 
I'm trying to keep a sense of humor about things that's going on. Maybe that's what's helping 
me speak to you all, but we need some kind of help here. This is a plea and a cry for help to 
find out something so this state could at least get the pipes fixed but we could even get that 
done, let alone in-home plumbing or anything else like that. That's what got me speaking. 
Thank you so much. 
 
Lorie McFarlane (Portland Advocates for Lead-Free Drinking Water): Thank you. My name is 
Lorie McFarlane, representing Portland Advocates for Lead-Free Drinking Water. Portland, 
Oregon is a cautionary tale. If you happened to be starting a family in Portland, Oregon in the 
1990s like me or if you are just now starting your family in 2024, you likely had, and still have, 
absolutely no idea that the city had, and still has, harmful levels of lead in water. The facts are 
clear. In 1997, officials here found a way to exploit loopholes in the Lead and Copper Rule. 
They forged a one of a kind agreement with the state exempting the city from adhering to 
federal regulation, aimed at minimizing public exposure to lead in drinking water. The result has 
been a willful neglect of public health for decades. Yet, instead of admitting a failed so-call 
substitute to the Lead and Copper Rule, our officials have been shifting blame to customers. In 
practice though, city engineers have not followed the federal regulation, which is to deliver non-
corrosive water. Their failure to do this has resulted in harmful water lead levels for decades 
here without violation. Inexcusably, our water bureau continues to keep its customers in the 
dark on this and more. That's why we're here today, because we fear our water provider is 
even now looking for new loopholes in EPA's proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. 
Therefore, we strongly urge EPA to set an enforceable MCL of five parts per billion at the tap. 
That would be protective of both health, and it's feasible. We know this because most, if not all, 
large water providers in the western U.S. region have achieved five parts per billion and under 
years ago by following EPA's corrosion control treatment requirement except Portland, Oregon. 
Finally, we're excited to see EPA added a provision that cities with a history of lead in water 
exceedances distribute water filters. Since even very low levels of lead, adversely impact 
children's brain development, and since lead is cumulative in the body, prevention is key. 
Therefore, we strongly urge EPA to require filters first, to take effect immediately, and at 
absolutely no cost to customers. We appreciate EPA offering this public hearing. Thank you. 
28 

Stacy Jones (Indiana Department of Environmental Management): I am the Chemical and 
Service Water Compliance Section Chief for the Indiana Department of Environmental 
Management, and I just want to thank EPA for taking the opportunity to simplify a couple of the 
portions of the rule that would have been very difficult to implement under the LCRR. The first 
being getting rid of the trigger level. I’d like to thank you for making the trigger level go away 
because it's hard enough to explain an action level to people. It's even harder to explain that 
there's multiple levels that you have to do different things at, and then I would also like to 
thank you for renaming the find and fix option, or find and fix requirement for after water 
systems are required to, after water systems have homes that are above the action level and 
going back and trying to figure out why they're above the action level, which is fine. “Find” is 
not the problem. The “fix” in the name connotation was an issue because there may or may not 
be something that is under the water system’s control. It may be entirely related to customer 
plumbing, and if it's determined to be customer plumbing, and not corrosion control related, it 
was kind of implying that the water system would replace the plumbing in the customer’s home. 
So I just wanted to thank you for making those two corrections, and we will be making 
comments on those and a few other things before the comment period ends. 
Public Comment Period #3 
Rob Willis opened the third public comment period. He reviewed the ground rules and logistics 
to provide public input. During the public comment period all speakers were provided two and a 
half minutes to provide their verbal comments to EPA. 
Douglas Cantor (Rutgers University): Hi, how are you doing? I am Douglas Cantor from the 
Political Science Department at Rutgers University. Thank you for having me. It is admirable 
that we are finally dropping down the Lead and Copper Rule threshold. I’m sorry, the lead 
threshold for parts per billion down to 10. It’s a standard that’s used by other governing bodies 
though other governments have their threshold even lower than that. But let’s not forget why 
this number is what it is and why it was originally set at 15. During the 1980s and 1990s, 
debates on whether or not to have this number be either an action level number or a maximum 
containment level number happened and the number to set it at was also debated as well. 
Now, key to these debates, key to those debates, was the fact that the number that was 
eventually settled on, which was an action level of 15, was based on nothing scientific. Nothing 
scientific. Everyone is in agreement that the acceptable level of lead in water is zero, from the 
scientific community to those running this meeting, who opened up this meeting with a 
statement that there is no acceptable level of lead for water. I'm grateful that this number is 
being dropped down, but let's not ignore the amount of pain, human suffering and economic 
loss that could have been prevented if, one, the number had been a maximum containment 
level number and not an action level, and two, the number had been even lower. The reason 
that 15 parts per billion was settled on was because it was determined that that was an 
economically feasible number for when governments should act for crossing a threshold. And 
what that has enabled governments to do is basically hover around 15, at the threshold of 15, 
while trying to tell their residents that their water is safe. If 100% replacement is the goal here 
of lead pipes, if 100% replacement is the goal, and zero is the acceptable level of lead, then 
this number should eventually be brought down to zero and we should eventually be making an 
active effort to make it a maximum containment level and to continuously monitor that it is at 
zero, and then we'll be in accordance with the scientific community and also within a 
recognition of history. Thank you for hearing me and allowing me to speak. 
29 

LaTricea Adams (Black Millennials for Flint): Good Afternoon. My name is LaTricea Adams, 
founder, CEO, and President of Black Millennials for Flint and White House Environmental 
Justice Advisory Council appointee. Thank you for the opportunity to speak this afternoon. I’m a 
native of Memphis, Tennessee, and like many majority Black cities, we are overburdened with 
lead service lines and weren't even knowledgeable until unfortunate circumstances like what 
happened during the Flint water crisis that put the entire nation on alert. Since the Flint water 
crisis, which occurred a decade ago, I have learned that in my own hometown, the homes of 
my parents, grandparents and great-grandparents all had lead service lines. Even the church 
where I was baptized had a lead service line. While the EPA is calling for replacement all of the 
lead service lines in 10 years, there are still areas where proposed rule falls short. Here are 
some key areas that EPA should consider to make this rule the strongest in history. No level of 
lead in drinking water is safe, even low levels of lead present risk of significant harm, but the 
current level of remediation should decrease to five parts per billion at minimum, as opposed to 
10 parts per billion. Require water utility providers to pay the full cost of removing the entire 
lead service line and EPA must enforce the fullest extent of regulatory power. Establish more 
long-term non-competitive grants specifically earmarked for lead service line replacement as 
certain local and state agencies do not have enough funding, especially rural areas. 
Additionally, mandate filtering programs for the duration of the lead service line replacement 
process. Mandate testing for lead in all public schools and child care facilities and enforced 
water filtration with the level of remediation of at least five parts per billion. Establish 
safeguards for renters to ensure there is equitable access to lead service line replacement. And 
last, but certainly not least, develop a national lead service line inventory where all cities and 
states report their respective inventory and progress as well as include in the EPA EJScreen tool 
and the Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool, also known as CEJST. Thank you again 
for amplifying the voices of community today. 
Sarah Bucic (Lead-Free Delaware): Thank you so much. My name is Sarah Bucic and I am co-
chair of Lead-Free Delaware and I’ve been a nurse for over 20 years, and for the last eight 
years, I’ve been a citizen advocate in my state of Delaware to prevent lead poisoning. And I 
thank you for the opportunity to provide comments today. I am here today regarding the lead 
action level being proposed for 10 parts per billion. The EPA notes, itself, that this proposed 
action level is not a health-based level. There is no safe level of lead in the human body or safe 
level of lead in water. And the current lead action level of 15 parts per billion, which was set in 
1991, is not based on health, nor is the current proposed 10 parts per billion. And we know that 
the EPA has set the maximum contaminant level goal for lead in drinking water at zero, and this 
is because lead is toxic and it can be harmful to human health at very low levels. I'll just tell you 
a quick story. When the State of Delaware Department of Education performed water sampling 
in our schools, the EPA required Delaware to use 7.5 parts per billion in our schools as a 
threshold after the EPA flagged my state of Delaware for its mishandling of sampling efforts. 
Lead action levels, which are intended to be used for treatment techniques, are often 
incorrectly misinterpreted by local health departments as maximum contaminant levels, which is 
exactly what happened in Delaware where our school sampling was initially considered safe if it 
was under 15 parts per billion. We know there's only two health-based standards for lead in 
drinking water, the EPA level of MCLG of zero and the American Academy of Pediatrics 
recommendation that states one part per billion for schools and water fountains. The EPA 
should set a health-based regulation of one part per billion maximum contaminant level for lead 
and water everywhere, especially at schools and child care centers. If we don't lower this level, 
we risk not only the health of our nation's most vulnerable, but we could risk spending huge 
amounts of money and not solving the problem. We know messaging has been focused on all 
lead service lines being replaced, but this is misleading, as there will be continued lead found in 
30 

water from premise plumbing and fixtures, and this will be very confusing. We also must 
address the possibility that the lead service line replacement can actually increase lead levels 
because construction activity may dislodge more lead from lead service lines. I ask that the full 
replacement of lead service lines at schools occur as soon as possible, not just for those who 
utilize well water. Thank you for the opportunity. I look forward to health being prioritized in 
the LCR. 
Julianna Garreffa (Private Citizen): Hi, my name is Julianna Garreffa, and I am here as a private 
citizen from Northern New Jersey and a member of the NRDC Action Fund. I want to reiterate 
what both the CDC and WHO have asserted: that there is no safe level of lead in drinking 
water. Given that the proposed rule of simply reducing the lead action level is insufficient, the 
only way to guarantee completely safe drinking water is to replace all lead service lines with 
pipes made of safer materials within the next 10 years. This means no PVC pipes and no 
extensions beyond the 10-year deadline. Even as a lay person, I understand this really all 
comes down to a fight over who’s going to pay for updating the infrastructure. The proposed 
rule specifies that water systems must replace LSLs, which are under their control. As a result, 
water utilities companies are paving the way to claim that they do not control the portions of 
LSLs under private property. I know this because we have already received several reminders 
from our water company that pipes on our property are our financial responsibility. Ask 
yourselves though, who has the power to turn off the water? Do property owners have a choice 
to switch water utility providers? I believe there's only one equitable answer. The government 
and the water utility company should be required to fully fund complete LSL replacement, 
including connectors and any portion of the LSL under private property. When a car company 
recalls unsafe parts, that company foots the bill to ensure it does not harm its customers. I see 
no difference here except that the government should back up the water companies so that 
they can keep providing this vital resource. Furthermore, there is precedent that this 
arrangement can work. The City of Newark, New Jersey replaced over 23,000 lead service lines 
at no cost to property owners in under three years. To do this, Newark adopted an ordinance 
that mandated the replacement of lead service lines, provided full funding for the construction 
regardless of the property owner's income, and allowed the city to replace the lead line even if 
they couldn't locate the property owner to get their consent. My family lives one town over from 
Newark, so I can say, firsthand, that the city is still operating as usual over a year after they've 
finished paying for this program. So I urge you today to please protect my family and countless 
others by finalizing a rule that mandates full LSL replacement at the cost of governments and 
water systems. Thank you, 
Madeleine Glick (Nutrition Consultant): Thank you for the opportunity to testify. My name is 
Madeleine Glick. I am an MSRD. I have a Master’s degree in Clinical Nutrition. I’ve been working 
as a nutrition consultant for over 30 years. Access to clean, safe water is a basic right and yet 
up to 22 million Americans, possibly more, drink tap water this is served by lead pipes, which 
we know is not safe. As a nutritionist, I've always encouraged my clients to consume clean, safe 
water. And for many years, actually more recent years, I’ve worked with seniors and I know 
there’s a lot of discussion about how children are adversely affected by lead in contaminated 
water, but adults and seniors who often have a lot of health problems that are age related, 
including kidney and cardiac problems that are exacerbated by lead contaminated water are 
another concern and another health issue that’s related to lead water. I thank this 
administration for acting to address these public health concerns around lead in drinking water, 
and I urge EPA to quickly finalize the most thorough Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
possible. The EPA’s recent proposal to get lead out of drinking water is a critical step towards 
addressing this health issue, but the regulations would take a decade to be put into place and 
31 

allows some utilities to avoid paying to replace these lead pipes. We need the EPA to finalize 
strong regulations that require water utilities to cover the full cost of lead service line 
replacement. We don't want to put financial burdens on low income homeowners, or any 
homeowners for that matter. And also, it's important to protect renters whose landlords are 
unlikely to pay the cost of lead pipe replacement. The other issue is that I think it’s important 
that the regulations include making sure that water utilities take no more than a decade to 
remove their lead service lines. And I just want to thank you again for the opportunity to 
testify. 
Paul Schwartz (Campaign for Lead Free Water): Thanks Rob and thanks to U.S. EPA Office of 
Water for this comment period. I’m learning a lot. I’m Paul Schwartz, co-founder of the 
Campaign for Lead Free Water. I want to associate myself with Yanna Lambrinidou, who spoke 
first today on public education and say that education is power and that the manufacturer of 
ignorance that EPA’s messaging has done causes harm, false assurance, and also breeds 
distrust and alienation from EPA, the states, water utilities, and health professionals who are 
going off of their problematic information. I also want to associate myself with Sarah Bucic's 
remarks that we need a health-based maximum contaminant level to be set at the tap. Now I 
want to spend most of my time talking about how consumers must be protected against having 
to pay for remediation of a contaminant that was inflicted on them and from which they may 
have suffered irreparable health harm. This includes both out-of-pocket costs and water rate 
increases for lead service line replacement. Thus water utilities must be required to aggressively 
pursue all possible means of paying for system-wide lead service line replacement, including 
existing ratepayer funds (i.e., by allocating or reallocating portions for these funds for lead 
service line placement), federal, state, and local funding and innovative funding and financing 
programs (e.g., Newark’s use of port fees or Madison, Wisconsin’s use of revenue from allowing 
cell phone antenna on its water towers). If after pursuing all such means, a water utility needs 
additional funds for lead service line replacement and decides to resort to water rate increases, 
it must be required under the LCR to submit the funding sources that it’s pursued, the funding 
proposals it has submitted, and the responses that it has received, and the state drinking water 
program should have the obligation to review and report on whether the water utility has truly 
exhausted all possible funding options. Of course, when funding options are exhausted and 
rates are raised, the rate reform should insulate low-income consumers from affordability 
challenges. Thank you so much. 
Brenda Santoyo (Little Village Environmental Justice Organization): Hello. My name is Brenda 
Santoyo. I’m a senior policy analyst with the Little Village Environmental Justice Organization. 
We are a community-based organization on Chicago’s southwest side. We recognize the 
tremendous effort it has taken for the EPA to get to the point of mandating the replacement of 
all lead lines as there is no argument to the fact that it’s necessary to protect our nation’s public 
health. The 10-year timeline mandates shows an apparent need to get these lines out of the 
ground expeditiously. However, we know that Chicago faces a unique challenge with the largest 
number of lead lines in this country, where EPA deemed the timeline to be far greater, currently 
a 40-year timeline for the completion of this work. That is at least two more generations of 
children, my future children, and my future grandchildren that will continue to be exposed to 
the risk of drinking lead contaminated water and bearing the health consequences of it. Many 
families without even recognizing that the water in their homes is what is deteriorating their 
health. Our organization has been the one to teach residents how to navigate Chicago’s online 
inventory and tell them for the very first time that they have a lead service line in their home. 
As we have these often-difficult conversations, they begin to connect the dots and begin to 
share how they have children with developmental delays or behavioral challenges. They have 
32 

children that have dropped out of school because of these challenges. We urge the EPA to 
reconsider this 10-year exemption and consider other feasible metrics that increase the rate of 
replacement over a set period of time for water systems with large concentrations of lead 
service lines, like Chicago. These regulations have real consequences on people's lives, and this 
is not something we can continue to overlook. The EPA cannot and should not in good 
conscious knowingly allow children and adults in places like Chicago, New York, and Cincinnati 
to continue to bear the brunt of lead contamination for additional decades to come. EPA cannot 
continue to push the narrative that our drinking water is safe when the existence of 9.2 million 
lead lines remain in the ground across the United States, contaminating the water before it gets 
to the tap. This disincentivizes households from pursuing solutions to replace their lead lines 
and use water filters in their home when they would greatly benefit. We know that although the 
acceptable level of lead in drinking water, according to the Lead and Copper Rule, is now 10 
parts per billion. That surpasses the acceptable level of lead exposure by 10 times according to 
the standards set by the Center for Disease Control. Mandated effective outreach and education 
is critical in geographical areas with high concentrations of lead lines, especially given the 
longevity of the proposed replacement timeline for major water systems. Thank you, 
Joshua Klainberg (New York League of Conservation Voters): Good afternoon. My name is 
Joshua Klainberg from the New York League of Conservation Voters. I come from the great 
state of New York, whose motto “Excelsior,” Latin for “ever upward or higher,” reflecting a 
commitment to the pursuit of excellence. It is in this spirit that I urge EPA’s proposed LCRI to 
go ever upward and higher by following examples from states like New York that are leading 
the way. For instance, data from service line inventories will be more readily available to New 
Yorkers than the rest of the nation thanks to city and state actions. In New York City, service 
line data is released publicly every six months. Statewide, water systems serving more than 
10,000 people will be required to update inventories annually starting in 2025. In the area of 
school drinking water, in 2016, New York was the first state in the nation to create a mandatory 
testing system. Currently, this program is leading the nation with triennial testing with an action 
level of 5 parts per billion. New York state chose an action level of 5 parts per billion because it 
recognized that 5 is the new 15, meaning that this is the level most commonly set or sought out 
here in the U.S. and abroad. Since there is no safe level of lead, we urge the EPA to follow the 
science and get as close to one part per billion as recommended by the American Academy of 
Pediatrics by reducing the action level from 15 parts per billion to 5. Concerning the deferred 
replacement deadline for systems with over 100,000 lead service lines, New York City has 
nearly 347,000 lead or possible lead service lines, 40% which are located in disadvantaged 
communities. Under the LCRI proposal, lead pipe removal in New York City could go on for up 
to 35 years. Ironically, creating a profound environmental injustice whereby wealthier and 
whiter communities outside of New York City would be assured cleaner drinking water decades 
before the city's low-income communities and communities of color. Rather than creating a two-
tiered system, the EPA should have one standard of up to 10 years for lead pipe removal for all 
Americans, regardless of race, socioeconomic status, or the zip code they happen to live in, 
whether it's in East Hampton or East Harlem. Thanks for the opportunity today and may you 
pursue excellence in this final rule by aligning the LCRI policies and the states like New York 
that are leading the way. 
Naadiya Hutchinson (Black Millennials for Flint: Baltimore): Thank you so much for this 
opportunity. My name is Naadiya Hutchinson. I completed the EJ Griot program hosted by Black 
Millennials for Flint, and I currently live in Baltimore, Maryland and provide these comments as 
a concerned community member whose neighborhood is undergoing the lead service line 
inventory process as we speak. To begin, there’s no safe level of lead in drinking water. The 
33 

EPA should therefore decrease the current level of remediation from 10 parts per billion to 5 
parts per billion. The EPA should also mandate testing for lead in all public schools and child 
care facilities, and enforce water filtration with the level of remediation level of, at most, 5 parts 
per billion. Lead exposure to adults also has alarming health ramifications, including increased 
risk of diabetes, high blood pressure, kidney disease, and other health challenges. Throughout 
the United States, Black people suffer from a higher incidences of high blood pressure and 
diabetes. Health interventions for these diseases often focus on lifestyle change, but the time is 
now for us to also address the systemic factors at play in the onset of disease. Climate change 
is also now and will worsen in the next decade. Saltwater intrusion is a pressing issue in coastal 
cities, as salt water is five times more corrosive to lead pipes than fresh water. In 2023, the City 
of New Orleans was at risk of salt water corroding pipes during the water scare with the county 
just to the south of New Orleans, Plaquemines Parish, losing drinking water access for months 
due to salt water intrusion. Therefore, lead pipe replacement should be prioritized in cities at 
most risk for saltwater intrusion as a form of climate resilience. The Lead and Copper law, as 
well as any supplemental guidance and enforcement, are critical for renters, as renters do not 
have personal agency over all of their housing conditions. The EPA must establish safeguards 
for renters to ensure that there is equitable access to lead service line replacement. 
Additionally, the EPA should require water utility providers to pay the full cost of removing the 
entire lead service line while not passing on cost to consumers, especially low income 
consumers via direct or indirect fees, establish long-term non-competitive grants, and provide 
water filtration programs for the duration of the lead service line replacement. Thank you again 
for the opportunity to provide these comments. 
Jennifer Hoponick Redmon (RTI International): My name is Jennifer Hoponick Redmon. I’m with 
RTI International. I am the Director of our Environmental Health and Water Quality program, 
and we work in partnership with state agencies in North Carolina and Georgia to conduct water 
testing at child care centers and schools. I would like to provide a few comments based on our 
testing to date. First and foremost, similar to others on this call, we believe that an enforceable 
health-based standard should be set for lead. It is very confusing for schools and child care 
centers, even for researchers and state agencies, to be working with lead and trying to reduce 
it in water without a health-based standard. So using the AAP reference level of one part per 
billion, or something that gets us closer to zero would be helpful. Our lab detects lead down to 
0.1 part per billion and so that's a detection limit potentially that you could use as well. 
Secondly, we implore EPA to consider making it mandated to test every tap used for drinking 
and cooking. To date, our North Carolina water testing program has done over 30,000 samples 
and we found that the number of fixtures is about 3% with an exceedance of the 10 part per 
billion trigger level, but by facility, it's 12%. And so what it shows us is that there’s extreme 
variability from tap to tap even within the same building and cherry picking taps within a facility 
might provide a false sense of security. Next, we would also like EPA to consider including all 
centers and schools, not just elementary schools, as lead is particularly concerning for young 
children, but it also is cumulative and consistent exposure in drinking water after elementary 
school can affect individuals of all ages. We'd also like EPA to consider increasing the 18 hour 
stagnation maximum to 72 hours to account for weekends, as most child care centers and 
many schools are closed and remain used over the weekend. Because children often drink 
water from taps without regular flushing on Monday mornings, the current rule as written 
prevents utilities from collecting samples likely to have the highest concentrations of lead in 
them. Thank you for your time. 
Nayyirah Shariff (Flint Rising): My name is Nayyirah Shariff. I am the Director of Flint Rising, 
which is an environmental justice organization, as based in Flint Michigan, and I am a Flint 
34 

resident. I'm very pleased that the EPA is taking an important step forward and also very 
pleased that the EPA has also adopted a lot of the policies that Michigan first implemented with 
Michigan’s Lead and Copper Rule. Unfortunately, one of the things that we have in Michigan 
that we still hope and are advocating for to be adopted at the federal-level is the cost of the full 
lead service line replacement be borne by the water utility. By making this optional, this would 
further entrench and harden structural racism and policy in our country and it will also have an 
undue burden on poor residents on decisions that were made many times long before they 
were born. In addition, I also hope that once we adopt this policy that there are funding 
mechanisms that further will not create more structural racism in this country. Specifically the 
fact that we need to have grants to pay for this and for there to be a mechanism outside of the 
state revolving funds. Finally, we really hope that with the distribution of filters that this also 
would be borne by the water utility or the state regulatory agencies. And while this is a step 
forward having lowering the action level from 15 parts per billion to 10, there is no safe level for 
lead and it should really be further lowered to the detect level. Thank you very much for your 
time. Thank you. 
Joe Fitzgerald (Milwaukee Water Commons): I’m Joe Fitzgerald. I’m representing Milwaukee 
Water Commons, an environmental nonprofit organization based in Milwaukee, Wisconsin and 
I’m calling in today both to commend EPA on taking a stronger stance on the Lead and Copper 
Rule proposal, but also to call for even stronger action and to articulate and back a lot of what’s 
been said so far on the call since I joined from folks around the country who are excited to see 
this 10-year replacement timeline and a more urgent action on the replacement of lead service 
lines. Communities around this country are dealing with lead poisoning at just a horrible rate in 
families, and we need to see action quickly to remove those pipes. Even in a water rich city like 
Milwaukee, we have 64,000 lead service lines. It’s not right to be one of the largest sources of 
fresh water in the world and to still have families fearing being able to drink the water coming 
from their tap. So to see a 10-year timeline is ambitious and we appreciate that, but that 
timeline should be required for all communities. We should be seeing folks at all levels of 
government looking to take action at the level of urgency being felt by those families. At the 
same time, we're excited to see a lowered action level, but I think many folks on this call have 
gone right to that point of the need to have a health-based standard at five parts per billion or 
lower. This will not only be just a reality of what lead poisoning looks like in this country, but it'll 
help with coordination with health systems and with folks who are dealing with lead poisoning. 
When we're taking action on other sources of lead, we need to be able to coordinate on those 
standards. We also would like to see more stringent testing for schools and backing of filter 
distribution and installation for families and also to eliminate that cost share for residents, 
especially as we prioritize working in the communities that have been most impacted by lead 
infrastructure. We know that those are communities who have been bearing the brunt of 
redlining and disinvestment, and so we should not also be asking those folks to cover the cost 
of pipe removal and replacement. Thank you. 
Cicely Allen (Wisdom Institute): Thank you. My name is Cicely Allen. I’m the mother of three 
children who live in Detroit, Michigan, and I work with an organization called the Wisdom 
Institute, a grassroots African- American woman and girl focused nonprofit, and we work to 
achieve reproductive justice at the intersections of access to clean, affordable drinking water 
and bodily autonomy. Wisdom Institute actually met with the EPA, or representatives of the 
EPA, recently, back in August of 2023 and discussed ways to engage in community and come 
up with strategies, and want to provide support. So with that, I want to thank you for the 
proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvement that requires the vast majority of water systems, 
including Michigan and the City of Detroit to replace lead service lines within 10 years. In 
35 

Detroit, 19 schools in Detroit public schools community district were identified with having lead 
contaminated water in a recent study. One of the schools, of course, was a school where my 
children attend. We weren't properly notified. We have two school-aged children that attend 
these schools in the district, and my daily concern is will they be exposed to lead water? I am 
worried about the water that’s coming out of my faucets at home, but I feel like I have more 
control to make sure that they don't drink water from those faucets, but at school, I don't know 
who's in control. I don't know what type of safety precautions they have set up so that children 
are not drinking toxic water. And so it's a concern on the home front and at school, and we're 
asking that we need stronger requirements to protect children by adding sampling and public 
notification requirements for schools and child care centers. Testing should be required for all 
schools and child care centers and completed on a regular schedule, just like all community 
water systems. On request testing will not catch changes to lead levels and not all schools will 
have filters and those that do may not be able to maintain them well. And so we ask for that, 
and we also realized that there needs to be a prioritization of lead pipe replacements for 
schools, hospitals, birth clinics, birth centers, residential homes to protect students, people 
expecting babies and infants from lead exposure. Thank you. 
Christopher Otto (Delaware Nurses Association): Good afternoon, my name is Christopher Otto. 
I'm a registered nurse in the state of Delaware and here today representing the Delaware 
Nurses Association. As EPA moves to finalize the proposed draft of the updated Lead and 
Copper Rule requiring states to replace all lead service lines within the next 10 years, we urge 
you to finalize the strongest possible safeguards as soon as possible. For over three decades, 
this rule has fallen short in safeguarding drinking water, only requiring action where tests detect 
elevated lead levels. There is no safe level of lead. Lead can affect almost every organ and 
system in the body. Even at very low levels, lead can cause serious irreversible damage to the 
developing brains and nervous systems of babies and young children. As an uncle with two 
nieces that attend middle school here in the state, I was astounded when we learned of the 
elevated lead levels in our school’s drinking water, and having to explain to my sister and nieces 
not to drink it. You know, I had to pinch myself sometimes wondering where I was living. Lead 
has also been recognized to be a cause of hypertension and a risk factor for heart disease, 
stroke, and chronic kidney disease. Access to safe drinking water is essential for our families to 
live healthy and productive lives. These proposed essential improvements to the rule are a step 
in the right direction for promoting public health. However, they do fall short. As the science is 
clear, there is no safe level of lead in water, so DNA strongly supports the following measures 
to strengthen this proposal, including lowering the maximum contaminant level of lead in 
drinking water to one ppb. We ask the EPA to set a health-based regulation of one ppb 
maximum contaminant level for lead in water at schools and child care centers, further 
requiring a full replacement of lead service lines at schools as soon as possible. We recommend 
installation and maintenance of point-of-use filter certified to remove lead on all taps used for 
drinking water, cooking, or beverage preparation in schools and child care centers. The EPA 
must finalize stronger Lead and Copper Rule Improvements which will replace all lead service 
lines within 10 years and require utilities to cover the full cost. Studies have shown that 
allowing water systems to charge individual homeowners leads to fewer replacements for non-
white and lower income house renters. Thank you for your time in taking this action. 
Kirstin Eller (San Antonio Water System): Hello, my name is Kirstin Eller and I am with the 
Potable Water Quality Department at San Antonio Water System or SAWS. We would like to 
thank EPA and all the individuals involved in the creation and further development of the LCRI. 
SAWS has over 600,000 service connections within our system. The current estimation of 
unknown service line categorized in our inventory is greater than 350,000. While the majority of 
36 

the publicly owned side is identified and has shown no presence of lead, there are many 
locations which will require investigations on both sides of the meter. If EPA writes the 10-year 
deadline into rule, SAWS will be required to complete over 50,000 inspections annually, or 
approximately 150 every day to be compliant. The inspections alone would cost the citizens of 
San Antonio one billion dollars in 10 years. The considerable cost and practicality of having 
enough manpower and materials for this one daily task is unfeasible. We understand and 
respect EPA's goal with this proposed 10-year deadline, but strongly suggest another category 
for deferred deadline eligibility be created for systems with substantial unknowns. We would 
also strongly encourage EPA to allow the use of predictive models that SAWS, an initiative in 
the early 1990s targeting lead pipe removal took place. Through our records review and initial 
inspections, we have yet to uncover any documentation of a lead line within our system that 
has not already been replaced. The decades of LCR tap sampling data, as well as substantial in-
house data sets all support that SAWS in the fortunate situation of not having a lead problem. 
Our water quality data substantiates that the majority of our system should be classified as 
non-lead. However, based on the language in the LCRI, SAWS is faced with the burden of 
proof. At greater than one billion dollars, this is a steep price to pay to prove San Antonio does 
not have a lead problem when all our data already illustrates just that. Lastly, the overall goal 
of including premise plumbing and the tap sampling protocols is admirable. However, it is not 
feasible for a water system to be held accountable for customer private property that it does 
not own nor have control over. We have strict private property laws here in Texas. We are 
having difficulty gaining access for simple pothole inspections of private service lines and 
anticipate access will be exponentially more difficult to obtain for assessing internal plumbing to 
private homes. In the event a lead-based component is in place, the LCRI does not give the 
public water system any authority to have it removed. This means that if a customer exercises 
their right not to replace a lead-based pipe or fixture, the PWS and its rate payers may be 
forced to pay for more frequent sampling as well as system-wide treatment solutions for 
personal decisions regarding their private property. SAWS strongly suggest that the EPA 
reconsider holding the water system accountable for private property without legal access or 
authority over a customer's decision. Thank you very much for allowing us to voice these 
comments. We will be submitting written ones as well. 
Public Comment Period #4 
Rob Willis opened the fourth public comment period. He reviewed the ground rules and logistics 
to provide public input. During the public comment period all speakers were provided two and a 
half minutes to provide their verbal comments to EPA. 
John Rumpler (Clean Water Program Director, Environment America): Thank you so 
much. My name is John Rumpler. I'm the Clean Water Program Director with Environment 
America speaking on behalf of our members all across the country, I want to address 
specifically the issue of lead in schools drinking water. Before I do so, let me note that we are 
wholeheartedly thrilled to see the 10-year deadline for replacing lead service lines. In the 
proposed rule, however, we need similar preventative action to ensure safe drinking water 
where kids go to learn and play every day. Our research has documented that lead 
contamination of drinking water is widespread in schools. Testing alone is not going to solve 
this problem, especially given the high variability of lead testing, and the fact that no 
remediation is required for community water systems. Instead, what we would propose is that 
EPA move to a prevention-oriented approach, installing filters at every tap, especially for the 
schools and child care facilities that EPA directly regulates as non-transient non-community 
37 

water systems. For all other community water systems, we urge EPA to give them an option to 
install filters at every tap used for drinking and cooking, and apply a standard much lower than 
10 parts per billion. For example, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends one part per 
billion as the limit for lead in schools, that’s what should be applied here. Alternatively, if water 
utilities that are community water systems do not want to do this this prevention-oriented 
approach, which has just been adopted as the law for the city of Philadelphia, for the entire 
state of Michigan, and so forth, and so on, then at least we urge EPA to dramatically increase 
the testing so it is robust, every tap tested at least once every six months with mandatory 
remediation, including filters and tap replacement with materials that are truly lead-free. On this 
last point, thank you for your consideration. Let’s move ahead and get the lead out.  
Jeff Tanner (Chief Technical Officer, Flow-Liner Systems): My name is Jeff Tanner. I’m 
Chief Technical Officer for Flow-Liner Systems. EPA needs to allow water authorities access to 
innovative certified technologies so they can get the lead out of our children’s drinking water 
now, not a decade from now. Here’s an innovative technology that’s called EPP (expandable 
pressure pipe). It’s inserted inside of a host pipe and here’s a piece of lead pipe that’s been 
inserted and expanded. And I have some other examples here of a copper and the plastic, but 
this is what it looks like inside of a lead pipe. This technology has been used as a barrier against 
lead since the early 1990s. It’s an advanced pipe technology whose structural material can last 
over one hundred years. It can withstand over four hundred psi of water pressure. It’s NSF 61 
certified for drinking water. This is a piece of copper pipe with the EPP material on it. It’s not a 
liner or a coating; it’s actually manufactured as a pipe. It’s NSF 61 certified and it’s a fraction of 
the costs compared to dig and replace, and they can be installed in a few hours, so you can 
imagine the savings. We manufacture this technology now in the USA, and it’s now available 
here in the US. For more information, please go to eppleadfree.com to learn more about EPP 
and help get involved by contacting the EPA to let them know. This advanced pipe technology 
needs to be utilized to get the lead out of our children’s drinking water now, eppleadfree.com. 
Thanks Rob. 
Peter Buress (Government's Affairs Manager, Wisconsin Conservation Voters): My 
name is Peter Boris, and I work as the government’s affairs manager with Wisconsin 
Conservation Voters. We are a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization, dedicated to engaging 
voters to protect Wisconsin's environment. I appreciate the opportunity to show our strong 
support for EPA's newest proposed improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule. Across 
Wisconsin, we are very worried about the serious, long-term health risks associated with lead 
contamination, particularly how those risks can impact children. In some Wisconsin 
communities, as many as one in four children under six years old are considered blood 
poisoned, based on blood lead levels that exceed five micrograms per deciliter. We know that 
no level of lead in drinking water is safe, and we’re particularly concerned that elevated blood 
lead levels in children are associated with hearing loss, lower IQs, developmental delays, 
behavioral changes, and emotional impacts like anxiety and depression. We appreciate that the 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements include 100% replacement requirements for water utilities 
within 10 years of the rule’s finalization. Based on 2022 data from our public service 
commission, Wisconsin still has at least 174,637 utility side service lines that contain lead or 
galvanized material and 181,918 customer side service lines that contain lead or galvanized 
material. To further improve the rule, we urge EPA to require water utilities to cover the costs 
of fully removing both utility side and customer side lines. This will ensure that individuals who 
38 

are already confronting the public health costs associated with lead poisoning don’t need to 
cover replacement costs on their own. Additionally, and last, all individuals are able to replace 
their customer side lines, we will not be able to protect the entire community from lead 
contamination. We also appreciate that the Lead and Copper Improvements include improved 
sampling, inventory, education, and notification requirements. We urge EPA to further build on 
the improvements by requiring public water systems to implement stronger testing and 
remediation plans for schools and child care facilities. This is the only way we can ensure 
Wisconsin children are fully protected. Thank you to President Biden and everyone at the EPA 
who has worked so hard on these improvements. Wisconsin Conservation Voters will be 
submitting written comments signed by over two hundred of our members. We strongly support 
these improvements and urge you to strengthen and finalize them as expeditiously as possible. 
Thank you for your time. 
Anna-Lisa Gonzalez Castle (Director of Water Policy, Elevate): My name is Anna-Lisa 
Gonzalez Castle, Director of Water Policy at Elevate, the Chicago-based nonprofit that advances 
safe, lead-free, and affordable water for all with a focus on child care facilities and 
environmental justice communities. We administer a three-pronged program to address lead in 
water in partnerships with local, state, and federal agencies and community partners. So, I offer 
the following comments, based on our experience doing this work on the ground, and we’ll 
submit more detailed comments in writing. Through Lead Care Illinois, Lead Care Cook County, 
and Lead Care Complete in Chicago we work with child care facilities across the state to test for 
lead in water and take necessary mitigation steps to ensure lead levels remain below the 2.01 
parts per billion threshold are held to. In the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, we applaud 
sort of a step in the right direction by the lowering the action level from 15 to 10 parts per 
billion, but this is insufficiently protective of public health, and there is no safe level of lead in 
water. A truly health-based standard would be zero parts per billion, and many in the medical 
community recommend a maximum contaminant level of five parts per billion. Again, Illinois 
child care providers are held to a standard of two parts per billion. The Lead and Copper Rule 
can do better. It must require strict reporting and enforcement of violations. We also performed 
free lead service line replacement in child care facilities across Cook County, including free 
restoration services to repair property where needed. In our experience, the cost to households 
and small businesses remain a major barrier in executing lead service line replacement 
strategies. The LCRI should require a full lead service line replacement at no direct cost to the 
customer. Lastly, we’re supportive of the expedited timeline for full lead service line 
replacement within 10 years. As a Chicagoan, I must call attention to the fact that the deferred 
replacement deadline leaves too many of us behind. I’m speaking today not only as a water 
policy professional, but as a pregnant person living in an environmental justice community on 
Chicago’s southwest side. I’m expecting my first child this spring, and I’m saddened by the 
thought that under my current state law and the deferred timeline that the LCRI would offer my 
city, not only will my unborn child grow up with the risk of exposure to lead in their drinking 
water on top of our compounding environmental threats, but my future grandchildren, and 
countless others, could face the same. Without more robust action, Chicago could take until 
2077 to remove all lead lines from our drinking water system. The LCRI should be requiring 
communities like mine to do more, not less, to protect public health. Thank you.  
Kathy Reiner (Career in Public Health and School Nursing): My name is Kathy Reiner, 
and I’m thankful for the opportunity to testify today on the Lead and Copper Rule. I live in 
39 

Colorado, where I’ve worked my entire over 40-year career in public health and school nursing. 
I'm here today to share my alarm about the current lead in drinking water in schools and child 
care, and our failure to protect vulnerable children from a lifetime of disability. Disabilities that 
are irreversible, but completely easily and cost effectively preventable. Lead causes the most 
morbidity of any other environmental toxin, and no amount is believed to be safe in children. 
Children living in poverty are more than three times as likely as their wealthier peers to have 
elevated blood lead levels, and Black children face twice the exposure rates of white children. 
These disparities are attributed to differences in the places where children live, learn and play, 
including schools and child care centers. Lead is an invisible menace present in the seemingly 
safe and live giving source, drinking water, and even more deplorable present in the drinking 
water of our schools and child care centers which ought to be a safe haven for our children. 
Voluntary programs do not protect our children. Case and point, here in Colorado the Safe 
Drinking Water in Schools Act was passed in 2017 and allocated grants for schools to test their 
water, and unfortunately most schools failed to apply for grants, and the action level in the rule 
was 15 parts per billion. Thankfully, this law was strengthened in 2022 and now requires 
phased in participation by child care centers and schools with an action level of five part per 
billion. Still, 27% of facilities did not participate. What is the solution? A strong Federal Lead 
and Copper Rule which will provide multiple layers of protection by quickly replacing lead 
service lines, improving tap standpoint protocols, lowering the action level to one part per billion 
for schools and child care centers, and funding for testing and remediation as well. It haunts 
me to think of the hundreds, if not thousands, of children, with learning disabilities that I have 
worked with throughout my career, and wonder how many of these children were poisoned by 
lead, a completely preventable occurrence. Shamefully, an estimated 72% of Colorado children 
under the age of six have lead detected in their blood, well above the national rate of 51%. We 
must ensure that not one more child is disabled simply because they were thirsty and drank 
lead contaminated water at their school or child care center. Thank you for this opportunity and 
thank you President Biden. 
Bill Slowinski (Concerned Citizen): Thank you for the opportunity to testify. My name is Bill 
Slowinski. I’m here today speaking as a concerned citizen. I was born and lived in Chicago my 
first 35 years of life. The year after I married, I moved to Oak Lawn, which is a suburb about 
two miles outside the city limits. I worked in Chicago for over 44 years. I still have family, and 
friends in Chicago, regularly visit Chicago for recreation and entertainment. Chicago suppliers, it 
was the water supplier for my village of Oak Lawn. It was in Oak Lawn that my wife and I 
started and raised our family. Water quality reports made us aware of lead in drinking our 
water, and we took steps to protect our family through the use of water filters. Unfortunately, 
not all households can take such action. There is no safe level of exposure to lead. Lead 
exposure damages children’s brains, leads to learning disabilities, it can cause certain cancers, 
and may be linked to heart disease. My village of Oak Lawn, like Chicago, the state of Illinois, 
and across the country, is a mixed community of incomes, ranges from poor, middle class, and 
wealthy. Not everyone can afford to take individual action to protect from lead exposure, yet 
everyone benefits when we act as a community. The Illinois EPA website on lead service line 
information showed that Illinois has nearly 680,000 lead service lines. The National Defense 
Resource Council did a survey in 2021 that listed Illinois with these lead service lines as the 
highest in this of all the states with lead service lines. Such numbers make the taught task, 
replacing lines, daunting yet in 2022 Benton Harbor Michigan replaced nearly all of their lead 
pipes in a year and in 2021 Newark, New Jersey replaced nearly all their lead pipes in two 
40 

years. Success can be done, and it requires cooperation for many parties. The EPA needs to 
enforce such cooperation. Regulation should require water utilities cover the full cost of lead 
replacement. Low-income owners will not hit the financial means to pay for replacement lines. 
Renters cannot force landlords to pay the cost of lead replacement lines, especially in low-
income neighborhoods. I read there are certain communities like Chicago and surrounding 
communities that may be granted too long of a time to replace lead service lines. This is not 
good for the elderly nor for a community young or little. As I mentioned, Benton Harbor and 
Newark have shown quick action is possible, we cannot allow another generation of children to 
be harmed by lead pipes. Please do your part and require that lead pipes are replaced equitably 
and quickly. Thank you for allowing me to testify. 
Chavaysha Chaney (Pennsylvania Women for a Healthy Environment): My name is 
Chavaysha Chaney, manager of efficacy and health policy from Pennsylvania Women for a 
Healthy Environment to comment on drinking water regulation for Lead and Copper 
Improvement and the need to strengthen our current standards. Women for a Healthy 
Environment requested PA school information from public school districts to collect and 
summarize data on potential environmental hazards and school buildings. We found 72% of 
schools reported testing for lead in drinking water in the 2018-2019 school year, but only 62% 
of schools who tested for lead in drinking water performed these tests in all of their school 
buildings as required by Act 32 in PA school code. Of schools that tested, 71% exceeded above 
5 parts per billion. Many school districts reported results over 20 per billion, despite the PA 
school code reporting limit being 15 per billion. 62.5% of school districts that exceeded the PA 
school code reporting limit of 15, noted that they had performed and completed remediation for 
those outlets. It's uncertain whether those school districts that did not remediate these outlets 
violated the PA school code, as there is no enforcement action required. We also released a 
water report of 36 community water systems in our county, in and outside of EJ communities 
which only 17 systems, 47%, responded. We felt a lack of water systems that have not initiated 
lead service line replacement and a lack of lead service line replacement program. We’re 
requesting strengthened standards such as water utility should be required or responsible for 
paying for completed lead service line replacements, potentially leaving significant costs for 
individual households. Water utilities shouldn’t be allowed for removing lead pipes beyond the 
10-year deadline. These provisions must be fixed, and we cannot allow more generations of 
kids to continue drinking lead water. Dropping the action level from 15 to 10 parts per billion is 
an improvement, but it’s insufficient. Better public education and outreach is needed. The rules 
should require utilities to either comprehensive and regularly test all water outlets at schools 
and child care centers, or work with these facilities to help them install water infiltration 
systems. This will incentivize expeditious resolution of lead issues and reduce costs compared to 
the removal and replacement of lead containing pipes and fixtures. Also, enforcement and 
reporting must be strengthened. Thank you for your time and consideration.  
Shelby Cline (River Network): My name is Shelby Klein and I work as the Drinking Water 
Program Associate at River Network, a national nonprofit organization that grows and 
strengthens a transformational network of water justice and river advocates. I appreciate the 
opportunity to address you all on a matter of significant importance: the persistent issue of 
lead-contaminated drinking water in our communities. Today, I commend the EPA for its 
proposed improvements of the Lead and Copper Rule. It's a commendable stride in addressing 
this critical concern; however, I believe that additional measures are imperative to fortify 
41 

safeguards for public health, particularly in communities disproportionately affected by lead 
contamination. The adverse effects of lead exposure, especially on children from historically 
underserved and segregated communities, necessitate our utmost attention, while the proposed 
rule represents a substantial improvement, I would like to highlight specific areas that would 
require immediate consideration. Firstly, I urge the EPA to re-evaluate timeline exceptions for 
cities with substantial number of lead pipes, such as Chicago, for removal timelines extended 
close to 40 years. Allowing such extended timelines poses risk for another generation, and 
proactive measures must be taken for the residents of these cities. I would also like to 
recommend that water utilities cover the complete cost of replacing lead pipes. This approach 
prevents low-income homeowners and renters from facing imposing financial burdens. Thirdly, 
the proposed role inadequately addresses lead and water at schools and child care facilities. 
The EPA should enact proactive measures akin to those instituted recently in the state of 
Michigan, to filter and test water in educational and child care institutions. While acknowledging 
the progress represented by the proposed rule, urgent and comprehensive action is required to 
fully mitigate the lead contaminated drinking water crisis in our country. The well-being of our 
communities hinges on robust and decisive measures to eradicate lead exposure from all water 
sources. I'd like to again express my gratitude to Administrator Reagan and EPA for their 
commitment to this critical issue. I hope the Agency will fortify the Lead and Copper Rule even 
further, helping to ensure that it becomes an instrument capable of protecting public health and 
guaranteeing a healthier future for us all. Thank you for your time and attention today. 
Anna Bunting (Freshwater Future): Thank you for this opportunity to provide comments. 
My name is Anna Bunting. I am a program co-director at Freshwater Future. We are a 
binational nonprofit that is a catalyst for community action for clean, safe, and affordable water 
in the Great Lakes region. First, we want to thank the EPA for listening to advocates, including 
major updates to the Lead and Copper Rule, including the 10-year replacement requirement 
and the banning of partial replacements. We have worked with grassroots organizations to get 
the lead out of drinking water for the past 10 years, and this experience has informed the 
following recommendations. Firstly, the EPA should mandate utilities cover the full cost of 
replacements, and ensure that replacements do not cause financial distress to homeowners, 
particularly low-income households. There needs to be best and equal protections across the 
rule. Firstly, this means that the EPA should not allow for exceptions to the 10-year replacement 
deadline, based on its own reasoning. Extending replacement deadlines the 10-year 
requirement will only subject impacted communities to prolonged exposure to lead in drinking 
water. Secondly, remove the small system flexibility for sampling waivers and for ALE response. 
Additionally, we need a stronger rule to protect children by adding sampling and public 
notification requirements for schools and child care centers. Testing should be required for all 
schools, not just elementary schools and child care centers. Also, testing should be completed 
repeatedly on the same schedule as all other community water systems. On-request testing will 
not catch changes to lead levels, and not all schools will have filters, and those that do may not 
necessarily have maintained them well. We need requirements that ensure replacements use 
safe materials, particularly copper, and ban unsafe plastics, particularly PEX and PVC, as well as 
provide guidance for post-consumer lead waste to reduce lead poisoning after disposal. 
Environmental justice communities are most vulnerable to environmental hazards, such as lead, 
and that should be first in line for water, infrastructure improvements. The EPA should 
recommend or require the use of EPA’s EJ Screen 2.0 to identify areas that utilities should 
prioritize in their lead service line programs. Lastly, we disagree with the EPA’s use of phrases 
42 

under the submit systems control and adequate access, and its mandate for the full 
replacement of lead lines and connectors. Simple measures, such as the adoption of local 
ordinance, like those in New York and New Jersey, would resolve these control issues and 
ensure that all lead service lines are replaced. We recommend that EPA requires such 
ordinances resolve this issue. Thank you.  
Jacob Jones (NRDC Action Fund): Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. My name 
is Jacob Jones. I’m here today with my friends from NRDC Action Fund to urge the EPA to 
strengthen their proposed improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule. For a number of years, I 
studied at Indiana University in Bloomington, Indiana—go Hoosiers. It's a bustling college town 
in Southern Indiana, with a huge population of students shifting from housing year to year. 
While living there, I frequently heard “don’t drink the water” from my fellow students. I thought 
the filtered dispensers throughout campus and in buildings were kind of just a novelty. I now 
know based on NRDC’s reporting that the City of Bloomington utilities in Indiana was one of the 
top 10 systems by population, with health-based violations of the Lead and Copper Rule, while I 
was living there from 2018 to 2020. Students there, like many renters across the country, 
frequently move from one housing situation to the next. Under the proposal, as it exists, 
homeowners would be responsible for replacing a portion of the lead piping, but in places like 
Bloomington, landlords may never be incentivized to take on the costs in their rentals, since it’s 
not their health at risk, it’s the renters health. So, I urge the EPA to protect vulnerable 
populations by requiring the utility companies to cover the cost of lead service line 
replacements like they did in Newark, New Jersey, which demonstrated that it was possible. I 
know, as many people have said it here today, there is no safe level of lead in drinking water, 
and I appreciate all of your work on the improvements to Lead and Copper Rule. I just want to 
urge you to set the strongest standards possible that leave no one behind, and we need you to 
set them as quickly as possible. I urge you to require utility companies to cover the cost of the 
lead service line replacements and keep them to a 10-year timeline. With these standards, I 
hope that we can finally provide safe drinking water to everyone in this country, especially 
children. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. 
Caroline Koch (Water Now Alliance): Hello, I'm Caroline Koch. I'm the Water Policy 
Director for Water Now Alliance, a national network for local leaders advancing sustainable and 
equitable water solutions in their communities. Thank you for the opportunity to provide input 
on the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements today because protecting health, well-being and 
safety are top priority for local leaders, my comments are focused on two recommendations. 
First, to provide additional clarity about which lead service lines must be replaced, and second, 
to ensure that funds required to pay for full lead service replacements, are allocated to address 
this public health issue. Eliminating all lead service lines is an important goal, because, as the 
proposed rule states, and many others have mentioned today, there is no known safe level of 
lead exposure. To ensure this goal is met, we urge EPA to revise the LCRI to clearly indicate 
that the replacement requirement includes replacement of lead service lines located on private 
property. As proposed, the rule is unclear on whether utilities would be responsible for 
removing lead lines that are not fully owned by the utility, because most lead service lines are 
at least partly owned by customers, and because the proposed LCRI leaves what it means to 
have access to conduct a full-service line replacement undefined, the proposed rule may be 
open to the interpretation that many, if not most lead service lines, are exempt from the 
replacement requirement. This is why we recommend EPA clarify that private sidelines are 
43 

covered by the rule. Providing additional clarity in the LCRI about which lead service lines must 
be replaced, will also help ensure that the funds required to pay for full-line replacements on 
public and private side are available. Estimates for replacing lead lines nationwide range from 
$45 to $100 billion. These estimates far exceed the $15 billion investment provided by the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. To help close this gap, we urge the federal government to 
provide additional funding, particularly in the form of grants, to local governments to enable 
them to expand and accelerate lead service line replacements on public and private property. 
Thank you. 
Isaiah Grays (High School Senior): Thank you. I am Isaiah Grays, a senior at Graham Link 
High School, where I proudly serve as president of student government, and I'm also a proud 
member of the Black Millennials for Flint Youth Environmental Justice Council. I am deeply 
committed to the environmental sustainability and are aware of the impacts of the everyday 
products of our health and the planet. I am speaking to you to express my enthusiastic support 
for the proposed modifications to the safer choice standards and the potential implementation 
of a safer choice claiming service certification program. I first want to commend this safer 
choice program for its pivotal role of partnering with businesses to offer consumers and 
commercial buyers in a reliable way to identify products with safer chemical ingredients in the 
world where choices about having a limit that signifies a commitment to both human health and 
environmental well-being is crucial for this safer choice program certification process. I do want 
to say that as we are talking about lead today, especially coming from a community, Flint, 
Michigan, where we've seen the impacts of lead, it is so important that we protect the children 
of our nation, and I’m glad that we're working to make changes within our nation. I'm glad of 
the work of the EPA and to a conclusion that no amount of lead is safe to have in children's 
bodies, or any person. I see the repositioning that we're taking as a nation and so any effort 
that is aimed to modify or improve the health of citizens, as a high school student and as an 
environmental justice advocate, I always stand for it, thank you so much. 
DeeAnn Guo: Hello, I am DeeAnn Guo and I am with the Childhood Lead Action Project in 
Providence, Rhode Island. I want to thank the EPA for allowing us to provide public comment 
today, and I just wanted to share that as part of the lead-free water Rhode Island Coalition, we 
are really encouraged by the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements and the 10-year timeline to 
have lead service lines replaced. I just wanted to echo many of the previous commentors who 
said the importance of having those lead service line replacements be full and at no cost to the 
homeowners because a loan program or a cost-sharing program disproportionately leads 
families who are low-income or families of color to take on the burden of the environmental 
impacts of lead and so this is a good opportunity to ensure that water authorities are the ones 
paying for those full service line replacements. I just wanted to echo what many have said 
before, but we do find that to be very important, and thanks again for letting us talk, thank 
you. 
Public Comment Period #5 
Rob Willis opened the fifth public comment period. He reviewed the ground rules and logistics 
to provide public input. During the public comment period all speakers were provided two and a 
half minutes to provide their verbal comments to EPA. 
44 

Candice Mushatt (Flint Community Lab): My name is Candice Mushatt. I am addressing 
these improvements today not only as the Director of the Flint Community Lab, which is a 
drinking water testing facility, but also as a dedicated representative of the City of Flint, 
Michigan. Our community has experienced firsthand the devastating consequences of 
inadequate regulations and lack of enforcement of those regulations, and I'm here to advocate 
for crucial changes to the Lead and Copper Rule that will safeguard the health and well-being of 
communities across the nation, and that will prevent further damage to water systems, and also 
prevent another crisis on the level of Flint. First and foremost, I urge you to consider the long-
term damage inflicted by lead pipes and deteriorating infrastructure. The water crisis in Flint 
has illuminated the dire consequences of aging systems where lead leaching into our water 
supply, has inflicted irreversible harm on the health of our residents, particularly our children. 
We cannot afford to overlook the urgency of addressing this issue comprehensively, and 
ensuring that our infrastructure can withstand the test time. We have an opportunity to get this 
right, right now. Which is why I am urging you to use copper piping through research of the 
environmental impact, both now and in the future of other non-toxic piping when copper piping 
may not be available. Furthermore, I am imploring the EPA to take into account the economic 
disparities that plague our communities, requiring water utilities to cover all costs associated 
with replacing lead pipes as essential. This measure not only ensures that the burden is not 
unfairly placed on low-income households, but also promotes social equity by acknowledging 
that access to clean and safe water is a fundamental right that should not be contingent on 
one's financial standing. In our pursuit of protecting those who are amongst the most 
vulnerable members of our society, I propose a mandate for mandatory testing in all schools 
and child care facilities. Children in Flint have experienced irreparable and immeasurable harm 
as a result of a crisis, the goal of our nation as a whole should be, to ensure that moving 
forward, all children are protected, and we must do everything in our power to shield them 
from the harmful effects of lead exposure by implementing rigorous testing protocols and 
educational and child care settings. We can take a proactive stance in preventing further health 
crises. Lastly, I emphasize the need to strengthen water system filter distribution requirements. 
Clean water is a basic human necessity and human right, and we must ensure that our water 
systems are equipped necessary tools to provide it. Strengthening filter distribution 
requirements will act as an additional layer of defense protecting our communities from 
potential hazards associated with lead contamination. And, as I end my comments, the changes 
proposed today are not just about preventing another Flint water crisis, they are about 
safeguarding the health and future of everyone in America as we collectively work towards a 
safer and healthier tomorrow. I implore the EPA to champion these amendments to the Lead 
and Copper Rule, ensuring that no community has to endure the pain and suffering that has 
befallen Flint. The time for change is now and together we can ensure access to safe stream 
water for all. Thank you. 
Melodie Morgan (Riverside Public Utilities): Thank you for taking my comment. I fully 
support replacing the lead lines. I am concerned, however, with the feasibility of this plan. 
When the public comments suggest that public utilities pay for the lead line replacements, they 
don’t necessarily understand how some public utilities work. Most public utilities are short-
staffed, and for public utilities to cover the costs they need funds for additional staff and supply 
lines to replace the lead lines. If the public utilities is required to fund the replacements, the 
public utility must go to board and ask for approval to fund this additional mandated expense 
through the issuance of bonds, which means, in turn that the rates will end up increasing, and 
45 

the public will end up paying for this. If the EPA offers something in the form of like a 
refundable loan, then public utilities can’t necessarily utilize this funding in the form of a 
refundable loan because, in doing so, it affects the utilities credit rating. So, in turn, they have 
to go back to board, and the public ends up paying with increased rates. I think that maybe 
something that could be considered is to have private contractors somehow receive the funding 
to provide the replacements, and that might make more financial sense. But I’m not really sure 
what the best way of going about doing this is. Thank you so much for taking my comment. 
Kaitlin Wright (Consulting Engineer in Illinois): I work as a consulting engineer working 
with several communities throughout the state of Illinois, and a variety of sizes, down to a 
population of 1,400 to well over 50,000. Majority of them have lead service lines, and I can 
honestly say that although every community is taking this very seriously, and they do 
understand the health concerns, the means of actually executing and financing replacements 
100% is not feasible. They are going to have to look at raising rates, if that is something that’s 
going to get pushed, and I can say that a 10-year replacement time period is also not going to 
be feasible for communities. Our infrastructure is aging across the entire United States, that 
includes water mains, that includes sewers that includes roads, and they are constantly being 
stretched thin on where to prioritize those efforts. So, for us to do this effectively, U.S. EPA or 
the federal government needs to look at ways for communities to fund this outside of raising 
rates or to rethink how we're going to schedule these replacements. That's all I have. 
46 

Appendix A. Public Hearing Agenda 
 
 
Public Hearing for EPA’s Proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI)  
January 16, 2024 
*** All times in Eastern Time *** 
 
11:00 – 11:20 AM  
Welcome and Hearing Orientation  
Robert Willis, Hearing Facilitator, Ross Strategic 
 
Eric Burneson, Director, Standards and Risk Management Division, Office of Ground 
Water and Drinking Water (OGWDW), United States Environmental Protection 
Agency (U.S. EPA) 
11:20 – 11:45 AM 
 
EPA Presentation on Proposed LCRI  
Anne Lausier, OGWDW, U.S. EPA 
11:45 AM – 1:00 PM 
 
 
Public Comment Period #1 
1:00 – 1:20 PM 
Break 
1:20 – 2:35 PM 
Public Comment Period #2 
2:35 – 2:50 
Break 
2:50 – 4:10 
Public Comment Period #3 
4:10 – 4:30 
Break 
4:30 – 5:45  
Public Comment Period #4 
5:45 – 6:00 PM 
Break 
6:00 – 6:50 PM 
Public Comment Period #5 
Held for unscheduled public comment speakers. 
6:50 – 7:00 PM 
Closing Remarks 
Hannah Holsinger, Branch Supervisor, Regulatory Assessment and Development 
Branch, Standards and Risk Management Division, OGWDW, U.S. EPA 
7:00 PM 
Adjourn 
 
 
A-1

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0748 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Oral Comments of Ronnie Levin on
EPA’s Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI)
January 16, 2024
I am Ronnie Levin, representing the Environmental Protection Network (EPN), a network of over 600
former EPA employees.
There are many improvements in the LCRI. We commend EPA for:
●
Expanding the regulated universe to 9 million pipes.
●
Reducing the time frame to 10 years.
●
Lowering the action level to 10 ppb. However, we suggest that the science could support a lower
action level of 5 ppb.
●
Requiring both first and fifth liter samples with the higher serving for compliance determination.
●
Requiring water systems to report home testing results to the residents within 3 days, regardless of
the levels.
●
Calculating the average annual replacement rate across a rolling three-year period.
●
Requiring disclosure and offering pipe replacement whenever there is a change in building
ownership.
We disagree with EPA’s proposal that utilities must only replace the portion of the lead service line (LSL)
that is on public property. Public water systems should exert the same effort to replace lead pipes as they do
to install or replace water meters.
●
We suggest that partial pipe replacement should be prohibited except in the direst emergencies.
●
EPA should encourage states to adopt explicit policies giving public water systems the authority to
use ratepayer funds to replace LSLs and galvanized requiring replacement service lines on private
property.
Last year, the Office of Management and Budget changed the discount rate for federal agencies to use in
cost-benefit analysis. The discount rate is now 2% and the analysis in the proposal should be updated to
incorporate this.
EPA and states need a working, formal agreement on implementation, including an underlying assumption
that reporting is accurate and complete. EPA should assert that each requirement is mandatory and that it
also constitutes compliance with this regulation. States should assert a statement of public awareness if in
compliance or not.
We believe EPA has unnecessarily omitted strengthening requirements to reduce children’s lead exposures in
schools and other child-occupied facilities. Both exposures and harms are potentially elevated there. In
schools and similar facilities, it has been demonstrated that mandatory installation of point-of-use filters on
all faucets potentially used for drinking is more efficient than implementing a testing and monitoring
program.

Finally, EPN believes that water systems will continue to underreport lead results and exceedances to the
public and primacy agency unless the regulatory language is strengthened to compel compliance. In
addition, state reporting to EPA will continue to be incomplete and late without a new Safe Drinking Water
Information System shared by EPA and the states and working agreements with states to comply with these
reporting requirements.
Thank you.
2

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1112 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0937 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Page 1 of 5 
 
Palm Beach County Water Utilities Department (PBCWUD)  
Comments for the 
Proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for  
Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
Submitted to the EPA on February 5, 2024. 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
 
 
Please reference to the particular section noted in the proposed LCRI. 
1. Definition Wide Mouth Bottle (P. 84966): 
PBCWUD Comment:  We are in agreement with the recommendation made by the Southeast 
Florida Utility Council in that:  Consideration of the practical aspects of tap sampling, including 
bottle sizes and availability is recommended. We suggest allowing a variance of +/- 3 mm in 
bottleneck size to accommodate commonly used containers. 
 
 
2. Paragraph 2 (P. 85035):  FR 84935.V.D. States: “Accurate service line inventories are essential to 
ensure replacement of all LSLs and GRR service lines. To that end, EPA is proposing to require 
water systems to validate a subset of the non-lead service lines in their inventory.”  The EPA 
continues:  “whether non-lead service lines categorized based on records should be subject to the 
validation process; and the role of the State in reviewing the inventory including the results of the 
validation process.” 
 
PBCWUD Comment:  
Record or as-built drawings should be treated as a valid method of identifying service line material 
regardless of the date of record. The purpose of Record or as-built drawings is the accurate 
documentation of what was constructed.  This process is considered a proven engineering 
practice. 
 
 
 
Please reference Section IX. (Pages FR 85035-85037) request for Comments section of the 
proposed LCRI for the remaining comments. 
 
3. General Matters:  
Paragraph 2 (P. 85035):  “Specifical1y, EPA requests comment on ways, that the proposed LCRI 
could be simplified and ways that burden, including paperwork burden, could be reduced without 
affecting the ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects.” 
 
PBCWUD Comment:     
 
With PBCWUD 200,000 connections (400,000 individual service lines) the Public 
Accessibility Doc tab of the EPA template spreadsheet may become unstable due to this 
large number of records.   

 
WUD Comments:  Proposed LCRI 
 
05Feb2024 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
Most utilities will be placing the inventory data into their GIS System so creating the 
spreadsheet solely for reporting to the EPA/State Agency is a duplication of effort and 
requires the Utility to maintain and addition document of substantial size. 
 
Submitting this information in a shape file (GIS System) will allow the data to be shared 
to the EPA in a more mobile format. 
PBCWUD Recommends:  The EPA should consider allowing Utilities to submit the Lead Service 
Line Inventory (LSLI) in either a GIS shape file or in a spreadsheet format with the technique to be 
chosen by the Utility. 
 
 
4. Service Line Replacement:  
Paragraph 2 (P. 85035):  “Whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent should 
be more than four times (e.g., five, six, or seven times).” 
 
PBCWUD Comment:   
The PBCWUD considers four attempts excessive.  Four attempts means four certified mailings, 
four instances of documenting the four attempts, and four attempts equates to a delay in getting 
the project underway.  To be cost effective the contractor will work the service line replacements 
by geographical area.  Therefore, all responses in a certain geographical area must be received 
before work in that particular geographical area can start.  A delay by one address could delay the 
entire geographical area.  
 
PBCWUD Recommends:   
Reducing the number of required attempts to gain consent to replace the service line from the 
property owner to two attempts.  If the property owner does not respond, then that particular 
address no longer becomes the responsibility of the utility at that particular location. 
 
Second PBCWUD Comment:   
The proposed rule also mandates using at least two different methods for securing consent 
(84921) which places yet another administrative burden on the Utility.   
 
PBCWUD Recommends:   
That certified mail to the property owner with documented return receipt to the address provided 
by the customer and the address provided by the local county property appraiser be sufficient if 
different.   If both the customer’s and he property appraisers address is the same then the 
certified mail is required only at the single address with two attempts.  
 
 
5. Paragraph 3 (P. 85035):  “Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets "control" for the 
purposes of the mandatory replacement provision (i.e., require systems to conduct full service line 
replacement in situations where the system has access to conduct the full replacement).”   
 
PBCWUD Comment & Recommendation:   
The public does not consider the service line from the meter to the building as being “under the 
control” of the Utility but does consider that service line to be their property.  This understanding 

 
WUD Comments:  Proposed LCRI 
 
05Feb2024 
Page 3 of 5 
 
has been reinforced for generations by the Utility and redefining that now will be difficult to 
control.    
 
The EPA is placing all utilities in a position of unexpected risk by giving the utility the responsibility 
to first inventory, and now potentially replace the service line on private property.  If the EPA 
decides to make the utility responsible for replacement of the private side service line it must limit 
the liability to the Utility and their contractors due to the potential of lawsuits and other civil 
action.  The EPA must protect the Utility and their contractors performing the work. 
 
 
6. Service Line Replacement: Paragraph 14 (P. 85036):  “The extent to which property owner consent, 
if required by State or local law or water tariff agreement, might complicate full service line 
replacement and whether there are additional measures EPA can take to facilitate access through 
the LCRI.” 
 
PBCWUD Comment & Recommendation:   
Same Comment & Response as above.   
 
 
7. Public Education:  
Paragraph 3 (P.85037):  “Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water 
systems are capable of providing consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three 
calendar days of obtaining those results, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or 
copper action level, or if a longer time frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar 
days, 14 calendar days).” 
 
PBCWUD Comment & Recommendation:   
Three days is a very short period and does not allow the Utility to perform adequate quality 
assurance on the laboratory report and other data.  PBCWUD recommends a minimum of 10 
business days.   
 
 
8. Paragraph 4 (P.85037):  “Whether the proposed requirement for water systems to offer lead 
sampling to consumers with LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines in the notice of 
service line material is effective at reducing adverse health effects. EPA is also requesting comment 
on the requirement for water systems to deliver consumer-initiated test results within three days 
of obtaining those results.” 
 
PBCWUD Comment & Recommendation:   
- 
By lead sampling PBCWUD assumes the EPA means lead sampling and analysis services.   
- 
EPA should define what is meant by consumer-initiated test results.   
- 
If consumer-initiated test results means what it implies, that the Utility is responsible for 
collecting and analyzing a water sample from the customer’s facility at their request and if 
they have a LSL, GRR or unknown, then PBCWUD sees this as a significant burden upon the 
Utility and opens the Utility for requests for service that are not needed, required, nor a good 
use of taxpayer money. 

 
WUD Comments:  Proposed LCRI 
 
05Feb2024 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
Three days is a very short period and does not allow the Utility to perform adequate quality 
assurance on the laboratory report and other data.  PBCWUD recommends a minimum of 10 
business days.   
 
 
9. Paragraph 7 (P.85037):  “Whether EPA should require water systems to provide filters to 
consumers when there is a disturbance resulting from replacement of a water main.” 
 
PBCWUD Comment & Recommendation:   
The EPA should limit the size of the area considered to be disturbed by a main replacement.  If a 
large water main is replaced there could be many thousands if not tens of thousands of customers 
affected.  Few if any of the customers supplied water by the main will have the service line 
disturbed so the requirements of this section will not be needed. 
 
 
10. Additional Requirements for Systems With Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances:  
Paragraph 2 (P.85037):  “Whether EPA should use three action level exceedances in a five-year 
period for identifying systems with multiple action level exceedances where additional action is 
warranted and, whether additional actions should be required sooner, or later, than the five-year 
period, or whether EPA should use a modified metric (number of consecutive action level 
exceedances in a set time period) or a different metric entirely (i.e., based on one or more factors 
other than the number of action level exceedances in a set time period).” 
 
PBCWUD Comment & Recommendation:   
A straight trigger using the number of exceedances needed in a five-year period to trigger 
additional actions is biased against larger systems.  The EPA should considered a statistical analysis 
to trigger additional actions.  As proposed a Utility could have 1,000 or 100,000 connections thee 
trigger level is the same. 
 
Paragraph 4 (P.85037):  “Whether EPA should require water systems to make filters certified to 
reduce lead and replacement cartridges, along with instructions for use, available to all consumers 
within 60 days of a system having multiple action level exceedances and whether there are any 
supporting or contrary data on whether the proposed filter requirement would be protective of 
public health.” 
 
PBCWUD Comment:   
A Utility with 200,000 connections could be responsible for providing 200,000 filters.  The cost 
of the pitchers alone at $35each equates to a cost of $7,000,000.  A utility can build a new water 
treatment plant for that amount.  Considering many of these filters will not be properly used of 
even sold on-line this is a significant waste of taxpayer money. 
 

 
WUD Comments:  Proposed LCRI 
 
05Feb2024 
Page 5 of 5 
 
PBCWUD Recommendation:   
- 
A more effective process would be for the Utility to provide the pitcher to the specific 
location identified as an exceedance and then perform a resampling activity in the close 
general area as the specific location of the exceedance to investigate the source of the 
exceedance.   
- 
A Utility could be required to physically verify the composition of the service lines at the 
specific exceedance location.  
- 
Pitchers should not be a required to be provided in an area where there are no lead, GRR or 
unknown service lines present.   
 
 
Paragraph 4 (P.85037):  “Whether EPA should require water systems to make filters certified to 
reduce lead and replacement cartridges, along with instructions for use, available to all consumers 
within 60 days of a system having multiple action level exceedances and whether there are any 
supporting or contrary data on whether the proposed filter requirement would be protective of 
public health.” 
 
PBCWUD Comment:   
A Utility with 200,000 connections could be responsible for providing 200,000 filters.  The cost 
of the pitchers alone at $35 each equates to a cost of $7,000,000.  A utility can build a new 
water treatment plant for that amount.  Considering many of these filters will not be properly 
used, and even sold on-line this is a significant waste of taxpayer money. 
 
PBCWUD Recommendation:   
- 
A more effective process would be for the Utility to provide the pitcher to the specific 
location and if after resampling multiple action levels are still exceeded the utility can 
investigate the source of the exceedance by investigating 5-10 nearby addresses. 
- 
A Utility could be required to physically verify the composition of the service lines at the 
specific exceedance location.  
- 
Pitchers should not be a required to be provided in an area where there are no lead, GRR or 
unknown service lines present.   
 
 
11. Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities:  
Paragraph 2 (P.85038):  “The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community 
water systems from the requirement for lead sampling in schools and child care facilities during 
the five-year period after the LCRI compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after 
January 1, 2021 but prior to the LCRI compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the 
waiver requirements of § 141.92(h).” 
 
PBCWUD Comment & Recommendation:   
PBCCWUD agrees with the proposed provision.  Palm Beach County has been proactively 
collecting water samples at schools and believes that this data is reflective of the status of the 
drinking water at these systems and will be useful for future monitoring.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1095 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5th, 2024
Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801,
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements
Michael S. Regan, Administrator
US Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
Dear Administrator Regan,
The undersigned organizations and experts dedicated to improving public health,
children’s health, and health equity submit the following comments regarding the US
Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary Drinking Water
Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”). The proposal makes several key
improvements in how lead in drinking water is regulated, and EPA now has the opportunity to
review and revise key provisions to ensure the final rule results in long-lasting and equitable
public health benefits.
Across the 19th and 20th centuries, millions of lead pipes were installed all over the
country. Decades later, millions of those lead pipes remain in the ground, causing dangerous
levels of lead exposure. This is why it is critically important for EPA to ensure the final Lead and
Copper Rule Improvements are as strong as possible, and will set us on the path to significantly
reducing lead exposure.
Health experts including scientists at EPA, at the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, and the American Academy of Pediatrics agree that there is no safe level of lead
exposure. Exposure is especially harmful for pregnant people, infants, and young children. In
children, lead exposure can cause cognitive and developmental effects like lower intelligence
quotient (IQ), learning and behavioral problems. In adults, health effects include risk of heart
disease, high blood pressure, kidney or nervous system problems, and cancer.1
These dangers also manifest as financial costs on individuals, families, and
communities. A recent Harvard School of Public Health study concluded that improved EPA
controls on lead in tap water would generate at least $9 billion in health benefits annually, in
contrast with EPA’s estimated implementation cost of $335 million dollars.2 The benefits would
include not only better health for children and adults but also less public health risks in
communities with lower wealth and Black, brown and Indigenous communities already
2https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/press-releases/regulations-reducing-lead-and-copper-contamination-
in-drinking-water-generate-9-billion-of-health-benefits-per-year-according-to-new-analysis/
1 EPA, Lead and Copper Rule Improvements: Proposed Rule, 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84880 (Dec. 6, 2023);
Lanphear, B. P., Rauch, S., Auinger, P., Allen, R. W., & Hornung, R. W. (2018). Low-level lead exposure
and mortality in US adults: a population-based cohort study. The Lancet. Public health, 3(4), e177–e184.

disproportionately burdened from cumulative exposure to different pollutants and more drinking
water quality violations.3
This is why it is critical for our nation’s collective public health that EPA keep strong
improvements of the proposed rule (such as the requirement for the removal of all lead service
lines in ten years, the requirements for water systems to sample both the first and fifth liter of
water passing through lead pipes, and a lower lead action level) subject to ensuring those steps
forward do not have loopholes which undermine the goals of the regulation, as detailed below.
Equity-related shortcomings and unintended consequences stemming from loopholes could
derail the success of the rule and disproportionately harm the most vulnerable among us.
Accordingly, the undersigned organizations urge EPA to ensure the final rule is improved in the
following key ways:
●
Remove the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: Under the
proposal, the places with the most lead service lines would potentially have decades of
compliance extensions available. It is a fundamental injustice that communities with the
most lead service lines would be allowed extra decades to fix this issue, and it is
unnecessary to build such an exception into the proposal itself.
●
Remove the “access” loophole: The proposal claims to require removal of all lead
service lines in ten years, but it actually requires removal only of those service lines that
a utility has “access” to, and leaves it up to states, water systems and localities to
determine whether the utility has access. As a result, a water system could comply with
the new rule and still leave vast quantities of lead service lines in the ground by asserting
a lack of access.
●
Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines:
Removal can cost thousands of dollars, and putting a disproportionate financial burden
on impacted homeowners and renters and will result in mostly wealthy and white
neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced, particularly when combined with the
“access” loophole.4 There are enough financing solutions, rate structures, and funding
streams available that EPA should ensure replacements be made at no direct cost to
individual consumers. This would achieve more equitable implementation and better
protect children’s health, resulting in more equitable public health outcomes.
●
Incentivize utilities to install filters in schools and child care facilities and ensure
that children who spend many hours in these settings daily are not at risk of
exposure: EPA’s proposed provisions related to protections in schools do not
meaningfully differ from the inadequate Trump administration proposal. EPA should
4 Baehler KJ, McGraw M, Aquino MJ, Heslin R, McCormick L, Neltner T. Full Lead Service Line Replacement: A Case
Study of Equity in Environmental Remediation. Sustainability. 2022; 14(1):352. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010352
3 https://www.nrdc.org/resources/watered-down-justice

require water systems to install filters certified to remove lead or to conduct thorough,
frequent tap testing at all taps and full public disclosure for all schools and child cares
that lack such filters. Removal in these settings should be prioritized; tap testing
thereafter can then be used to identify additional sources of lead, such as plumbing
fixtures.
●
Lower the action level to 5 parts per billion: Lowering the action level from 15 to 10
ppb is an important improvement, but still less strict than the 5 ppb standard urged by
health experts, recommended by Canadian and European authorities, and applicable to
lead in bottled water in the United States. It is also far less stringent than the 1 ppb
maximum lead level that the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends for children
in schools.
●
Public Education about Protection from Lead in Water: Historically, messaging from
EPA and water systems has revolved around compliance with regulations (which does
not equate with safe water) and outdated advice on how people can reduce their
exposures from lead in water. Improved public education should be an integral part of
any improved Lead and Copper Rule. It should include annual messaging about not only
the risks of contamination from lead service lines but also lead plumbing, which is
ubiquitous. It should also include information about the effectiveness of lead-certified
point of use filters as a way for families to reduce lead levels in their drinking water.
Messaging should not suggest that tested lead levels below the action level are "safe",
and emphasize that there is no safe level of lead exposure. Water systems should also
work with local health departments to distribute information about additional sources of
lead exposure, including lead-based paint hazards, lead in soil and dust, lead in food
and cosmetics, and lead in consumer products and cultural and imported products, along
with actionable steps to reduce these exposures. This messaging would be
science-based, culturally and linguistically relevant to communities served, regularly
delivered, and help avoid creating mistrust between water systems and the people who
rely on them.
●
Prevent regrettable substitutions and pollution from removed lead pipes: EPA
should require water systems to replace lead pipes with copper instead of plastics such
as polyvinyl chloride (PVC), chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC), PEX or HDPE pipes.
Plastics have known adverse impacts to human health and children's development, and
replacing one hazard with another will create a new set of health hazards for generations
to come. A harmful stew of chemicals can leach from plastic pipes into drinking water,
and these pipes are more vulnerable to thermal degradation from wildfires than copper
pipes. In addition, micro-and nanoplastics can be released from the pipes into drinking
water. Plastic pipes also put fenceline communities at risk during the production and
disposal phase, when toxic substances can be released into air and water. For example,
when PVC/CPVC pipes are incinerated, they can release highly toxic dioxins into the
environment. EPA should also address end of life considerations for lead pipes and
require that those removed are recycled in a safe and environmentally sound manner.

Lead exposure through drinking water is one of the most solvable health crises of our
time. With stronger regulations and more funding, this administration has the opportunity to
make unprecedented progress on this issue, and achieve their goal of removing all lead service
lines in ten years. EPA’s proposed rule is a meaningful departure from prior ineffective
regulations, but without being cognizant of the cumulative effects of these loopholes and blind
spots, these reachable public health goals may end up unrealized. Accordingly, we urge EPA to
implement the changes suggested above when developing the final rule in order to best protect
the health and development of all children and that of future generations. Thank you very much
for this opportunity to provide comments.
Organizational signers
Able Differently
Alaska Community Action on Toxics
Alaska Community Action on Toxics
Alianza Nacional de Campesinas, Inc.
American Public Health Association
Black Millennials 4 Flint
Black Women for Wellness
Breast Cancer Prevention Partners
California Safe Schools
Center for Environmental Health
Children Now
Children's Environmental Health Network
CleanAIRE NC
Collaborative for Health & Environment (CHE)
Community for a Cause
Defend Our Health
Endangered Species Coalition
Family Farm Defenders
Flatley Read, Inc.
GreenLatinos
Healthy Babies Bright Futures
Heart of the City Neighborhoods, Inc.
Huntington Breast Cancer Action Coalition, Inc.
Last Tree Laws Massachusetts
Learning Disabilities Association of Alabama
Learning Disabilities Association of America
Learning Disabilities Association of Arkansas
Learning Disabilities Association of California

Learning Disabilities Association of Connecticut
Learning Disabilities Association of Delaware
Learning Disabilities Association of Florida
Learning Disabilities Association of Georgia
Learning Disabilities Association of Illinois
Learning Disabilities Association of Indiana
Learning Disabilities Association of Iowa
Learning Disabilities Association of Maryland
Learning Disabilities Association of Michigan
Learning Disabilities Association of Nebraska
Learning Disabilities Association of New Jersey
Learning Disabilities Association of New York
Learning Disabilities Association of North Carolina
Learning Disabilities Association of Ohio
Learning Disabilities Association of Oklahoma
Learning Disabilities Association of Pennsylvania
Learning Disabilities Association of South Carolina
Learning Disabilities Association of Texas
Learning Disabilities Association of Utah
Learning Disabilities Association of Virginia
Learning Disabilities Association of Washington
Learning Disabilities Association of Wisconsin
North Carolina Conservation Network
Oregon Environmental Council
Shelby County Lead Prevention & Sustainability Commission
Society for Birth Defects Research and Prevention
Texas Environmental Justice Advocacy Services (t.e.j.a.s.)
Toxic Free North Carolina
Public health professionals, child health and health equity advocate signers
Angela Guyadeen
Director - Safe Water Initiative
Natural Resources Defense Council
Benjamin A Gitterman, M.D., FAAP
Darya Minovi
Senior Analyst
Union of Concerned Scientists

Ronnie Levin
Instructor
Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health
Bruce Lanphear, MD, MPH
Professor
Simon Fraser University
Charles Moon
Pediatrician
Montefiore Medical Center
Maida Galvez
Professor of Environmental Medicine and Public Health and Pediatrics
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
Elin Betanzo
President and Founder
Safe Water Engineering, LLC
Fanaye Amsalu
Project/Program Manager
David Lawrence
Res Sci/Professor
HYSDOH/UAlbany
Jyotsna Jagai
Program Officer
MacArthur Foundation
Matt Wilson
Health & Environmental Investigator III
Public Health- Seattle & King County
Morri Markowitz MD
Director, Lead Poisoning Prevention and Treatment Program
Montefiore Medical Center
Martha Moriarty
President
Learning Disabilities Association of Minnesota
Barbara Melnick

Board Secretary
Learning Disabilities Association of Maine
Kristie Trousdale
Deputy Director
Children's Environmental Health Network
Chris Lake
Executive Director
Community for a Cause
LaTricea Adams
CEO, Black Millennials 4 Flint
Chair, Shelby County Lead Prevention & Sustainability Commission
Michelle DeGarmo
President / CEO
Flatley Read, Inc.
Dr. Louis Allen
President
Able Differently
Robina Suwol
Executive Director
California Safe Schools
Tamara Massey
President
Learning Disabilities Association of Alabama
Brittany Franklin
Healthy Children Project Coordinator
Learning Disabilities Association of Arkansas
Dr. EunMi Cho
President
Learning Disabilities Association of California
Gregg French
President
Learning Disabilities Association of Connecticut
Fern Goldstein

President
Learning Disabilities Association of Delaware
Cathy Einhorn
President
Learning Disabilities Association of Florida
Carolyn Kingsley
Healthy Children Project Coordinator
Learning Disabilities Association of Georgia
Bev Johns
President
Learning Disabilities Association of Illinois
Patty Useem
President
Learning Disabilities Association of Indiana
Vicki Goshon
Healthy Children Project Coordinator
Learning Disabilities Association of Iowa
Kelly Tanzi
President
Learning Disabilities Association of Maryland
Amy Barto
Healthy Children Project Coordinator
Learning Disabilities Association of Michigan
Clarice Jackson
President
Learning Disabilities Association of Nebraska
Sollie Pinkston
Healthy Children Project Coordinator
Learning Disabilities Association of New Jersey
Katherine Cappella
President
Learning Disabilities Association of New York
JoAnna Barnes

President
Learning Disabilities Association of North Carolina
Holly Roe
President
Learning Disabilities Association of Ohio
Holly Hunt
Healthy Children Project Coordinator
Learning Disabilities Association of Oklahoma
Alex Moulton
Healthy Children Project Coordinator
Learning Disabilities Association of Pennsylvania
Dr Analisa Smith
President
Learning Disabilities Association of South Carolina
Pam Smith
Healthy Children Project Coordinator
Learning Disabilities Association of Texas
Gaylia Tanner
Board Secretary
Learning Disabilities Association of Utah
Mitch Beres
President
Learning Disabilities Association of Virginia
Diane Sixel
President
Learning Disabilities Association of Wisconsin
Phil Mortenson
Co-President
Learning Disabilities Association of Washington
Lee Kueckelhan
Co-President
Learning Disabilities Association of Washington

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2132 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA Docket Center
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket, Mail Code 28221T
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460
Docket ID No: EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801
As members of the New York League of Conservation Voters, we applaud your Lead and
Copper Rule Improvements proposal and encourage you to strengthen and quickly
finalize these important safeguards for our families and our drinking water. Lead is a
neurotoxin and is especially harmful to children. We know there is no safe level of lead,
but still up to 22 million people in this country drink water delivered through lead pipes.
The EPA has an incredible opportunity to once and for all get the lead out and protect
our families and communities.
The proposal includes a key provision requiring all lead pipes be replaced within 10
years, however, there are exemptions for some cities that could leave our families
exposed to lead in drinking water for decades. New York City has nearly 347,000 lead or
possible lead service lines. At least 40% of these lead pipes are in Disadvantaged
Communities, affecting roughly 738,000 people, a population equivalent to the 19th
biggest city in this country, larger than Boston, Washington DC, Baltimore, or Atlanta.
Under the EPA's proposal, lead pipe removal in NYC could go on for up to 35 years.
Ironically this would create a profound environmental injustice whereby wealthier and
whiter communities outside of New York City would be assured cleaner drinking water
decades before the city's low-income communities and communities of color. The
35-year timeline would be a disaster for families who live in these communities, and
would further delay environmental justice. We urge the EPA to close this loophole and
require that every water utility meet the 10-year deadline.
Additionally, we urge the EPA's proposed LCRI to follow examples from states like New
York that are leading the way. For instance, data from service line inventories will be
more readily available to New Yorkers than the rest of the nation thanks to city and state
actions. In NYC, service line data is released publicly every six months. Statewide, water
systems serving more than 10,000 people will be required to update their inventories
annually starting in 2025. In the area of school drinking water, in 2016 New York was the
first state in the nation to create a mandatory testing system. Currently this program is
leading the nation with triennial testing and with an action level of 5 ppb.

Finally, since there is no safe level of lead, we urge the EPA to follow the science and
get as close to 1 ppb as recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics by
reducing the action level from 15 ppb to 5 ppb. Also, paying to replace dangerous lead
pipes should not be the responsibility of the homeowner, which would put a
disproportionate burden on low-income communities and potentially exclude renters
whose landlords refuse to pay. EPA should ensure that the water utilities cover all the
costs of full lead service line replacement.
In closing, we appreciate the Biden administration's commitment to getting the lead out
of drinking water and encourage you to incorporate these important strengthening
provisions to ensure that everyone, no matter their race, income, or zip code, has access
to clean water.
Signed,
Ackerman, Judith A
636 W End Ave Apt 4R
New York
NY
Adams, Erin
2225 Eastern Pkwy
Niskayuna
NY
Agoston, Linda S
210 Clinton Ave Apt 3E
Brooklyn
NY
Agro, Sister Joan
496 Western Hwy
Blauvelt
NY
Ahmadi, Kate
69 Woodcock Mtn Dr
Washingtonville NY
Aldrich, Claire
3 Autumn Ridge Rd
South Salem
NY
Alicie, Lori
10 Nicole Dr Apt B
Spencerport
NY
Allen, Carol B
19 Beechwood Rd
Hartsdale
NY
Alleyne, Veronica
154 Union Square Blvd
North Chili
NY
Alton, Walter
PO Box 33
Cherry Plain
NY
Alvarez, Felipe
517 E 77th St Apt 2M
New York
NY
Amandes, Sarah
45 Grace Ct
Brooklyn
NY
Amor, Valerie
227 West St Apt 935
Brooklyn
NY
And, Ira
2609 Carmel Ave
Brewster
NY
Anderson, Matthew
3 Beechwood Dr
Ballston Lake
NY
Antonucci, Anthony
2 Whiteview Rd
Wynantskill
NY
Apicella, Scott
300 Hayward Ave Apt 1S
Mount Vernon
NY
Arpin, Susan
23 Holly Hill Ln
Katonah
NY
Balali, Lila
646 Elmwood Ave
Buffalo
NY
Barringer, Brittany
6842 Schuyler Dr
Derby
NY
Barry, Marina
250 Cabrini Blvd Apt 9F
New York
NY
Barulich, Maryann
250 Cabrini Blvd Apt 9F
New York
NY
Basner, Naomi
1915 Nameoke Ave Apt 206
Far Rockaway
NY
Bauer, Lani
11 Justin Cir
Henrietta
NY

Benware, Bettyann
85 Eileen St
Albany
NY
Berg, Bruce
245 W107th St Apt 2F
New York City
NY
Berger, Jim
25 Esplanade Dr
Rochester
NY
Berger, Judith
3 Pilcher St
Staten Island
NY
Berlant, Rebecca J
183 15th St
Brooklyn
NY
Bernstein, Scott H.
107 W 86th St Apt 3F
New York
NY
Bien, Annie
29 Tiffany Pl Apt 2F
Brooklyn
NY
Birnbaum, Beth S
6142 150th St
Flushing
NY
Blacklock, Kim
480 Farmers Mills Rd
Kent Lakes
NY
Blaire, Jan
32 Lewis Rd
Irvington
NY
Blakesley, Robin
5340 S Hill Rd
Canandaigua
NY
Bley, Tanya E
3554 80th St
Jackson
Heights
NY
Bobek, Gabriel
SULLIVAN St
New York
NY
Boehm, Lynne
20910 41st Ave
Queens
NY
Bohley, Christine
PO Box 576
Philmont
NY
Bolan, Nancy
50 Parkway W
Mount Vernon
NY
Bond, Lauren
175 W 60th St
New York
NY
Borysevicz, Dmitri
440 10th Ave Apt 4FN
New York
NY
Bramwell, George Y.
45 Park Ln
Staten Island
NY
Brancato, Vincent
545 W 111th St
New York
NY
Bratton, Christine
155 Hicks St
Brooklyn
NY
Braun, Cynthia
118 Lily Pond Ln
Katonah
NY
Brengelmann, Lori
9 Russo Dr
Hopewell Jct
NY
Brieger, George
100 Beekman St
New York
NY
Brisson, Linda
537 Powers Rd N
King Ferry
NY
Brown, Janet
444 Crystal Ave
Staten Island
NY
Brown, Nora
134 Hornbrook Rd
Ithaca
NY
Butler, Mary Jo
319 Thorncliff Rd
Buffalo
NY
Campbell, Catherine
3110 Kendal Way
Sleepy Hollow
NY
Cap, Lyn
8 Valley
Great Neck
NY
Caracci, Joyce
3 Stratton Ave
Smallwood
NY
Caramico, Jason
40 Baylawn Ave
Copiague
NY
Caredda, Christine
9833 64th Ave Apt 7J
Rego Park
NY
Carr, Hope
8723 Ridge Blvd Apt 1
Brooklyn
NY
Caseley, Laura
2385 Crescent St Apt 1A
Astoria
NY
Castelli-Hill, Susan
518 Sweet Hollow Rd
Melville
NY

Catherine, John Neil
132 E 35th St # 9-K
New York
NY
Chasin, Barbara H
129 Rachel Carson Way
Ithaca
NY
Chen, Wenting
471 Bay Ridge Ave
Brooklyn
NY
Cherry, Carla E
60 W 57th St Apt 3G
New York
NY
Childs, James
2405 Kingsland Ave
Bronx
NY
Christenson, Michelle L
373 Prospect Pl
Brooklyn
NY
Coffey-Edelman, Lynn
27 Foxwood Dr E
Huntington
Station
NY
Coffey, John
45 E Avenue Apartment Number
200
Shortsville
NY
Cohen, Harriet
330 E 38th St Apt 9H
New York
NY
Cohen, Wendi
50 Glendale Rd
Ossining
NY
Conant, Douglas
432 Connecticut St
Buffalo
NY
Conroy, James
214 9th St
Hicksville
NY
Conway, French - Gabriele
110 Draper Ln
Dobbs Ferry
NY
Cotterell, Karen
128 MacDougal St Apt 4C
New York
NY
Cuvier, Claude R R
16 Sequoia Dr
Coram
NY
Dandorf, Susan
18 Maple Ter
Staten Island
NY
Darlington, Beth Darlington
124 Raymond Ave # 323
Poughkeepsie
NY
Dean, Cindi
23 Mohawk St
Rye
NY
Del Gaudio, Eldrich
6 Summer Winds Ct
Cornwall On
Hudson
NY
Delvecchio, Gianluca
18 Meadow Ct
Staten Island
NY
Depalma, Vera And Jack
57 Montague St Apt 5E
Brooklyn
NY
Desantis, Joanne
9 Fawn Rdg
Millwood
NY
Desposito, Barbara
37 Storm Dr
Holtsville
NY
Devine, Kelly M
119 Jayne Ave
Port Jefferson
NY
Devinney, Claudia D
6786 Westview Dr
Perry
NY
Di Pirro, Carolann
16 Brushy Neck Ln
Westhampton
NY
Dinhofer, Jacalyn S
16 W 16th St Apt 6PS
New York
NY
Donohue, Virginia
606 Lower Wright St
Hudson Falls
NY
Donovan, Alexandra
255 Eastern Pkwy
Brooklyn
NY
Dubinsky, Jesse
162 Rolling Way
Peekskill
NY
Dudley, Roslyn
148 Cedar St
Amity Harbor
NY
Duque, Vanessa
4005 Ithaca St Apt 6C
Elmhurst
NY
Durst, Alexandra
7718 169th St
Fresh
Meadows
NY

Eager, Matthew
133 Merritts Pond Rd
Riverhead
NY
Eichner, Jeffrey
162 Eastland Ave NY
Rochester
NY
Epstein, Ken
20538 Brian Cres
Bayside
NY
Erling, Anne
242 Woodlawn Ave
Albany
NY
Esposito, Louis A.
325 Marine Ave
Brooklyn
NY
Eustace, Melissa
476 Esplanade
Pelham
NY
Evans, Peter
238 Longview Dr
Webster
NY
Falletta, Nicholas J
91 Payson Ave Apt 4G
New York
NY
Fano, Emily
127 W 83rd St Unit 932
New York
NY
Fassman, Dennis
372 Post Ave Ste 104
Westbury
NY
Fast, Wendy
8406 Green Rd
Dansville
NY
Fecht, Sarah
2186 Cruger Ave Apt 2J
Bronx
NY
Fergusson, Brady
28 Nelson St
Rochester
NY
Fernald, Annie
104 S Bedford Rd
Pound Ridge
NY
Feuchter, Robert H. H.
17520 Wexford Ter Apt 11H
Jamaica
NY
Feyne, Stephanie
PO Box 230582
New York
NY
Fitch, Kaitlin M
321 Farm To Market Rd
Troy
NY
Foley, Catherine
15 Woodbine Ave
Stony Brook
NY
Forman, Carole
189 Atlantic Ave Apt 3D
Brooklyn
NY
Forman, Fay
355 8th Ave Apt 9F
New York
NY
Forman, Janet
351 W 24th St Apt 12C
New York
NY
Forsyth, Mark A
FIRST St
Redwood
NY
Fox, Pat
71 Olde Crane Ct
Huntington
Station
NY
Fox, Vicki
67 Wodenethe Dr
Beacon
NY
Fumarola, Aaron
907 Alfred Ln
Homer
NY
Gaffney, Perri
45 W 132nd St Apt 12K
New York
NY
Gage, Kyle
4965 Hillcrest Dr
Canandaigua
NY
Gallagher, Sarah W Woodside
1136 1st Ave Apt 7
New York
NY
Gallagher, Sean
9031 Fort Hamilton Pkwy Apt 6H Brooklyn
NY
Garescher, Marie Z
3 Pheasant Walk
Peekskill
NY
Garner, Peggy
336 Irish Settlement Rd
Plattsburgh
NY
Garnett, Juanita
2835 Webb Ave
Bronx
NY
Gassman, Cathy
134 Woodell Ave
Buffalo
NY
Gehrke, Justin
67 Hanrahan Ave
Farmingville
NY
Ghenoiu, Paul E
33 W Hill Rd
Plattsburgh
NY
Gibbon, Sherry
937 State Route 14
Lyons
NY

Giddins, Lea
960 Sterling Pl Apt 3D
Brooklyn
NY
Gilligan, Nanette A
PO Box 3754
Kingston
NY
Gold, Wendy
40 Brady Rd
Saugerties
NY
Gonzalez, Scarlett
677 Classon Ave Apt 2LF
Brooklyn
NY
Goodall, Bettina
2562 W Brutus St
Weedsport
NY
Goodwyn, Kahlil T
30 Montrose Ave Apt 22Q
Brooklyn
NY
Gooze, Elene
8 N Hill Dr
Ballston Lake
NY
Gorr, Michael
8 Deer Run
Skaneateles
NY
Gould, Steve Nancy Nancy
94 Christopher St Apt 3
New York
NY
Gradoni, Peter B
PO Box 1114
Alfred
NY
Graham, Cindy
19963 State Route 12F
Watertown
NY
Greenberg, Jill Jill
525 E 82nd St
New York
NY
Greenidge, Jen Jennifer
2114 Hillcrest Ave Olean NY
Olean
NY
Gregor, Alison
16 Palomino Path
High Falls
NY
Greinke, Pamylle
PO Box 456
Peconic
NY
Grill, Chris
1 Crestwood Ct
Albany
NY
Grimm, Linda
99 Broadway
Rocky Point
NY
Gross, Fran
379 Dunnsville Rd
Schenectady
NY
Groten, Margery D
112 Turnberry Ct
Poughkeepsie
NY
Gruvman, Edna
360 Court St Apt 21
Brooklyn
NY
Gutman, Carl
10 Pine St
Delmar
NY
Hall, James
358 S Manning Blvd
Albany
NY
Halloran, Susan
521 Madison Ln
Hamilton
NY
Halper, Deborah
145 E 15th St Apt 7U
New York
NY
Hannwacker, Frank
3077 Cross Bronx Expy Apt 4N
Bronx
NY
Hart, Marjorie L
133 E 64th St
New York
NY
Heidelberger, Ellen
7 Stephen Ln
Cortlandt
Manor
NY
Herdan, Deborah
100 Ocean Pkwy Apt 1M
Brooklyn
NY
Hilf, Lawrence
85 Willowcrest Dr
Rochester
NY
Hill, Katherine
445 W 49th St Apt 2C
New York
NY
Hines, Marianne
PO Box 442
Saranac Lake
NY
Hinkelman, Carol
348 Ripplewood Dr
Rochester
NY
Hirsh, Seth
901 Kilmer Ln
Valley Stream
NY
Hollinrake, Mark
35 Morningside Ave Apt 1C
New York
NY
Hoover, James L.
4290 Atwood Rd
Stone Ridge
NY

Hope, Phillip R
319 Avenue C Apt 1F
New York
NY
Hopkins, Steve Daniels
6 Peck Ave Apt 62B
Rye
NY
Hoskins, Ursula
New York Botanical Gdn
Bronx
NY
Hough, Dennis L.
821 E Brighton Ave Apt 1404
Syracuse
NY
Hufnagel, Glenn R
1174 Kensington Ave NY
Buffalo
NY
Hunnewell, Sarah F
670 Montauk Hwy
Water Mill
NY
Inwald, Karen
315 Park Pl
Brooklyn
NY
Jakubowska, Hania
197 Kane St
Brooklyn
NY
Janeway, William C
PO Box 360
Keene
NY
Janoff, Lenore
1 Jefferson Ferry Dr Apt 5253
South Setauket NY
Janzick, Stan
1110 Stadium Ave
Bronx
NY
Jaskowitz, Rita Nip
121 7th Ave Apt 3F
Brooklyn
NY
Jeffryes, Ann
210 Denton Pl
Roosevelt
NY
Jenkins, Jeff
341 Versailles Rd
Rochester
NY
Johnson, Barbara
61 Collenton Dr # NY14626
Rochester
NY
Johnson, Elaine
21 Sutherland St
Pittsford
NY
Johnson, Michele
2764 Hedwig Dr
Yorktown
Heights
NY
Joncus, Andrew
25 Dongan Pl
New York
NY
Kalinowski, Mary M
527 W 162nd St Apt B1
New York
NY
Kanaan, Alistair
47 W 13th St
New York
NY
Kanz, Isabelle
PO Box 85
Peconic
NY
Kasal, Jan
11 Lynn Ct
Malverne
NY
Keast, Alix E
214 Riverside Dr
New York
NY
Kelley, Sheila
217 Sandburg Pl
Pine Bush
NY
Kenyon, Dawn
54 Bumphill Rd
Greenfield
Center
NY
Kimball, Hubert D.
8223 Dexter Pkwy
Baldwinsville
NY
Kirsch, Elaine
2400 E 3rd St # 11223
Brooklyn
NY
Klainberg, Joshua
130 8th Ave Apt 2C
Brooklyn
NY
Klainberg, Marilyn
14 Short Dr
Manhasset
NY
Klein, Lois
104 W 70th St Apt 7D
New York
NY
Klosterman, Pete
27 Maple Brook Rd
Tuxedo Park
NY
Knaack, Dennis
2065 Ryer Ave
Bronx
NY
Knowles, Jonathan
2121 30th Rd Fl 2
Astoria
NY
Knutsen, Shaun
2 Marine Ave
Brooklyn
NY
Kohlman, Christopher
1741 Pilgrim Ave NY
Bronx
NY
Koltun, Elizabeth
515 W 110th St
New York
NY

Konheim Heffron, Josh
177 E 75th St
New York
NY
Korman, Scott
27110 Grand Central Pkwy Apt
28K
Floral Park
NY
Kosior, Ciara
360 E 19th St
Brooklyn
NY
Koster, Fred
200 E 81st St
New York
NY
Kouvaris, Angelina
6 Amys Path
East Quogue
NY
Kowtun, Alex
78 Front St
Hornell
NY
Kraft, Marianne
2809 Claflin Ave Apt 42
Bronx
NY
Kroell, Lauren
34 Forest Pk Ave
Larchmont
NY
Kyriacou, Nancy
146 W 79th St Apt 1D
New York
NY
Lagnado, Sarah C
1659 E 10th St
Brooklyn
NY
Laird, Michael W
95 Rivington St
New York
NY
Lam, Juliana
10 Hanover Sq
New York
NY
Lambert, John C
1111 Park Ave # 3B
New York
NY
Lawrence, Kirk
563 Bayport Ave
Bayport
NY
Lee, Brenda
16 Quarry Dr
Wappingers
Falls
NY
Lee, Jussara
8 Bethune St Apt 2
New York
NY
Lee, Tsee
54 Orange St
Brooklyn
NY
Lehman, Brenda
15 Bullhead Ln
Bridgehampton NY
Lenthall, Kate
4 Lundy Rd
Wawarsing
NY
Lenz, Robert
10531 Main St # NY14031
Clarence
NY
Lerner, Kenneth
4929 Triphammer Rd
Geneseo
NY
Levin, Susanna
1255 North Ave
New Rochelle
NY
Levitt, Jeffrey
175 Whitehall Rd
Albany
NY
Libbey, Richard Richard
2015 Park St
Atlantic Beach
NY
Lipsky, Carol Name Last
1385 York Ave Apt 21A
New York
NY
Lisboa, Rosita
320 9th St Apt 1
Troy
NY
Livingston, Elaine D
1403 Glenwood Rd
Vestal
NY
Lombardi, Robert
1465 E 64th St
Brooklyn
NY
Longsworth, Sophia
617 W 170th St
New York
NY
Longyear, Sharon H.
21 Rondout Hbr
Port Ewen
NY
Loree, Michelle
420 E 66th St
New York
NY
Lorenzo, Cionin
109 Hill Top Rd
Rhinebeck
NY
Love, Sproule
140 W 124th St Apt 6B
New York
NY
Lucas, Jacquelyn
PO Box 661
Coram
NY
Lund, Amy
3347 Old Lakeview Rd
Hamburg
NY

Lupowitz, Martin Lupowitz
13 Suominen Ln
Ulster Park
NY
Luxton, Lynne
55 W 14th St Apt 2F
New York
NY
Macnish, Stephen Mac
83 Valley View Rd
Pleasant Valley NY
Madden, Michael
50 Germonds Rd
New City
NY
Majumdar, Ziggy
34 Surrey Mall
Slingerlands
NY
Malmros, William R
134 Thimbleberry Rd
Ballston Spa
NY
Malsheimer, Kris
547 Washington Ave
Lindenhurst
NY
Mansfield, Mark
37 Madison St
Geneva
NY
Margulies, Lee
32 Glenridge Ave
Stony Brook
NY
Markowitz, John
151 W 86th St
New York
NY
Marquette, Christine Anne
33 Liberty St Apt 113
Monticello
NY
Martin, Brittany S
2698 Frederick Douglass Blvd
New York
NY
Martin, James A.
110 Cathedral Dr
West Seneca
NY
Mcallister, Joseph Charles
24 Cambria St
Staten Island
NY
Mcallister, Roseann
24 Cambria St
Staten Island
NY
Mccann, Michael
265 W 87th St
New York
NY
Mccann, Patrick
6020 Ivory Dr
Farmington
NY
Mcdermott, Marley Mcdermott
5 Michigan Rd
Floral Park
NY
Mcdonald, Joyce
182 S Estate Dr
Webster
NY
Mcdonald, Lisa
19 Mayhew Ave
Larchmont
NY
Mcevoy, Aileen Zone
191 W Pine St
Waverly
NY
Mckevitt, Rosalind
318 W Olive St
Long Beach
NY
Mclaughlin, Chantal
135 W 225th St Apt 5H
Bronx
NY
Mead, Stephen E
108 Pinehurst Ave
Albany
NY
Melendez, Orlando
272 Wyckoff St
Brooklyn
NY
Michel, Karen
71 Nassau Ln Apt 3A
Island Park
NY
Miller, Suzanne E.
4001 Little Neck Pkwy
Little Neck
NY
Millhollen, Pilar
295 Bennett Ave Apt 5G
New York
NY
Milligan, Ned
4301 46th St NY11104
Sunnyside
NY
Mitchell, Heather M
11201 Queens Blvd Apt 16A
Forest Hills
NY
Mlawski, Leslie Leslie
834 Raleigh Ln
Woodmere
NY
Moon, Charles
3450 Wayne Ave
Bronx
NY
Morgan, Elizabeth
441 W 21st St
New York
NY
Motelson, Jeffrey
31 Wildwood Rd
Katonah
NY
Muhammad, Ruby
9838 57th Ave
Corona
NY
Murphy, Jane
179 S Conger Ave
Congers
NY
Murray, Dara L
440 E 62nd St
New York
NY

Murray, Kathy
61 Collenton Dr # NY14626
Rochester
NY
Murray, Margaret
1684 W 1st St
Brooklyn
NY
Musante, Gail
199 Front St
Deposit
NY
Myers, Nicole
25 Kulenkampf Pl
Valley Stream
NY
Naidich, Sandra R
603 4th Ave Apt 2B
Brooklyn
NY
Nasta, Steven
10 Short Hill Rd
New City
NY
Nelson, Anne
9 Lark Dr
Woodstock
NY
Niccolini, Dianora
435 E 78th St Apt 2M
New York
NY
Nizzari, Kathy
410 W 25th St Pha
New York
NY
Nordyke, Mark Jerome
3506 Sunset Cir
Kunkletown
NY
Norris, S.
W39TH St
New York
NY
North, Jenny
516 Granite Rd
Kerhonkson
NY
Noyes, Donna
101 Wall St
Huntington
NY
O'Connell, B
13 BLACKBIRD VILLAGE Cir
Lewisburg
NY
Obrien, Victoria L
6128 Gates Ave
Ridgewood
NY
Oconnell, Brooke
13 BLACKBIRD VILLAGE Cir
Lewisburg
NY
Oconnor, Gregory
50 Stewart Ave Apt 3L
Huntington
NY
Oliver, Russel C..
11 Sherman Rd
Kerhonkson
NY
Otis, Suzanne
358 Woodstock Rd
Millbrook
NY
Out, Sheila
247 Valley Rd
Ithaca
NY
Pabst, Judy J
6244 Willow Run Ct
East Amherst
NY
Pace, Rosemarie
6124 82nd Pl
Middle Village
NY
Palevsky, Sheila L
215 W 98th St Apt 8E
New York
NY
Papandrea, John J
110 W 90th St Apt 2F
New York
NY
Paris, Abby
ELEANOR Pl
Huntington
NY
Pfister, Joe
651 Vanderbilt St
Brooklyn
NY
Pillinger, Hal
25 Tower Hill Dr
Port Chester
NY
Pinn, Saundra
5 Stuyvesant Oval Apt 3B
New York
NY
Poklemba, Jane
33 Upper Loudon Rd
Loudonville
NY
Polonka, Jack
1419 Longview Ave
Peekskill
NY
Port, Gail S
7025 Yellowstone Blvd Apt 4V
Forest Hills
NY
Posthauer, Patricia
46 Hemlock Ln
Bay Shore
NY
Prince, Michael B
6749 Bear Ridge Rd
Lockport
NY
Prowda, Karen
515 Plaza Dr
Vestal
NY
Przybycien, Ron
62 Kent Shore Dr
Carmel
NY
Puca, Laurie H
16 Thornwood Dr
New City
NY

Quirk, Joseph
147 Avenue A
New York
NY
Racioppo, Rita
209 Currie Ave
Staten Island
NY
Raitano, Joan
3823 Arthur Dr
Seaford
NY
Ranells, Daniel
3150 Rochambeau Ave
Bronx
NY
Rankin, Andrea
437 McLean Rd
Cortland
NY
Rauch, Ann
2 Ploughmans Bush
Bronx
NY
Raught, Lisle
434 State Route 369 Lot 14
Port Crane
NY
Rauth, Ike
186 Ventry Ct Unit C
Ridge
NY
Rengers, Edward
391 John Joy Rd
Woodstock
NY
Rice, T Walker
11109 76th Rd
Forest Hills
NY
Riesch, Chris
29 Spruce St
Pawling
NY
Ring, Barbara
2 Hildreth Rd
Hampton Bays
NY
Riordan, Dianne
10 Duane Ter
Buffalo
NY
Rivers, Jerry R
8 Gombert Pl
Roosevelt
NY
Roberson, William D
410 E 17th St Apt 4C
Brooklyn
NY
Rojecki, James
646 Elmwood Ave
Buffalo
NY
Romero, Tony
400 W 43rd St
New York
NY
Rosenbloom, Mara
570 Ocean Pkwy Apt 2A
Brooklyn
NY
Rosenfeld, David
1746 Ocean Ave
Brooklyn
NY
Rosenthal, Andrew
54 Riverside Dr # PH-E
New York
NY
Rosenzweig, Lester Y
2 Miller Ave
Albany
NY
Rost, Janice
149 Orchard Rd Apt 2N
Briarcliff Manor NY
Russell, Doug
307 1/2 Garfield Ave
Endicott
NY
Sacco, Patricia. A
446 Duncan Elder Dr
Greenlawn
NY
Sacerdote, Alan S
164 Amherst St
Brooklyn
NY
Samuels, Jill
91 E Mosholu Pkwy N
Bronx
NY
Samuels, Renee
2140 Knapp St # NY11229
Brooklyn
NY
Sanetra, Lisa
6025 Saint Felix Ave
Glendale
NY
Satawa, Michael
855 Mulberry Rd
Valley Cottage
NY
Saxton, Lynn
317 Wyoming St
Warsaw
NY
Schiff, Margie
81 Bryant Ave
White Plains
NY
Schloss, Robert J
445 N State Rd Ste 116
Briarcliff Manor NY
Schnell, Adrian
415 Main St
New York
NY
Schulman, Nancy
65 W Broadway Apt 11B
Long Beach
NY
Schulwolf, Marthe
522 Gair St
Piermont
NY
Schurr, Arthur
100 W 94th St Apt 6F
New York
NY

Schwartz, Adam
22 Lexington Hl Unit 12
Harriman
NY
Schwartz, Tamar B
4746 40th St Apt 3E
Sunnyside
NY
Schwarzlander, Dr Harry And
Patric
1301 Nottingham Rd Apt C211
Jamesville
NY
Scrimenti, Anthony
417 New Karner Rd
Albany
NY
Scuder, Amanda C
175 W 92nd St Apt 6D
New York
NY
Seckendorf, Michael J.
16 Towners Rd
Carmel
NY
Sefer-Stefancic, Ljubica
Sefer-Stefancic
435 Fort Washington Ave
New York
NY
Seitz, Elaine
72 Old Pond Rd
Great Neck
NY
Sekhon, Kanwaldeep K
61 Debby Ln
Gates
NY
Seligman, Ann C
235 E 46th St Apt C
New York
NY
Serret, Patrice
101 W 12th St Apt 4M
New York
NY
Severino, Yangenerly
2460 Davidson Ave Apt 35A
Bronx
NY
Shalat, Harriet T.
10242 62nd Dr
Forest Hills
NY
Shaloum, Tami
100 W 31st St
New York
NY
Shapiro, Denise Denise
24 Camp Dr
Selden
NY
Shapiro, Jordan
521 N Ohioville Rd
New Paltz
NY
Sheehan, Nancy
110 Parkway Dr
Cobleskill
NY
Shields, Juli
699 Powers Rd NY
Conklin
NY
Silverstein, Sasha B
235 Lincoln Pl Apt 5C
Brooklyn
NY
Simpson, Rachel
50 Collingwood Dr
Rochester
NY
Sivin, Elijah
155 Terrace Pl
Brooklyn
NY
Smith, Ida
510 Main St Apt 468
New York
NY
Smith, Marsha
15 Bridle Ln
Dryden
NY
Soomro, Alia
3415 31st Ave Apt 1C
Astoria
NY
Southlea, Trev
111 Breckenridge Rd
Mahopac
NY
Spears, La
115 Delaware St
Tonawanda
NY
Spiegelman, Robin
8230 233rd St
Queens Village NY
Stark, Jeffrey
9609 67th Ave Apt 6E
Rego Park
NY
Stark, Robert L Stark
9609 67th Ave
Rego Park
NY
Stedman, Matt
23 Gloucester Ave
Montauk
NY
Stern, Richard I
11 Riverside Dr Apt 1NW
New York
NY
Stimpson, Lisa
153 Bergen St Apt 1
Brooklyn
NY
Stirpe, Albert
6021 Lisi Gardens Dr
Syracuse
NY
Stone, Susanna
5 Barberry Ln
Middle Island
NY
Stroke, Marija
201 W 89th St Apt 9F
New York
NY
Strong, Kenneth
68 Bayberry Ln
Levittown
NY

Subramaniam, Manickawasagar 2629 E 27th St
Brooklyn
NY
Szalasny, John
344 Teakwood Ter
Buffalo
NY
Szalasny, John S
344 Teakwood Ter
Buffalo
NY
Tainow, Daniel W
112 Rivington St Apt 5B
New York
NY
Tan, Margaret
504 12th St
Brooklyn
NY
Tartaglia, Lauren
2 Northside Piers Ph 3
Brooklyn
NY
Tate, Constance
280 9th Ave Apt 6B
New York
NY
Taylor, Anne
40 5th Ave
New York
NY
Tefft, Robert
317 Pacific St NY
Brooklyn
NY
Teplin, Lynne
846 Palmer Rd Apt 1A
Bronxville
NY
Tetro, Barbara
30 Seguine Loop
Staten Island
NY
Thomas, Ela
519 Shepherd Ave
Brooklyn
NY
Thompson, Jessica
360 Cabrini Blvd Apt 6O
New York
NY
Thompson, Terrence
17224 133rd Ave Apt 5D
Jamaica
NY
Tighe, Julie W
505 W 47th St Apt 4EN
New York
NY
Tignanelli, Doreen
COLBURN Dr
Poughkeepsie
NY
Tinling, Tricia
7 Beakrush Ln
West Henrietta
NY
Toro, Victoria
2812 Dudley Ave
Bronx
NY
Travis, Patricia
42 Midland Blvd
Ronkonkoma
NY
Truax, Brian
10991 Camp Ground Rd
Forestport
NY
Turgeon, Mary Blaise
95 Chapin St
Binghamton
NY
Tussing, Katharine
148 Crestwood Ave Apt 4
Buffalo
NY
Valentine, Jennifer
313 1st Ave
Massapequa
Park
NY
Vandermolen, Elijah
435 E 14th St Apt 9C
New York
NY
Vanetten, Margot
437 Upper Valley Rd
Rochester
NY
Vasquez, Leslie
3109 Roberts Ave
Bronx
NY
Vaughan, John
349 W 122nd St
New York
NY
Vernon, Margaret M
115 Keller Dr
Fonda
NY
Virtuoso, Lauren
83 Woodbury Dr
Lockport
NY
Vogt, Jennifer
12 Leonard Dr
East Northport
NY
Waite, Judith G
6 Deshon Ave
Bronxville
NY
Waksman, Richard
93 Deerfield Ln N
Pleasantville
NY
Wald, Adrienne
28 Chestnut Hls
High Falls
NY
Walker, Karen
22 Pennicott Cir
Penfield
NY
Walsh, Caitlin
160 N Main St
New City
NY

Walsh, Gerald
26 Hillcrest Ave
Brewster
NY
Weinberger, Daniel
17 A S Valley Rd
West Orange
NY
Weisman, Baruch
1029 E 12th St
Brooklyn
NY
Wendel, Heidi A
29 Secor St
Cold Spring
NY
Whalen, Kenneth
3186 Parmly Ct
Mohegan Lake
NY
Wiecezak, Theresa
25 Jefferson St
New Hyde Park NY
Wilce, Joan H.
54 Fairfield Rd
Yonkers
NY
Winkle, Celeste
160 Clarkson Ave
Brooklyn
NY
Wittman, Charles
68 Stuart Ave
Amityville
NY
Yellen, Lynn
163 Ocean Ave # H3
Brooklyn
NY
Young, Jane
85 High Falls Road Ext
Catskill
NY
Younger, Kristina E
480 Pond View Rd
Petersburg
NY
Yozwiakl, Bernard
64 Sunset Dr
Croton On
Hudson
NY
Zaientz, Stephanie
25520 74th Ave
Glen Oaks
NY
Zinn, Andrea And Eric Andrea
629 E 24th St
Brooklyn
NY
Zuckerman, Arlene
11035 72nd Rd Apt 606
Forest Hills
NY

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0858 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0959 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
The Honorable Michael Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
FOR ELECTRONIC DELIVERY 
RE: 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Docket ID#: EPA–HQ–OW-2022-0801 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
The District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority (DC Water) appreciates the opportunity 
to comment on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI or Proposed 
Rule). DC Water continues to be a strong advocate for public health and water quality 
protections for our customers. Specific to lead protections, our commitment is evidenced by 
DC Water’s Lead Free DC Program. 
While the Proposed Rule contains a number of very positive improvements, DC Water has 
concerns that the requirements, as proposed, may prove challenging to implement. We are 
particularly concerned with any potential impacts on affordability for District residents. 
DC Water hopes that the comments we have provided will assist EPA in formulating a final 
LCRI while recognizing the many competing challenges we face, including limited funding, 
aging infrastructure and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS).  
If you have any questions regarding the attached comments, please contact me. 
Sincerely, 
Jeffrey F. Thompson 
Chief Operating Officer and Executive Vice-President 
Attachment 

1 
 
District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority (DC Water) 
Comments on the U.S. EPA 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
88 FR 84878 – Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
I. 
INVENTORY and REPLACEMENTS 
 
1. V.B.2. Deferred Deadlines for Mandatory Service Line Replacement 
 
There is significant concern over contractor capacity and supply chain of 
copper pipe, fittings and filters. Suggest EPA allow for water systems to apply 
for extensions due to shortage of resources. 
 
2. V.B.2. Deferred Deadlines for Mandatory Service Line Replacement 
 
Many water systems will not be able to replace all lead service lines within 13 
years.  Suggest EPA provide alternative public notification requirements for 
water systems that have active replacement programs but will not be able to 
meet the compliance deadline.   
 
3. V.B.3. Minimum Replacement Rate 
 
If a homeowner denies replacement on the private side, it should be removed 
from the calculation of percent replacement required.  
4. V.B.4. Partial Service Line Replacement 
 
According to pothole.com, approximately 11,000 traffic fatalities each year are 
a result of poor road conditions. Without the ability to perform partial 
replacements when the property owner refuses private-side replacement, 
streets will consistently be in need of repair and paving. Streets will need to be 
paved in full to avoid dangerous conditions due to spot repairs and then need 
to be dug up again with a property owner change or delay in acceptance of the 
program. Water systems cannot be expected to bear the cost of the constant 
paving and repairs to keep the roads safe.  Perhaps funding could be provided 
to Department of Transportation to repair roadways damaged by service line 
replacements. 
 
5. V.B.5 Service Line Replacement, Water System Access to Full Service Line 
 
Service line replacement plan must identify any legal requirements or water 
tariff agreement provisions that affect a system’s ability to gain access to 
conduct full service line replacement. Systems must conduct a minimum of four 
attempts to engage property owners (and renters/tenants) about conducting full 
service line replacement.  
 

2 
 
DC Water exceeds the outreach requirements with the customers to conduct 
full service line replacements. For instances in which the water system no 
access to private property and customer has repeatedly refused access, are 
there additional measures EPA can take to facilitate access to the privately 
owned service lines through the LCRI? DC Water may evaluate mandates that 
could include tenant/renter participation to grant access for full replacements. 
 
6. §141.2 Definitions - Connector or 141.84(a)(2)(i) 
 
Clarify the definition of a connector to the specific pipe materials instead of the 
"rigid" characterization.  DC Water interprets rigid as galvanized iron, brass, 
and plastic pipes but other users of the regulation could interpret differently. 
Also consider limiting the review and data collection to service lines less than 
3 inch-diameter since any larger would not have a lead connector. 
 
7. §141.2 Service Line Definition 
 
In 40 CFR 141.2, EPA defines the term Service Line to mean, "….Where the a 
building is not present, the service line connects the water main to the outlet." 
However, the term is overly broad EPA does not define or qualify the type or 
purpose of the "outlet," which can include outlets used for industrial purposes 
that do not impact human health.   To be consistent with the intent and purpose 
of the LCR, recommend revising this definition to read, "....the service line 
connects the water main to an outlet typically and usually used to provide water 
for human consumption." Please also clarify that a hydrant would not be 
considered an outlet. 
 
8. §141.84(a)(2)(ii) 
 
Reviewing records of past "connectors" is highly burdensome for many water 
systems. EPA assumed the connector review would be 75% of the effort for the 
LCRR records review, which must ignore the review of documented past 
replacements and instead only consider the existing connectors. Should EPA 
require a review of every individual past non-lead pipe replacement to 
determine the connector, a large water system would have to review individual 
field reports over tens of thousands of replacements. The benefit of the 
information from past replacements does not cover the level of effort.  DC 
Water recommends limiting the review to potentially existing lead exposure - 
connector materials to only galvanized iron service lines that are currently 
believed to exist in the system and requiring data collection from current 
maintenance activities to start by 1 year following the finalization of the rule. 
 
9. §141.84(b)(4) 
EPA should allow for water system responses to customer notification of 
incorrect categorization to include phone calls or emails to exchange 
information and potentially resolve the matter. In some cases, an inspection 

3 
 
may not always be required.  Many people believe their water service line was 
replaced during home renovations when only the internal plumbing was 
replaced. Water systems will have a significant burden visiting each of these 
sites to "inspect". In addition, "inspections" as used here is unclear - if the water 
service line is not viewable at the point-of-entry could an "inspection" be 
considered completed or is EPA requiring excavation based on a verbal report 
from a customer? The latter would cause extreme disruption to a scheduled 
program for replacements and identifying service line pipe materials in addition 
to "fairness" by unsupported verbal reports. If the customer reports a lead 
service line, then a picture of the pipe they are looking at will support their 
report. 
 
10. §141.84(d)(5) 
 
Combining the Known Lead/GRR and Unknowns to calculate the replacement 
rate creates a planning challenge. EPA should create separate replacement 
requirements for the unknown service lines.  The separation will allow water 
systems to better plan and execute without playing "catchup" because no lead 
service lines were found of the unknown group where they might have 
estimated a given percent to be lead as needed for budgeting. The three-year 
rolling average does not provide sufficient buffer for this type of catchup.   
 
11. §141.84(e) 
 
Replacement of a lead connector encountered during a water main repair will 
result in partial replacements if unable to confirm and/or replace the private side 
pipe material. The excavation to repair a water main typically reveals 6-10 ft of 
water main, which could have multiple service connections.  Coordinating and 
executing full service line replacements at the time of the water main repair is 
extremely challenging due to night repair work, need for additional crews to 
execute the service replacements, and extended water shuts for those services 
requiring replacement. The block could be planned for future water main or 
LSR by-block replacements which would more efficiently execute the work with 
respect to planning, communicating to residents, and costs (emergency work 
typically has a higher unit cost than planned by-block work).   
 
12. §141.84 Service line inventory and replacement requirements 
 
(ii) Within six months of any change in ownership of the property, the water 
system must offer full service line replacement to any new property owner and 
make a ‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain the property owner’s consent as described 
in paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section within one year of any change in property 
ownership. If the water system is unable to obtain consent from the current 
property owner after making a ‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain it, the water system 
is not required under this rule to replace the line. This paragraph continues to 

4 
 
apply after a system completes its mandatory service line replacement 
program. 
 
Recommend EPA use the trigger of when the new owner contacts the water 
utility which will give the water utility the proper contact information. The real 
estate transaction may occur many months before the owner is reachable.  
 
Alternatively, recommend EPA requiring owners (sellers) to allow water 
systems to change their private service line prior to the change in ownership of 
the property. If replacement is not completed prior to the change in ownership, 
this approval must be transferable in the sales contract or addendum and 
agreed by the new owner. 
 
13. 141.84(h)(iv)(3) 
 
Providing written notice within 24 hours does not provide time for the water 
system to QA/QC the field reports and data entry.  Executing large service line 
replacement programs requires robust QA/QC of field data and EPA 
encouraging reduction of QA/QC to mail a letter that will not reach actual 
consumers is counterproductive. Mailing a letter to landlord with incorrect 
information can have dire consequences if one notes a service line was 
replaced and it was not.  The letter could be used to convey incorrect 
information to future tenants. 
 
II. 
WATER QUALITY SAMPLING AND OCCT AND RELATED NOTIFICATIONS 
 
1. §141.2 Definitions 
 
Recommend revising the definition of “Wide-mouth bottles” to be defined by the 
inner diameter of the bottle, which is the functional intent of the requirement, 
and specify a minimum diameter of at least 40 mm.  The revision is suggested 
to meet the intent of the regulations which is to capture all water flow from a 
fully open faucet (with the aerator on), while also balancing the need of all water 
systems to procure the bottles as many do not meet the current the definition 
of 55 mm wide.  DC Water's current sample bottle supply has an inner diameter 
of 42 mm.   
 
2. §141.81(d) 
 
EPA should not require water systems with corrosion control and have active 
lead service line replacement programs to re-optimize their corrosion control 
treatment if they have not exceeded the lead or copper action level. The effort 
is burdensome and water systems should focus their funding efforts on 
replacing service lines.  Although 141.81(f) does allow for water systems that 
will complete their lead service line replacement within five years to not 
complete the OCCT study, the duration is insufficient for larger water systems 

5 
 
that are also researching water service line pipe materials and/or have a large 
number to replace.  The new Action Level for Lead will trigger the study or 
exceedances for many water systems and the States will not have sufficient 
staffing to evaluate the studies. 
 
3. §141.86(a)(4)(iii) 
 
Tier 3 sample sites should not include homes with galvanized premise 
plumbing. The lead release from galvanized pipe scales is a different 
mechanism of release than the lead from lead service lines and lead solder, 
which is how EPA established the OCCT framework. The mechanism of 
release from the galvanized iron scales is unstable iron pipe scales. The OCCT 
treatment options focus on lead solubility, therefore the triggering of the OCCT 
studies stipulated in 141.81 does not adequately address the lead release from 
galvanized iron pipes.  While the regulation does allow States to waive the 
OCCT re-evaluation is some cases, the provision is insufficient. Most States 
will not have the expertise and time to evaluate individual system water 
chemistry to justify the waiver approval. 
 
4. §141.86(a)(4)(iii) 
 
EPA should provide a template Sample Form with the sampling instructions 
that are simple and have graphics.  The form can be used by all water systems 
and therefore reduce the water systems’ burden to create their own and the 
States’ burden to approve individual Sample Forms. 
 
5. §141.86(b)(2) 
 
EPA requires replacement of sample sites within the same compliance period 
and within “reasonable proximity” of the original site.  Water systems with lead 
service lines will be replacing these in full neighborhoods within months or a 
year.  Finding a site within “reasonable proximity” will be very challenging while 
EPA’s required lead service line replacements are being conducted.  EPA 
should recognize the competing efforts and waive this requirement for water 
systems with active lead service line replacement programs.   
 
6. §141.86(e) 
 
Inclusion of customer-requested samples should not be used for calculation of 
the 90th percentile if the water system has the required number of samples 
meeting their required Tier.  EPA states in the Preamble that the rule provides 
flexibility to the water system to adjust their customer-requested sampling 
protocol so those samples could not be included.  However, the use of different 
protocols has a negative impact on data analysis, which can be very helpful for 
a water system.  Some customers collecting under one program will be 

6 
 
confused why the method changed under another program and therefore 
undermine their trust in the water system. 
 
III. 
OUTREACH AND EDUCATION 
 
1. 40 CFR Part 141, Subpart Q.2 
 
General: Throughout the LCRI, there are references for a water system to 
provide mandatory lead health effects language and informational statements 
about lead. 
 
Recommend that EPA publishes required language and statements and not 
allow water systems revisions unless approved by EPA. This will allow for 
consistent messaging across the US. 
 
The LCR, LCRR, and LCRI have different mandatory health effect language.  
With the promulgation and effectiveness schedule proposed in the LCRI, the 
timeline of which language to use when has become unclear and needs to be 
clarified by EPA.  For example, the items of the LCRR that become effective 
10/16/24 require health effects language (e.g. the service line material 
notifications) but it is not specified if the associated 141.85 language should be 
used (or the language from the LCR or LCRI be used). 
 
2. IX. Request for Comment. Public Education (9) 
 
EPA is seeking information and data on when a system provides translated 
materials to consumers with limited English proficiency, what resources are 
used to translate materials (e.g., State resources, community organizations), 
and what barriers water systems may face in providing accurate translated 
materials.  
 
Water systems need further clarification on what “limited English proficiency” 
means.  In addition, water systems need more clarity on what documents 
should be translated. Barrier: Utilities often hire consultants or outside vendors 
to translate documents, which can be cost prohibitive for smaller water 
systems. 
 
IV. 
FUNDING 
 
1. The goal to replace all LSLs will not be achieved unless it is at no direct cost to 
customers. Without sufficient funding for the private side replacements, many 
LSLs will remain since many families in disadvantaged areas will not be able 
to pay for the private side replacement. In most states, water systems cannot 
use the portion of BIL loan money for private side replacements since they have 
to pay back the loan with ratepayer funds. A federal law is needed allowing 

7 
 
water systems to use ratepayer funds for removal of private side LSLs in the 
interest of public health and/or more grant money is needed for water systems 
to use specifically for the private side. Without LSLR free to water customers, 
the only LSLs remaining will be those in lower income areas, exacerbating the 
equity issue. 
 
2. Recent BIL grants issued indicate that funding cannot be used for partial 
replacements.  Does this mean that costs for a singular partial replacement will 
not be reimbursed or is the entire contract ineligible for funding? 
 
3. The LCRI indicates that in a review of a number of states that the inability to 
deploy user fees for private side replacement work may be more perceived 
than real.  In DC Water's context, the constraint is real. Currently, DC Water 
has a shortfall of approximately $60M to complete private side replacements 
since ratepayer funding cannot be used to complete private side replacements.  
Legislative action would be needed to change laws put in place to protect the 
ratepayer.  These laws currently prohibit use of ratepayer fees for work on 
private property. 
 
4. The LCRI indicates that in a review of a number of states that the inability to 
deploy user fees for private side replacement work may be more perceived 
than real.  In DC Water's context, the constraint is real. Currently, DC Water 
has a shortfall of approximately $60M to complete private side replacements 
since ratepayer funding cannot be used to complete private side replacements.  
Legislative action would be needed to change laws put in place to protect the 
ratepayer.  These laws currently prohibit use of ratepayer fees for work on 
private property. 
 
5. Water systems do not have the available funding to meet the LCRI 
requirements without increasing rates which must be approved by a board. The 
amount of EPA available BIL funds will not cover all water systems. To assist, 
EPA should establish and award water systems grants specifically for lead or 
GRR identification and replacement.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0879 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0923 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Re: Proposed Rule, Environmental Protecon Agency, “Naonal Primary Drinking Water Regulaons 
for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI),” Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
Dear EPA Administrator:
Today, there are more than 9 million lead service lines in the ground around the U.S.1, impac#ng 30 
million or more Americans right now.  With that many services lines in our communi#es, parents
around the U.S. must be prepared to hear a dreaded phrase: “Your child has tested posive for lead 
poisoning” or worse, they may be completely unaware of the long-term havoc lead can cause to 
their health. While this horrible reality is felt across the county, these lines are o+en dispropor#onately 
in low-income and communi#es of color, exposing them to increased risk of lead-contaminated drinking 
water. That is why swi+ ac#on is urgent; the health of another genera#on of children being exposed 
to lead is on the line, and the EPA has an unparalleled opportunity in the Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvement (LCRI) proposal to ﬁx this problem once and for all.
As cited by the EPA, young children, infants, and fetuses are par#cularly vulnerable to lead because 
the physical and behavioral eﬀects of lead occur at lower exposure levels in children than in adults2. 
A dose of lead that would have li7le eﬀect on an adult can have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on a child. In 
children, low levels of exposure have been linked to damage to the central and peripheral nervous 
system, learning disabili#es, shorter stature, impaired hearing, and impaired forma#on and func#on 
of blood cells.
Because of the commitment of the Biden Administra#on & the EPA to strengthen the exis#ng lead 
and copper rule via the LCRI, we have a once-in-a-genera#on opportunity to provide immediate 
help to the 10 million American households and 400,000 schools/child care centers served by a lead 
service line (LSL) or pipes.3 While the LCRI puts forward several reac#ve ini#a#ves to address lead 
exposure from LSLs in the country, the LCRI does not go far enough for the many Americans who 
have to wait ten years or more for LSL replacements, represen#ng a “lead ac#on gap” for many 
residents and communi#es. 
I call on the EPA to strengthen the ﬁnal LCRI with the following ac#ons:

Deliver immediate help by requiring point of use ﬁltraon devices to residents with an acve 
lead service line: Require systems with lead service lines to distribute lead reducing pitcher 
ﬁlters & replacement cartridges, or faucet mounted ﬁlters, to every resident serviced by a lead 
line un#l six months a+er that line is replaced.

Shorten or eliminate the exceedance window: If a water system has a test site with one 
exceedance, they should immediately retest for conﬁrma#on.  If the system has a conﬁrmed 
exceedance, water systems should deliver remedies prescribed by the LCRI.
                                                            
1 h7ps://www.epa.gov/system/ﬁles/documents/2023-04/Final_DWINSA%20Public%20Factsheet%204.4.23.pdf
2 h7ps://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/basic-informa#on-about-lead-drinking-water
3h7ps://www.whitehouse.gov/brieﬁng-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-lead-
pipe-and-paint-ac#on-plan/

o
To accelerate the delivery of lead-free drinking water to communi#es with conﬁrmed 
lead exceedances, the EPA should require systems to distribute (vs. “make available”)
point-of-use (POU) ﬁltra#on & educa#onal materials to residents to ensure those 
households use ﬁlters in their homes.

Make the LCRI eﬀecve date as soon as possible: Every year we wait to implement the LCRI is 
another year a crisis can develop or more children can/will test posi#ve for lead poisoning which 
is why three years is too long to wait to implement.
I applaud the EPA’s eﬀort to enact a na#onal solu#on to reduce the levels of lead in drinking water and 
we strongly believe that the EPA has a unique opportunity to accelerate the necessary help to vulnerable 
popula#ons & underserved communi#es in the ﬁnal LCRI by strengthening provisions that would ensure 
safe and lead-free drinking water is available in all communi#es.
Thank you for your #me and considera#on of these comments.
Sincerely,
Dinakar Panyam
3639 Su7on Loop
Fremont, California 94536

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0949 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024
Radhika Fox and Michael S. Regan
US Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801,
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements
Dear Ms. Fox and Mr. Regan,
GreenLatinos is a national non-profit that convenes an active comunidad of Latino/a/e (hereafter
referred to as Latine) leaders, emboldened by the power and wisdom of our culture, united to
demand equity and dismantle racism, resourced to win our environmental, conservation, and
climate justice battles, and driven to secure our political, economic, cultural, and environmental
liberation. Founded in 2008, we provide an inclusive table at which our members establish
collaborative partnerships and networks to improve the environment and the well being of our
communities. We envision a healthy and equitable society where communities of color are
liberated from disproportionate environmental burdens, free to breathe fresh air, drink pure
water, access clean transportation and enjoy our majestic public lands, ocean, and waters. We
develop and advocate for policies and programs to advance this mission.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recently proposed improvements to the lead
and copper rule (LCRI), which would mandate that all lead service lines be removed within the
next 10 years. This proposal, while essential to making sure communities across this country
have access to safe drinking water, still falls short of what is necessary to tackle this public
health issue.
Latines continue to lack clean and safe drinking water when compared to other demographics in
the US. A Guardian investigation in 2021 found that Latine communities are disproportionately
1
exposed to federal drinking water violations twice as much as those serving the rest of the US.
When it comes to lead exposure, Black and Latine communities are at the frontlines of the
1 Holden, E., Enders, C.,Kommenda, N., Ho, V. (2021) “More than 25m drink from the worst US water systems, with Latinos most
exposed” Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/feb/26/worst-us-water-systems-latinos-most-exposed. Accessed
30th of Jan 2024.
PO Box 60217, Washington, D.C., 20039 | www.greenlatinos.org

issue, with communities throughout the United States, including Chicago , New York City , as
2
3
well as across major cities in California such as Fresno and Los Angeles
grappling with
4
inequitable access to clean, safe drinking water. Staff and members of GreenLatinos, and the
communities
we
represent,
urge
the
EPA
to
consider
the
following
revisions
and
recommendations to the LCRI, to ensure the administration is doing all it can to guarantee safer
drinking water for all.
1.
No amount of lead in water is safe for consumption. While the EPA is proposing to
lower the lead action levels from 15 parts per billion (ppb) to 10 ppb, this level is not
protective enough. The lead action level dictates when a water system has to inform the
public and take action to reduce lead exposure while working to replace the lead pipes.
WIth this in mind, the lead action level should be reduced to 5 ppb. As mentioned
previously, our community faces elevated levels of lead exposure. More stringent lead
action levels must be set to ensure that these issues are addressed.
2.
When testing reveals lead concentrations above the lead action level, water
systems should provide free and accessible certified water filters to residents.
This distribution needs to be paired with robust community education and outreach so
people have information on the importance of filters and the lead reduction process. This
outreach should continue until lead levels are reduced.
3.
Testing needs to be required in public schools and childcare facilities. Currently,
there is no federal policy for lead testing to be required for drinking sources in public
schools and childcare facilities. Any testing done is voluntary, putting children from
underserved communities at a higher risk to lead exposure. Schools in states with large
Latine populations fail to protect children from lead exposure. Hence, it is critical that
5
this proposal requires the testing of all water outlets at schools and childcare facilities,
with prompt public disclosure of test results for all these facilities. Additionally, water
utilities, at minimum, should provide certified filters if testing reveals lead concentrations
above the lead action level, which we recommend should be set at 1 ppb for schools and
5
McCormack,
J.
(2019).
“Kids
Face
Risk
of
Lead-Contaminated
Drinking
Water
in
Schools.”
Available
at:
https://salud-america.org/kids-face-risk-of-lead-contaminated-drinking-water-in-schools/. Accessed 30th of Jan 2024.
4
Scheyer,
J.
&
Pell,
M.B.
(2017)
“Lead
poisoning
afflicts
neighbourhoods
across
California.”
available
at:
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN16T19X/. Accessed 30th of Jan 2024.
3 Arnold, C. (2023). “Digging into Exposure Disparities: Mapping Lead Service Lines in New York City.” Environmental Health
Perspectives 131(8). Available at: https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP1227. Accessed 30th of Jan 2024.
2 Paddock, B. (2022). “High Lead Tests Concentrated in Chicago’s Black and Latino Neighborhoods, Report Finds.” Available at:
https://news.wttw.com/2022/09/27/high-lead-tests-concentrated-chicago-s-black-and-latino-neighborhoods-report-finds.
Accessed
30th of Jan 2024.
PO Box 60217, Washington, D.C., 20039 | www.greenlatinos.org

childcare facilities, as recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics.
This
6
water testing is one crucial step to ensuring all facilities across the United States that are
dedicated to caring for our children protect children by providing clean drinking water.
4.
Reduce the amount of exceptions to the 10-year lead service line removal
requirement. Communities should not have to pay the price of more exposure to lead
simply because there are more lead service lines in their water systems. Communities
that have higher proportions of lead service lines in their water systems should be
prioritized. Additionally, any loopholes that prevent water systems from removing the
entire lead service line should be removed, so additional burden is not placed on renters
or low-income homeowners.
5.
Water utilities and government agencies must cover the cost of replacing lead
pipes without passing the cost on to communities. Additional non-competitive grants
and funds should also be made available for water utilities and agencies who do not
have enough funding. Black and Latine communities have dealt with the consequences
of lack of maintenance of their communities’ water infrastructure for far too long;
ensuring that these communities are the first to receive funding with minimal bureautic
barriers will expedite access to clean and affordable drinking water.
6.
Ensuring language justice when informing communities. Make sure public notices
and any outreach is done in multiple languages, both on written materials and if
resources are shared in person. Currently, a large portion of the EPA’s resources are
only accessible in English. There are many languages spoken in the United States, so
providing information only in English contributes to the inaccessibility of resources and
lack of effectiveness. The Latine community is particularly vulnerable to exposure to lead
contamination, hence EPA must provide resources in multiple languages, especially as
the agency positions itself to promote environmental justice and meaningful public
engagement.
These revisions and recommendations align with the principles outlined in the Latino Climate
Justice Framework (LCJF), a policy guide to solving climate and conservation issues that
disproportionately burden Latine communities. Specifically, the imperative to invest in robust
water infrastructure and guarantee language accessibility throughout every phase of public
engagement. Endorsed by 64 organizations and backed by over 1200 individuals, the LCJF
underscores the essential requirement for equitable community policies.
6 Lanphear, B. P., Lowry, J. A., Ahdoot, S., Baum, C. R., Bernstein, A. S., Bole, A., Brumberg, H. L., Campbell, C. C., Lanphear, B.
P., Pacheco, S. E., Spanier, A. J., & Trasande, L. (2016, July 1). Prevention of Childhood Lead Toxicity. Pediatrics, 138(1).
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-1493
PO Box 60217, Washington, D.C., 20039 | www.greenlatinos.org

Water is a human right. Inequitable access to affordable, clean water continues to impact our
community. More stringent lead standards are absolutely critical, along with sufficient funding to
ensure that lead pipes are removed and replaced both along main municipal lines as well as
lines connecting to residential living areas. Low-income and communities of color already bear a
disproportionate burden of environmental degradation; ensuring that costs for replacement of
water infrastructure, purification, and water quality monitoring are not passed on to them is
essential. Outreach of water quality issues must be accessible in order for our communities to
be better informed. We need safe drinking water for all.
Sincerely,
Val Z. Schull and Maritza Mendoza
GreenLatinos
Water Equity and Ocean Program
PO Box 60217, Washington, D.C., 20039 | www.greenlatinos.org

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1122 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
January 5, 2024 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
US Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
 
Via Electronic Submission through the Federal eRulemaking Portal and email  
RE: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
Revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) will help ensure that toxic-free drinking water is a priority 
for communities who have been excluded. Thank you for acknowledging the urgent need to replace 
lead service line pipes as soon as possible. At this stage, implementing the revisions in a way that 
prioritizes historically disadvantaged communities is crucial. 
Equity has always been at the core of the LCR's history. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
promulgated the LCR through the Safe Drinking Water Act to ensure that historically excluded 
communities were no longer disproportionately affected by water toxins.1 Therefore, decades later, 
any revision should ensure this goal at a basic level. 
Funding decisions could harm frontline communities  
State revolving loan funds (SRFs) will provide most of the funding avenues for this LCR 
implementation.2 In other words, states will decide where to allocate funds. If states do not prioritize 
frontline communities, these funding decisions will exacerbate existing resource decisions that have 
 
1 Lead and Copper Rule, 56 Fed. Reg. 26,548 (June 7, 1991) (codified at 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(b) (6–7)) (requiring prioritization 
for lead service line replacement based on factors including disadvantaged consumers and sensitive populations). 
2 Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,878, 85090 n.27 (Dec. 6, 2023) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. 
141–42), https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2023-26148/p-805. 

 
2
left Black and other historically excluded communities without funding to fix their water infrastructure 
for years. The intentional reallocation of funds away from Jackson, MS, the neglect in Flint, MI, and 
countless other examples demonstrate that funding must be directly funneled to Black and other 
frontline communities to remedy decades of disinvestment.3  
Across the country, not all governors care about equity nor do we see all state agencies supporting 
frontline communities.  Consequently, the EPA shouldn't leave a decision as important as water 
infrastructure funding for lead service line replacement to individuals who have no track record of 
helping frontline communities. Therefore, the EPA must take proactive steps to consider other avenues 
for state accountability and direct funding channels. Black and other frontline communities deserve 
detailed state guidance if states get this much power over these decisions. Additionally, the EPA should 
review state plans closely without rubber-stamping allocations. Finally, the EPA should take whatever 
steps possible in rulemaking and in guidance to incentivize water systems to explore equitable cost-
sharing mechanisms, abandoning regressive rate structures in favor of more equitable approaches, 
efficiencies in utilities’ pipe replacement programs, and other financing mechanisms to obtain funding 
for replacement in addition to SRF funds. 
Lead should not be left behind in any community 
Two provisions in the Lead Copper Rule allow exceptions to lead service line replacement within 10 
years.4 Although we recognize the EPA's purpose in extending the timeline for lead service line 
replacement in places with over 80,000 total lines, the logic contradicts the overarching objectives. It 
seems that a goal of the revisions is to “significantly reduce exposure to lead through drinking water.”5 
However, lengthening the amount of time, in some instances to over 40 years to remove lead will not 
accomplish this goal.  
A lack of enforcement of the Lead Copper Rule revisions in places with large populations will inevitably 
result in higher health risks for the individuals the rule is supposed to protect. The more service lines 
those communities have, the more likely they are to serve large populations. Places like Chicago, which 
have a large Black and people of color population, fall under this exception.6 And this extension falls 
flat for protecting frontline communities. It deprioritizes community health. Utilities and other entities 
have already neglected these service lines for decades. Why should residents have to continue to wait 
 
3 NAACP, Complaint Under Title VI Regarding Discrimination Impacting the City of Jackson's Drinking Water System, to 
Honorable Michael S. Regan, Adm’r and Anhthu Hoang, Acting Dir., EPA Off. External C.R. Compliance (Sept. 27, 2022), 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-10/2022.10.20%20Final%20Acceptance%20Letter%20Recipient-
MSDOH_06R-22-R4_MSDEQ_07R-22-R4_1.pdf; see also Abre’ Conner, Testimony before the United States House of 
Representatives Committee on Homeland Security Hearing on Critical Infrastructure Preparedness and Resilience: A Focus 
on Water, (Sept. 19, 2022) 
https://naacp.org/sites/default/files/documents/HS%20Hearing%20Testimony%209.19.22%20Abre%20Conner%20FINAL.p
df (citing reports and data on Jackson and Flint water crises). 
4 Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,913. 
5 Id. at 84,879. 
6 Chi. Dep’t Water Mgmt., Water Service Line Inventory, CHI. WATER QUALITY, https://sli.chicagowaterquality.org (last visited 
Jan. 30, 2024) (“There are approximately 400,000 lead service lines in Chicago.”). 

 
3
for safe drinking water? The time is now to create bold and equitable provisions that include all 
vulnerable communities in solutions. 
Reducing action levels is a good idea 
Next, the revisions lower the lead in water action levels to 10 parts per billion while research clearly 
shows that lead in water is unsafe at any level.7 An action level only requires that there should be some 
measures taken for the next steps to protect human health. These measures can be as simple as 
informing the community regarding the lead in their water and creating mitigation steps. If the goal is 
to increase public awareness and mitigate harm, action levels for lead must be lowered to ensure 
broader drinking water safety.  
If the risk of lead exposure can lead to impaired cognitive development in children and increased 
cardiovascular risks in adults, the least that can be done is to mitigate the impact and increase public 
awareness. Other countries have already recognized this and set their action levels at 5 parts per 
billion, indicating the United States’ need for stricter regulations.8 Therefore, lowered action levels are 
necessary to reduce lead exposure and protect public health. 
Early public engagement and outreach are critical  
While it is important to have public comment periods, we continuously hear that many communities 
do not have EPA or water utility public education regarding how dangerous their current pipes can be 
to their health. Additionally, they lack public educational materials regarding how common lead 
exposure is. Indeed, most people do not know how dangerous lead is, whether they have lead pipes or 
lead plumbing, the types of filters that can help if they are at risk of exposure (most people are), and 
how to use such filters. We have observed that some of this is intentional misinformation from utilities 
and water systems - for example, conflating the issue to residents of compliance versus safety 
measures, to prevent raising alarm. Residents also do not understand which types of pipes are better 
and who qualifies for service line replacement. Currently, the EPA leaves much of this outreach to 
utility systems without ensuring that residents get information.9 Sadly, when residents request 
information, they often hear that due to government systems, they cannot receive additional 
assistance for public engagement. 
Specific questions should be raised to address the checks and balances needed to ensure outreach 
resonates across communities. For example: 
 
7 Ab Latif Wani et al., Lead Toxicity: A Review, INTERDISC. TOXICOL., June 2015, at 55, 55–64, https://doi.org/10.1515/intox-
2015-0009 (“[T]here is no threshold value below which lead exposure can be considered safe.”). 
8 HEALTH CANADA, GUIDELINES FOR CANADIAN DRINKING WATER QUALITY 1 (2019) available at https://www.canada.ca/en/health-
canada/services/publications/healthy-living/guidelines-canadian-drinking-water-quality-guideline-technical-document-
lead/guidance-document.html (setting the Canadian maximum acceptable concentration (MAC) for total lead in drinking 
water at 5 ppb (0.005 mg/L)). 
9 Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,068–73. 

 
4
• Do the fact sheets reflect how residents can reach other individuals for information 
regarding pipe replacement other than their local utilities? 
• Are websites, reports, and fact sheets explicit and efficient when sharing public health risks 
and solutions related to lead in drinking water?  
• Is the material engaging and updated based on feedback regarding questions regarding lead 
service lines? 
• Has the public engagement information been focus group tested regionally, for different 
age groups, cultural differences, and more? 
These are the types of questions that the EPA should readily answer regarding public engagement. 
Next, most residents do not receive public engagement regarding lead in water until there are serious 
problems.10 While we appreciate that the EPA continues to share that information is available, this is 
not the reality for many frontline communities. It is often left to advocates to outline the harms and 
avenues for assistance.  
We hope that the EPA (1) holds utilities more accountable for misinformation regarding lead service 
lines (2) increases strategic and culturally sensitive public education that resonates within a community 
(3) increases funding specifically for local advocates who continue to share the importance of finding 
lead service lines and testing and (4) creates a stronger feedback loop with advocates to allow for 
better messaging to communities in real-time. 
Increased access to filters and water sampling  
A ten-year plan to replace service lines that contain lead is a welcome revision. However, no amount of 
lead can be safe for communities.11 Therefore, the EPA must provide more expedient mitigation and 
stopgaps to communities. Moreover, free water testing and filters should be available across the 
country without the need for multiple exceedances to action levels. Once it is clear that a service line 
has lead, residents should automatically be allowed to request filters.  
There must also be additional accountability steps that residents can take to test their water without 
waiting for utilities to share this information or test their service lines. Water testing is crucial because 
it allows communities to personally identify and address how much lead they are exposed to and take 
necessary steps to protect their health. We appreciate the recognition that tap sampling must 
improve. However, if a resident requests sampling, there should be a mechanism to do that testing and 
sampling regardless of whether the site is known to be a “lead service line site” given that this 
 
10 See, e.g., Key moments in Flint, Michigan’s lead-tainted water crisis, Associated Press, June 28, 2022, 
https://apnews.com/article/politics-health-michigan-rick-snyder-flint-543cc1dfb5ec28da5bd8c641432f23f8; EPA OFF. 
INSPEC. GEN., REP. NO. 23-P-0031, THE EPA SHOULD DETERMINE HOW ITS ELEVATION POLICY CAN MORE EFFECTIVELY ADDRESS RISKS TO THE 
PUBLIC 8 (2023), https://www.epaoig.gov/sites/default/files/reports/2023-09/_epaoig_20230907-23-p-0031.pdf (detailing 
EPA’s failure to alert Benton Harbor residents of actionable lead levels in drinking water). 
11 Wani et al., supra note 7. 

 
5
information is still being formulated. To ensure no delays in receiving assistance, residents in all 
frontline communities should have a direct line to the EPA and technical assistance centers to request 
sampling and filters. Residents should also be able to easily flag where it is not happening.    
The water system should pay for the replacement of infrastructure 
Currently, frontline communities may also be forced to assist in replacing lead service lines rather than 
the water system covering the full costs.12 Placing additional financial burdens on these communities 
further exacerbates the existing inequalities and injustices they face. Indeed, the EPA has data that 
demonstrates frontline communities are disproportionately affected by lead service lines and often 
cannot access the funds necessary to fix them.13  
As part of its commitment to prioritize vulnerable and frontline communities, the EPA cannot expect to 
be able to allow low-income homeowners to share costs. EPA must require water systems to pay for 
the costs of full lead service line replacement, and as mentioned before, there are numerous funding 
sources, alternative rate structures, financing mechanisms, and replacement efficiency programs that 
already exist and have been used in communities around the country to help ensure replacement is 
funded for everyone, not just wealthy homeowners. 
The “access and control” loophole must be removed 
Rather than a presumption that water systems, for purposes of maintenance, upkeep, replacement, 
etc., have access to a lead service line, as EPA has asserted in the past, this proposed rule presumes the 
opposite. The rule requires only lines that water systems have control of to be replaced, and control is 
largely defined as access – though access is not defined clearly. EPA instead defers to water system 
interpretation of access.14   
In the proposed rule, if a system does not have access (for example, because a homeowner does not 
want to pay 5,000 dollars for replacing their line and decides to not grant a utility permission to work, 
or because an absentee landlord cannot be reached) then the utility does not have to replace the 
line.15 Additionally, that lead line would not be a part of the calculus on whether a community has had 
all of their lead service lines replaced in ten years. Practically speaking, this means a system can claim 
they have replaced 100% of lead service lines as required by the rule and still have many lead service 
lines in people’s homes. Another practical consequence is that because there are thousands of 
systems, there is no way the EPA can ensure that local governments, state governments, and utilities 
do not game this provision by interpreting “access” as they see fit to avoid spending money on LSLR in 
 
12 Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,923–24 (discussing EPA’s decision not to ban cost-
sharing and impact on vulnerable communities). 
13 See generally, Letter from Dr. Deborah L. Swackhamer, Chair, EPA Science Advisory Board, and Dr. Jeffrey K. Griffiths, 
Chair, SAB Drinking Water Committee, to Lisa P. Jackson, Administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; GAO, 
Drinking Water: EPA Could Use Available Data to Better Identify Neighborhoods at Risk of Lead Exposure; Complaint Under 
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 41 U.S.C. § 2000d, 40 C.F.R. Part 7 against Providence Water. 
14 Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920. 
15 Id. at 84,923–24. 

 
6
certain communities. Given the history of exclusion from investment and infrastructure repair in black 
communities to this day in places like Jackson, Mississippi, this risk could have extreme consequences 
that run counter to what EPA hopes to accomplish with this rule.16 
The location of lead service lines needs to be better understood 
As of now, the EPA has not identified all lead service lines.17 Part of the revisions is to locate legacy 
service lines. However, the EPA has still not shared whether it will be and how transparent it will be 
with communities regarding lead service lines. If the goal is to ensure that the country removes all lead 
service lines, what accountability mechanisms exist outside the EPA? How will communities know if all 
the lines are replaced within ten years if this information is unknown? While we appreciate that there 
are potentially some security considerations, this should not come at the cost of residents being 
unclear whether there are still lead service lines in their communities. 
The revisions must strengthen protections for students 
The LCR revisions finalized by the Trump administration did nothing to advance the health of children 
in schools when it comes to exposure to lead in drinking water. This proposal does not meaningfully 
differ from the Trump administration’s revisions. Like the Trump rule, the proposal requires a single 
lead test at just five locations in each school and just two locations in a childcare center, once in the 
first five years, with no mandatory retesting or required notice to parents and staff, and no general 
public notice.18  
Black children are more likely to be exposed to lead in drinking water, as well as other contaminants, 
and under this rule, they would be vulnerable to additional exposure at schools.19 To make matters 
worse, exposure at schools can be egregious because water sits still for long periods like weekends and 
school breaks20: one study found that about 82 percent of public school buildings in New York State in 
2016 reported having one or more taps that tested above 15 parts per billion,21 and the Seattle Public 
Schools tested for lead in 2004, they found an outlet with lead levels as high as 1,600 parts per 
billion.22  
 
16 See generally NAACP, supra note 3. 
17 Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,933–36 (explaining timeline for inventory and 
identification of unknown service lines). 
18 Id. at 84,956. 
19 Deniz Yeter et al., Disparity in Risk Factor Severity for Early Childhood Blood Lead among Predominantly African-American 
Black Children: The 1999 to 2010 US NHANES, 17 Int’l J. Env’t Rsch. Pub. Health, Feb. 2020, at 1, 1, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17051552. 
20 U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFF., GAO-18-382, K-12 EDUCATION: LEAD TESTING OF SCHOOL DRINKING WATER WOULD BENEFIT FROM 
IMPROVED FEDERAL GUIDANCE 1 (2018), https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-18-382.pdf. 
21 N.Y. DEPT. HEALTH & N.Y. DEPT. EDUC., LEAD IN SCHOOL DRINKING WATER STATUS REPORT 7 (2021), 
https://www.health.ny.gov/environmental/water/drinking/lead/docs/lead_in_schools_report_governor.pdf. 
22 Catherin Karr et.al, Lead in Seattle School Drinking Water:  A Review of the Health Implications, Northwest Pediatric 
Environmental Health Specialty Unit, University of Washington  (December 2004), 
https://www.academicpedsjnl.net/article/S1530-1567(06)00159-6/pdf.  

 
7
The solution is to not rely on testing, but to assume lead is present and dangerous and instead default 
to installing filters at kitchen faucets and designated hydration stations (bottle filling water and 
drinking fountains) while periodically testing those outlets to ensure that the filters are properly 
keeping lead levels low or below detection. EPA asserts that they do not have the authority to require 
school systems to directly take this approach, despite mandating testing outside of water systems in 
other parts of the rule (like testing in private homes), however in the proposed rule, the EPA does not 
even bother incentivizing such an approach. The EPA could easily require regular and comprehensive 
testing and public notice for schools that do not have appropriate filters, such that school systems end 
up preferring to install the filters. This approach would better protect children’s health.  
Conclusion  
We, the undersigned, appreciate this welcomed next step in creating a pathway to safer drinking with 
these revisions in mind. We hope that the EPA strongly considers the ways that the current proposed 
revisions will counter its goals and implement critical updates that prioritize historically disadvantaged 
communities. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Abre’ Conner 
Director, Center for Environmental and Climate Justice 
NAACP 
 
Monica Lewis-Patrick  
President & CEO 
We the People of Detroit 
 
Usman Mahmood 
Policy Analyst 
Bayou City Waterkeeper 
 
Vanessa Bly 
Co-Founder 
Bridges // Puentes Justice Collective of the Southeast 

 
8
Kendall Dix 
National Policy Director 
Taproot Earth 
 
Dr. Yasmin Zaerpoor 
Director of Water Equity and Climate Resilience 
PolicyLink 
 
Mary Pelletier 
Director 
Park Watershed 
 
Sonia Kikeri 
National Director of Civic Infrastructure 
Emerald Cities Collaborative 
 
Russell Armstrong  
Senior Director Campaigns and Advocacy 
Hip Hop Caucus 
 
Dr. Sacoby Wilson 
Professor and Director 
CEEJH 
 
LaTricea D. Adams, MAT, EdS 
CEO 
Black Millennials 4 Flint 
 
 
 

 
9
Kelly Moser 
Senior Attorney and Water Program Leader 
Southern Environmental Law Center 
 
Val Z. Schüll 
Water Equity and Ocean Program Director 
GreenLatinos 
 
Don Jodrey 
Director of Federal Relations 
Alliance for the Great Lakes 
 
Yvette Jordan 
Chairperson 
Newark Education Workers Caucus 
 
Vangela M. Wade 
President and CEO 
Mississippi Center for Justice 
 
Brenda Coley 
Co-Executive Director 
Milwaukee Water Commons 
 
Robert Penner 
Steering Committee 
Get the Lead Out Coalition of Milwaukee 
 
 
 

 
10
Mia Montoya Hammersley 
Environmental Justice Clinic Director 
Vermont Law & Graduate School Environmenal Justice Clinic 
 
Melinda Pierce 
Legislative Director 
Sierra Club 
 
Abby Tinsley 
Vice President for Conservation Policy 
National Wildlife Federation 
 
Portland Advocates for Leadfree Drinking Water

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0877 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
DANIEL BOSCH, ASSOCIATE
PH 225.382.4625 
DANIEL.BOSCH@KEANMILLER.COM 
 
 
 
4863-6141-8147 v2 
February 5, 2024 
Submitted via Regulations.gov  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA 
Docket Center, ORD 
Docket, Mail Code 28221T, 1200 Pennsylvania 
Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460
 
 
Re: 
Comments of the Louisiana Chemical Association  
Public Comment on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI)  
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801; FRL-5423.2-01-OW 
88 Fed. Reg. 84,878 
KM File No. 3645-411
To Whom It May Concern: 
Our firm represents the Louisiana Chemical Association (“LCA”). The LCA respectfully submits 
the following comments on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”)’s proposed National 
Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (“LCRI”).  
LCA is a nonprofit Louisiana corporation, composed of seventy (70) members with over one 
hundred (100) chemical manufacturing plant sites in Louisiana. LCA was formed in 1959 to promote a 
positive business climate for chemical manufacturing that ensures long-term economic growth for its 
member companies. LCA members are committed to excellence in safety, health, security, and 
environmental performance, and to protecting our employees and surrounding communities. 
On December 6, 2023, the EPA proposed revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulation (“NPDWR”) for lead and copper under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act 
(“SDWA”).1 EPA proposes to require water systems to replace lead service lines (“LSL”) and galvanized 
requiring replacement service lines (“GRR”), remove the lead trigger level, reduce the lead action level to 
0.010 mg/L, and strengthen tap sampling procedures, among other changes that are aimed at improving 
public health protection and simplifying the rule relative to the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
(“the 2021 Rule”). The LCRI provides adjustments in the additional following areas: corrosion control 
treatment, public education and consumer awareness, requirements for small systems, and sampling in 
schools and childcare facilities. The EPA states that the LCRI “aims to address potential disproportionate 
 
1 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,878 (Dec. 6, 
2023) (hereafter referred to as the “LCRI”).  

February 5, 2024 
 
 
Page 2 
 
4863-6141-8147 v2 
impacts of lead in drinking water in communities, including through proposed lead service line 
replacement and public education, among other aspects of the proposed rule.” 
LCA appreciates the opportunity to submit comments on the LCRI. LCA member companies 
operate facilities across Louisiana that depend on public water systems for reliable and constant supply of 
water for regular operations. Additionally, several member facilities maintain their own water supply 
through groundwater obtained by groundwater extraction wells or capturing and treating freshwater, 
thereby classifying them as “non-transient non-community water systems” (“NTNCWS”) within the 
definition of the LCRI. Therefore, LCA has a direct interest in providing these comments.  
COMMENTS 
I. 
Replacement of LSL and GRR for All Systems 
Under the LCRI, all systems will be required to replace LSLs and GRR service lines within ten 
years of the effective date of the LCRI.2  Additionally, the LCRI requires that systems enter an LSL 
replacement plan and that each system achieve at least a 10% annual reduction rate in service line 
replacements per year.3 The 10% reduction rate will be based on a three-year rolling average, which will 
be calculated “by taking the sum of the annual percentages of service lines replaced from year one, year 
two, and year three, then dividing that sum by three.”4 
The LCRI preamble provides that “the LCR and [the 2021 Rule] required water systems that 
exceeded the lead action or trigger levels to conduct [lead service line replacement]” (emphasis added).5 
The prior rules did not require all systems in the nation with LSLs and GRR service lines to simultaneously 
replace service lines. Rather, under the 2021 Rule, service lines that were shown to actually contribute to 
lead contamination through sampling and testing were required to be replaced.   
The LCRI defines a service line as “a portion of pipe which connects the water main to the building 
inlet. Where a building is not present, the service line connects the water main to the outlet.”6 For industrial 
facilities, this definition would include lines that connect not only buildings, but individual operations 
units within the facility to the water main.  
The replacement of service lines will cause enormous interruptions to industrial site activities not 
only due to excavation operations within the footprint of facility operations units, but also due to the 
interruption of water supply to the facility. The LCRI’s expedited timeline for LSL and GRR replacements 
further imposes a significant burden on industrial facilities without a commiserate reduction in risk to the 
public. Industrial facilities heavily rely on a consistent water supply for industrial processes, such as 
cooling operations for equipment. Facilities will have to either shut down or severely scale back operations 
 
2 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85,064. 
3 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85,064-5.  
4 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85,065. 
5 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,911. 
6 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85,054. 

February 5, 2024 
 
 
Page 3 
 
4863-6141-8147 v2 
in order to allow for service line replacement to take place, causing decreased production and safety 
concerns for facility personnel.  
EPA found generally that LSL replacement at NTNCWSs was “feasible.”7 But EPA did not 
expressly or thoroughly consider feasibility with respect to NTNCWSs at industrial facilities. Indeed, the 
effects of facility water line replacements on the expedited schedule proposed and the resulting 
interruptions to facility operations makes the current regulations infeasible within the definition of the 
SDWA. Specifically, “feasible” is defined in section 1412(b)(4)(D) of SDWA as “feasible with the use of 
the best technology, treatment techniques and other means which the Administrator finds, after 
examination for efficacy under field conditions and not solely under laboratory conditions, are available 
(taking cost into consideration).” As explained below, the cost considerations alone make the expedited 
10-year timeline and required replacement of all LSLs infeasible. Safety considerations and other process 
interruptions further support the infeasibility under the SDWA. Finally, EPA must provide field condition 
examinations for NTNCWs at industrial facilities to support feasibility under the definition.  
Moreover, the purpose of the LCRI is to ensure safe and lead-free drinking water. The zero-sum 
replacement requirements create undue burden on industrial-based NTNCWS without a commiserate 
benefit towards safe drinking water. Therefore, and for the reasons outlined in this section, LCA requests 
that the LCRI be amended to provide for an exemption for industrial facilities from LSL replacement 
requirements or, at the least, delayed implementation.   
A. Cost Analysis  
As stated by stakeholders in the EPA’s Small Business Advocacy Review Panel on the LCRI, 
limited workforce and shortages of materials could impede service line replacement progress, especially 
when all systems in a geographic region are conducting replacement simultaneously.8  The LCRI provides 
that the costs estimates associated with the proposal are derived from states that are currently 
implementing similar measures to replace LSL lines on a similarly expedited time frame. Basing a cost 
analysis on actual costs incurred by states implementing the proposal makes good sense. However, LCA 
comments that the states used in the analysis – namely Illinois, Michigan, New Jersey, and Rhode Island– 
are not comparable to all U.S. states. The four states are located in two regions – the Northeast and 
Midwest. Both areas are cold weather climates unlike other areas of the U.S. including the Southeast. 
States in other regions experience different climates, environments, and stressors, such as natural disasters 
unique to the regions. These naturally occurring events present complications for the replacement of LSLs. 
Weather events will limit the time that construction crews can engage in LSL replacement activities, 
thereby lengthening construction timelines and increasing costs. Additionally, lower sea levels in coastal 
areas further complicate LSL replacement when the lines cannot be accessed other than through 
excavation operations. LCA therefore requests that the costs analysis of the LCRI be revised to more 
accurately account for regional considerations that may increase the costs of LSL. 
 
7 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,912. 
8 See U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Panel Report of the Small Business Advocacy Review Panel on EPA's 
Planned Proposed Rule Lead and Copper Rule Improvements National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (May 31, 2023), 
available at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0045.  

February 5, 2024 
 
 
Page 4 
 
4863-6141-8147 v2 
B. Funding Availability for Service Line Replacement  
 
The LCRI preamble provides that “the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Pub. L. 117–58), 
also referred to as the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (“BIL”), included $15 billion specifically 
appropriated for lead service line replacement (“LSLR”) projects and associated activities directly 
connected to the identification of LSL and planning for the replacement of LSLs.”9  While the BIL 
provides funding for LSL replacement, the funding available is inadequate to meet the EPA’s projected 
cost of replacement. Estimates cited in the rulemaking docket project that the total cost of LSL 
replacement will be roughly $55 billion.10    
 
 
LCA has two central concerns as it relates to BIL funding. First, although LCA contends that $55 
billion is a conservative estimate, it is still far higher than the $15 billion that is available through the BIL. 
The remaining costs of LSL replacement will undoubtedly be passed on to ratepayers and, in the case of 
LCA members who may be NTNCWSs, absorbed by the facility. This is further exacerbated by the 
expedited time frame of 10 years for compliance now required under the LCRI. Although the 2021 Rule 
provided 35 years for compliance, the LCRI now shortens that time frame by 71.5%, thereby compressing 
the total costs of LSL and GRR replacements into a much shorter time window, essentially “frontloading” 
the costs for water systems. Compressing the timeline will also lead to increased costs through shortages 
of construction and plumbing labor and materials for service line replacement. And, although the LCRI 
provides for deferred deadlines for LSL replacement achievement, this deferral is only available for 
systems who are replacing greater than 10,000 LSLs.11 
 
 
Second, although EPA consistently cites the $15 billion in BIL funding throughout the LCRI as 
support for service line replacements, the LCRI is not clear how this funding would be made available to 
service line replacements for smaller and NTNCWS water systems. These systems are particularly 
vulnerable to the cost effects of the rule, because in many instances these systems may not sell the water 
they produce and therefore do not have a rate-setting mechanism to recover the costs of LSL replacements. 
LCA requests clarification on how funding will be made available through the BIL appropriation and that 
NTNCWSs be prioritized in considering funding awards under the BIL appropriation.  
 
C. Access to Industrial Facilities 
 
 
LCA objects to the LCRI insofar as it requires public water systems to enter private property and, 
in the case of LCA members, their industrial facilities, to remove LSLs. EPA specifically requests 
comment on “[t]he extent to which property owner consent, if required by State or local law or water tariff 
agreement, might complicate full service line replacement and whether there are additional measures EPA 
can take to facilitate access through the LCRI.”12 LCA members operate complex industrial sites that are 
subject to an expansive array of environmental, process, and safety regulations. To ensure compliance 
 
9 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,881. 
10 Ronnie Levin, Full Lead Pipe Replacement Analysis, T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Harvard University, 
Document No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0042, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0042 (last 
accessed Jan. 23, 2023).  
11 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85,065. 
12 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85,036. 

February 5, 2024 
 
 
Page 5 
 
4863-6141-8147 v2 
with these many regulations, LCA members must closely regulate access to their industrial sites. Many 
member facilities achieve this through required safety training or pre-qualifying contractors and services 
through a pre-approved vendor list.  For LCA members that rely on public water systems for their water 
supply, requiring that industrial sites grant access to public utility companies would make LCA members 
susceptible to a host of liabilities and would place both the public water system and the industrial site 
employees at serious risk.  
 
 
During the EPA’s January 16, 2023, public hearing on the LCRI, several commenters stated that 
the access required for LSL replacement is similar to access to record readings on a metering device. 
However, to gain temporary access to record readings from a water flow metering device is a very different 
matter from extended, continuous access to engage in construction related activities and make physical 
alterations to property in order to replace service lines. The access required for LSL replacement will not 
only be extended in time, but extensive in nature.  
 
 
The proposed Section 141.84(c)(3) of the LCRI, which would apply to LCA member facilities 
who are served by a public water system, provides for the procedure through which a public water system 
may request consent from private landowners on four separate occasions before they cease attempts to 
replace the lead service line, citing examples such as phone calls, text messages, emails, and door hangers 
as means of attempts to make contact.13 Under Section IX of the LCRI preamble, the EPA further seeks 
comment on the possibility of requiring more attempts “e.g., five, six, or seven times.”14 LCA objects to 
this provision as currently written. If consent is required to replace a service line retained on private 
property, and a private owner explicitly denies consent to the public water system, then that express denial 
should be deemed sufficient to vitiate the need for further attempts. As provided in the foregoing 
discussion, industrial sites have legitimate safety concerns regarding the replacement of service lines and 
should be allowed to preserve their right to deny consent for replacement of the service lines. LCA 
recommends that the LCRI be amended to: a) provide greater clarity for how the consent provision pertains 
to industrial facilities, and b) if a private owner explicitly denies consent, that a public water system may 
cease further attempts to gain consent.  
 
D. Disconnection of Service Lines Considered as Replacements 
 
LCA supports the EPA’s proposal to count physical disconnections of service lines from the water 
supply as service line replacements if the line is not in active use. In many instances, the full extraction of 
a service line would be overly burdensome and costly and would result in no decrease to potential lead 
exposure in water supply. Thus, this option preserves a system’s ability to achieve a higher cost savings 
and a lower level of invasive intervention, particularly as it relates service lines retained by private owners.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85,064. 
14 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,923, 85,035. 

February 5, 2024 
 
 
Page 6 
 
4863-6141-8147 v2 
II. 
Flexibility Provisions for Small and Non-Transient, Non-Community Water Systems 
A. Mandatory LSL and GRR Replacement 
LCA appreciates that the LCRI retains the Small System Flexibility provisions of the 2021 Rule, 
which provide relief to small systems and NTNCWS from corrosion control treatment (“CCT”) 
requirements.15 The Small System Flexibility provisions provide: 
Small community water systems serving 3,300 or fewer persons and all non-
transient non-community water systems that exceed the lead action level, 
but do not exceed the copper action level, may elect to use this provision in 
lieu of the corrosion control treatment requirements otherwise applicable to 
small systems in § 141.81(a)(3), if approved by the State.16  
Thus, the LCRI allows small and NTNCWS systems to choose one of three options as an alternative to 
CCT requirements: 1) approved corrosion control, 2) installation of point of use devices, or 3) replacement 
of lead-bearing plumbing materials.17   
Although the flexibility provisions provide relief for CCT requirements, the provisions have been 
amended to remove the exemption from the requirement to replace LSLs.  The 2021 Rule provided that 
small and NTNCWS systems may elect to replace LSL as an option to meet compliance when sampling 
results indicate an exceedance of the lead action level.18 However, the LCRI now removes this as an option 
of compliance, and instead requires NTNCWS to comply with the general requirement for total LSL 
replacement.19 LCA objects to this change. Many industrial facilities are classified as NTNCWSs, as they 
operate their own water system and maintain an independent water supply. The LCRI makes no distinction 
for the intended purpose of the water supply, instead stating that “all water systems” must replace “all” 
service lines.20 Based on the definitions in the rule, the requirement to replace LSLs applies even to parts 
of a NTNCWS that do not provide potable water, but instead transport, for instance, process water, such 
as for cooling systems, even though the intended purpose of the LCRI is to ensure safe drinking water. 
LCA requests that the LCRI be amended to provide that service lines used for the transport of water for 
the purpose of industrial process operations be excluded from the applicability of the LCRI.    
NTNCWS industrial facilities are required under the 2021 Rule to take certain protective measures 
under the Small System Flexibility provisions. EPA previously determined that these alternative options 
provided proper protections and that the options “allow water systems to select the most financially and 
technologically viable strategy that is effective in reducing lead in drinking water.”21 Industrial facilities 
 
15 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85,085 (to be codified as 40 C.F.R. § 141.93). 
16 Id. 
17 Id. 
18 40 C.F.R. 141.93(a)(1) (2021).  
19 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,880, 84,938. 
20 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85,064 (to be codified as 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(d)).  
21 2021 Rule, 84 Fed. Reg. 4,219 (Jan. 15, 2021).  

February 5, 2024 
 
 
Page 7 
 
4863-6141-8147 v2 
rely on water supply for industrial processes. To require LSL replacement at these facilities will require 
enormous resources and will disrupt facility operations and will require unit or plant outages. Anytime a 
facility or a unit is required to shut down and re-start, there are personnel, process safety, and 
environmental concerns. Thus, as noted by EPA, the flexibility provisions provided sufficient protections 
without requiring costly and unnecessary shutdown and restarts. The EPA does not sufficiently explain 
why those alternatives are now inadequate.    
The LCRI does not adequately consider the impact of LSL replacement on NTNCWSs. The LCRI 
preamble provides that only 147 NTNCWSs were surveyed on whether they had LSLs. The preamble 
assumes that “since 132 of them did not report any lead, GRR, or unknown service lines,” that therefore 
“LSLs are rarely used in these systems.”22 A sample of 147 cannot represent the total number of 
NTNCWSs, which numbers over 17,000.23 By comparison, this sample accounts for just 0.86% of all 
NTNCWSs. The LCRI simply assumes that because of the low number of LSL survey results combined 
with the fact that few NTNCWSs contain more than 1,000 service lines that “relatively few of these service 
lines [will require] replacement over the proposed 10-year deadline.” However, this is an assumption and 
does not take into account that many industrial facilities, which may be NTNCWSs, are pre-1970 
constructions and may therefore contain LSLs. Further, the number of service lines in a water system is 
not indicative of its ability to complete LSL replacement within the prescribed timeframe, as industrial 
sites are complex and any change in normal operations must be carefully planned well in advance. LCA, 
therefore, requests that LSL replacement be retained as an option under the flexibility provisions rather 
than as a requirement for NTNCWSs.  
B. Other Requirements for Water Systems 
Although the LCRI retains some of the flexibility provisions for NTNCWS compliance (see 
discussion above), it adds requirements for small and NTNCWS systems without providing sufficient 
justification. For example, the LCRI requires NTNCWS to provide consumer notices of testing results 
within 3 days of results, 24-hour notification of lead action level exceedances, notices for pipe replacement 
notifications, recurring educational programing, and identification of consumers most at risk.24 Although 
some or all of these requirements may benefit publicly owned systems, many of these requirements are 
inapplicable and unduly burdensome for industrial NTNCWs.  
1. Educational Programming  
The LCRI amends the 2021 Rule to now require that NTNCWSs engage in education and outreach 
services.25 LCA member facilities are already required to conduct rigorous training in compliance with 
numerous other environmental regulations and OSHA requirements.  However, the type of educational 
programming, outreach services, and public notices required under the LCRI are inapplicable to the nature 
of an industrial facility that maintains a water system without any paying customers or homes.  Said 
another way, additional training would not further the intent of the proposed rule because an industrial 
 
22 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,912. 
23 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,912. 
24 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,880. 
25 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,952. 

February 5, 2024 
 
 
Page 8 
 
4863-6141-8147 v2 
facility-NTNCWS does not serve households and ratepayers.  LCA requests that the LCRI be revised to 
retain the exemption from education requirements for NTNCWSs provided under the 2021 Rule.  
2. Consumer Testing Results  
 
The LCRI provides that “water systems are required to provide consumer notice of an individual's 
lead tap sampling results from monitoring under § 141.86” and that results be provided to consumers 
“within three calendar days after the system learns of the results.”26  The LCRI also requires that sampling 
results for copper testing be provided to consumers.  LCA requests clarification of the applicability of this 
provision for NTNCWSs when the system does not have customers and does not deliver water to 
individual households.  The notification requirement, while applying to all systems, does not contemplate 
the unique circumstances of NTNCWSs, such as those at industrial facilities. LCA requests that the LCRI 
requirement for sampling results be amended to exclude NTNCWSs or, at least, to clarify how and to 
whom NTNCWSs should provide sampling result notifications.  
3. Consumer Risk Identification  
 
The LCRI requires that all water systems “[c]ontact customers who are most at risk by delivering 
education” and that if “local public health agencies provide a specific list of additional community based 
organizations serving populations at greatest risk from lead exposure (e.g., pregnant people, children), 
including organizations outside the service area of the water system, then the system must deliver 
education materials that meet the content requirements of paragraph (a) of this section to all organizations 
on the provided lists.”27 This requirement does not take account for the nature of industrial facility 
NTNCWSs who do not provide water to “customers,” or to individuals “outside the service area.” Like 
other provisions of the LCRI, the requirement for at risk customer identification is not applicable to most 
industrial-based NTNCWSs. LCA requests that the applicability of provisions for consumer risk 
identification be amended accordingly.  
III. 
LSL Inventory Creation 
The LCRI retains the 2021 Rule’s requirement that systems, including NTNCWSs and other small 
water systems, create and maintain an inventory of LSLs by October 16, 2024.28  The LCRI additionally 
requires that systems update the inventory annually.29 The LCRI preamble states that “EPA has 
determined that it is feasible (i.e., technically possible and reasonably affordable relative to a large system) 
for water systems to create a complete and accurate inventory of service line materials by the proposed 
service line replacement deadline to support the treatment technique for mandatory service line 
replacement.”30 However, EPA’s assessment was not performed for all types of water systems.  
 
26 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg 84,949. 
27 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 85,069. 
28 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,968. 
29 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,884, 85,081. 
30 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. 84,933. 

February 5, 2024 
 
 
Page 9 
 
4863-6141-8147 v2 
Industrial facilities, such as those maintained by LCA members, may not already maintain this 
information, thereby requiring these facilities to dedicate staff hours and resources to creating an 
inventory. The determination that a service line is lead-bearing will require sampling, testing, inspections, 
and contracting with numerous outside professional services. This work will necessarily interrupt facility 
operations, causing a loss in production hours and, in some cases, requiring shutdown of facility equipment 
to conduct sampling of service line materials.  Shutdowns and subsequent restarts of facility equipment 
present the greatest safety risk for facility personnel because these occasions involve the greatest number 
of independent variables and, by extension, opportunities for error.  In an effort to minimize disruptions 
to facility operations and preserve safety conditions for personnel, LCA requests that the LCRI inventory 
requirement should be amended to provide that NTNCWSs may first use sampling as a preliminary 
assessment of the potential presence of lead service lines to determine if a more invasive investigation is 
merited.   
IV. 
Conditions of State Primacy 
 
LCA objects to the potential conditions for state primacy for which EPA has solicited comment 
when the prescribed condition would require state regulators to go beyond the requirements of the LCRI. 
Specifically, LCA objects that, as a condition of primacy to administer these regulations, states should be 
required to set initial shortened deadlines than those required by the LCRI.31 Specifically, EPA requests 
comment on the following: 
5. EPA is taking comment on whether States, as a condition of primacy, or 
EPA when it is directly implementing the program, should be required to 
set initial shortened deadlines by a certain timeframe, such as no later than 
60 days after the compliance date. 
* * * 
7. Whether to require the State, as a condition of primacy, to approve the 
use of the deferred deadline provision where the water system qualifies for 
it and/or whether to require the State, as a condition of primacy, to assess 
whether it would be feasible for a system to meet the 10-year deadline or a 
shorter deadline even if the system meets the regulatory criteria for the 
deferred deadline.32 
LCA objects to conditioning primacy and any and all of the timeline adjustments above. If a water 
system meets the criteria for a deferred deadline, the State should not be required to reassess whether it is 
feasible for the water system to meet a 10-year or shorter deadline. State regulators, including the 
Louisiana Department of Health, have properly adopted implementing procedures for the enforcement of 
lead pipe regulations. To the extent compliance deadlines are required to be updated, the state regulators 
have the authority under approved primacy to amend the regulations as needed. EPA does not need 
separate provisions requiring assessment of the deadlines or feasibility of the deadlines as a condition of 
primacy.  
 
31 LCRI, Section IX, 88 Fed. Reg. 85,035. 
32 Id. 

February 5, 2024 
 
 
Page 10 
 
4863-6141-8147 v2 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
LCA appreciates the opportunity to comment on the LCRI. Please feel free to contact LCA at 
225.376.7672 or Tokesha@lca.org or myself with any questions.  
 
 
Very truly yours, 
 
KEAN MILLER LLP 
 
Daniel W. Bosch, Jr. 
 
 
cc:  
 
Tokesha Collins-Wright (via email) 
 
 
Vice President, Environmental Affairs and General Counsel 
 
 
Louisiana Chemical Association 
 
 
 
Lauren J. Rucinski (via email) 
 
 
Kean Miller, LLP 
 
 
 
Bryant R. Bremer (via email) 
 
 
Kean Miller, LLP

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0844 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC  20460 
 
Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801,  
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
On behalf of the physician and medical student members of the American Medical Association (AMA), I 
appreciate this opportunity to offer our comments in response to the Environmental Protection Agency’s 
(EPA) National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). The 
AMA supports the proposed revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation for lead and 
copper under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act.  
The adverse health effects of lead exposure are well documented and no safe blood lead threshold in 
children has been identified.1 Lead exposure during childhood causes adverse and permanent 
neurodevelopmental consequences. Even low blood lead levels have been linked to low IQ, decreased 
academic achievement, increased emotional and behavioral problems, as well as delayed physical 
development in adolescents.2 Drinking water remains an important, but often overlooked, source of 
exposure to lead, particularly for children and infants.3  
In 2016, the AMA’s House of Delegates, which is our policy-making body representing physicians, 
residents, and medical students from every state and national medical specialty, adopted Policy              
H-135.928, “Safe Drinking Water.”4 This policy closely aligns with several aspects of the EPA’s 
proposed LCRI. Specifically, the AMA is supportive of EPA’s efforts to remove and replace lead service 
lines and other leaded plumbing materials that come into contact with drinking water as quickly as 
 
1 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2023. Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention. Available here: 
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/overview.html.  
2 National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. 2024. Lead. Available here: 
https://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/topics/agents/lead#:~:text=In%202021%2C%20CDC%20updated%20the,on%20
children%20with%20highest%20exposures.  
3 COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH, Bruce Perrin Lanphear, Jennifer A. Lowry, Samantha Ahdoot, 
Carl R. Baum, Aaron S. Bernstein, Aparna Bole, Heather Lynn Brumberg, Carla C. Campbell, Bruce Perrin 
Lanphear, Susan E. Pacheco, Adam J. Spanier, Leonardo Trasande; Prevention of Childhood Lead Toxicity. 
Pediatrics July 2016; 138 (1): e20161493. 10.1542/peds.2016-1493. 
4 American Medical Association. Policy Finder - Safe Drinking Water H-135.928. Available here: 
https://policysearch.ama-assn.org/policyfinder/detail/lead?uri=%2FAMADoc%2FHOD-135.928.xml.  

The Honorable Michael S. Regan 
February 5, 2024 
Page 2 
 
 
 
 
possible. While we understand EPA’s justification for having exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal 
mandate, we strongly urge the EPA to work closely with those systems to ensure they are in compliance 
expeditiously with the final rule. These exceptions could increase existing health inequities and disparities 
in communities with the most lead service lines, and therefore the highest potential exposure levels, if 
they are allowed extra decades to fix this issue. 
The AMA is also supportive of the proposed LCRI changes regarding public education and messaging 
efforts. The proposed rule states, “For water systems serving a large proportion of consumers with limited 
English proficiency, all public education materials must include a translated statement regarding the 
importance of the materials and consumers can contact the system to get the materials translated in other 
languages.” The AMA supports robust and frequent public education efforts and outreach to consumers, 
including historically marginalized populations and disproportionately affected communities. It is critical 
that public education be science-based, culturally and linguistically relevant to communities and that 
educational materials be delivered through multiple channels (e.g., social media, mailing, public service 
announcements, etc.). 
Lastly, the AMA supports the EPA for updating its tap sampling protocol and for lowering the lead action 
level from 0.015 mg/L to 0.010 mg/L. With the updated tap sampling protocol, we hope the EPA will 
make concurrent efforts to improve public access to testing data on water lead levels by requiring testing 
results from public water systems to be posted on a publicly available website in a reasonable timeframe 
thereby allowing consumers to take precautions to protect their health. We believe the lowered lead action 
level is a step in the right direction but hope the EPA may consider lowering it even further, as the current 
evidence indicates there are no safe blood lead levels in children. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this proposed update. The AMA looks forward to 
collaborating with the Administration on these important efforts. Together, we can help to ensure all 
Americans have access to safe and healthy drinking water. Please contact Margaret Garikes, Vice 
President for Federal Affairs, at margaret.garikes@ama-assn.org or 202-789-7409 with any questions.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
James L. Madara, MD

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0832 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
By Electronic Submission: Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC  20460 
 
Dear Mr. Michael Goldberg: 
 
The South Carolina Water Quality Association (SCWQA) appreciates the opportunity to comment 
on USEPA’s proposed revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) for 
lead and copper. On December 6, 2023, EPA issued for public comment further proposed 
revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR), found in 40 C.F.R. § 141.80.91), known as the 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). Although the SCWQA supports a robust Lead and 
Copper Rule, we have significant concerns, summarized below, about several of the proposed 
changes.  
 
The SCWQA comprises public water and sewer statewide. Our members are dedicated to 
protecting public health and the environment – this includes reducing the amount of lead and 
copper present in our finished drinking water. We never seek to avoid necessary and appropriate 
requirements. Instead, we embrace such requirements and work to prioritize them and obtain the 
funding necessary to comply from the public that we serve. That said, as public utilities we must 
provide public water service in an affordable and cost-effective manner.  
 
With that perspective, we are compelled to submit these comments because the proposed LCRI 
requirements create a massive regulatory and economic obligation for both public water systems 
and their ratepayers. Adding these distribution system obligations is especially burdensome on 
top of the PFAS-related treatment obligations anticipated with EPA’s pending MCLs. Lead Service 
Line (LSL) removal is particularly challenging given the need for significant public outreach and 
interaction in relation to private laterals. US EPA estimates that there are around 9.2 million LSLs 
in the United States, which the AWWA estimates could cost over $90 billion to replace. Below we 
explain why we believe that the inventory obligation and removal of any LSLs that are found may 
be a major challenge both administratively and financially and will lead to significant conflict 
between EPA, the States, and water utilities as they struggle to define the universe of LSLs and 
complete the mandated replacements. 

SCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 2  
 
 
2 
 
I. 
Achieving 100% Lead Pipe Replacement Within 10 Years is Both Financially and 
Practically Impossible.  A Phased-In Deadline Based Upon System Lead Levels is 
Both Necessary and Appropriate 
 
The 10-Year Timeline 
 
The proposed LCRI would require water utilities to complete 100% lead service line replacement 
(LSLR) within 10 years. 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84882 (Dec. 6, 2023).  While there are alternative 
timelines for (1) systems with a high proportion of lead and GRR service lines in their distribution 
system relative to their total number of households served and (2) systems that would otherwise 
be required to replace greater than 10,000 service lines per year under the proposed 10-year 
replacement requirement, Id. at 84913, the ten-year timeframe is woefully inadequate and does 
not consider availability of material and human resources nationwide nor the complexity and 
legality of using water utilities to force work on private property.     
 
Anytime we talk in terms of “all” in relation to 50,000 water systems, spread across the country, 
we should pause for a reality check.  We should especially pause when a significant number of 
the LSLs to be replaced have not even been identified.  We should further pause when faced with 
a potential price tag of upwards of $100 billion dollars. 
 
EPA estimates that there are more than 50,000 water systems nationwide.  It is simply impractical 
for such a large number of systems to make significant distribution system changes in a ten-year 
period.  This is especially the case given the (1) fact that many/most of the LSLs have not been 
identified, (2) cost of such replacements, (3) need for public outreach around utility-owned LSL 
replacement, and (4) need for outreach and coordination with homeowners across the country 
regarding replacement of their customer-owned LSLs.  Such an historic and unprecedented effort 
would come during the worst period in modern history for trying to plan, finance, bid, and deliver 
projects.  There is simply not enough engineering or construction talent available to do the work 
- even if we could fund it. 
 
Many of our water systems are struggling right now with basic water availability, especially during 
the winter months.  Cold weather each of the last several winters has taken a major toll on water 
systems leading to numerous water main breaks and boil water advisories.  These have been 
especially prevalent across the southern United States and into the mid-Atlantic.  For example, 
much of the District of Columbia had a boil water notice in January of 2024 due to cold weather-
related line breaks. 
 
US EPA has for several decades made a priority of imposing incredibly expensive (and in many 
ways, counter-productive) sewer system improvement mandates on local governments 
nationwide.  As a result of this sewer-first enforcement approach, local resources have been 
forced to the sewer side, often at the expense of water utilities’ ability to raise revenue.  Those 
deferred investments are now coming home to roost for water systems.  On top of general system 
needs, thousands of water systems face historically expensive PFAS-related capital upgrades 
and incredible annual operation and maintenance costs for those facilities.  Adding a LSL 
replacement obligation over the next 10 years on top of these historic financial challenges is a 
bridge too far financially and from a project delivery perspective. 
 
A one-size-fits-all LSL removal period will have water systems with low lead levels vying for the 
same funding and engineering/contracting resources as water systems with much higher lead 
levels.  This makes no sense whatsoever. 

SCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 3  
 
 
3 
 
 
A more logical approach to LSL replacement is for USEPA to adopt a phased approach where 
utilities with higher P90 lead levels have earlier deadlines to replace their LSLs while utilities with 
lower P90 numbers defer their replacements.  Such an approach will allow EPA, the States, and 
utilities to prioritize available federal and State grant/loan resources as well as engineering and 
construction resources to water systems with higher lead levels.    
 
We specifically recommend that the final rule authorize the states to establish phased-in deadlines 
for their water systems.  Any water system above the 10 ppb lead action level must remove their 
LSLs within 10 years of the effective date of the rule.  Utilities with P90 values below the 10 ppt 
would be prioritized based upon their levels for LSL removal, generally not to exceed a 20-year 
compliance period.   We believe that 20 years is a more realistic (albeit, still very challenging) 
compliance period.  Significantly, such an implementation period will allow water utilities to 
coordinate LSL removal with other system upgrades both getting and giving economies of scale 
to water system projects.  This will reduce the financial burden and system planning disruption 
that will otherwise result from a crude, 10-year LSL removal deadline. 
 
This phased approach, coupled with a one-third reduction in the lead action level, will ensure 
additional protection going forward for all Americans who receive public drinking water, from day 
one of the Rule’s effective date. 
 
II. 
Lead Service Line Replacement Must Only Include Public Lead Service Lines. 
 
Lead Service Line Replacement Must Consider Complexities and Legalities of Private Property 
Ownership. EPA lacks the authority to require public water utilities to replace privately-owned 
water infrastructure located on private property.  There are significant legal questions about 
whether public entities can even spend public funds for this private purpose.   
 
EPA needs to address the legality of requiring public water systems to replace private lead service 
lines before imposing such a requirement in the LCRI. 
 
Rather than illegally seeking to force public water systems to make improvements to indoor 
plumbing, EPA should give water utilities a benefit for each full LSL replacement that is performed.  
For example, a utility could be given more time to complete LSL removals (within our suggested 
20 year from the rule effective date compliance period) if they meet certain private side LSL 
removal goals (such as 30 or 40 percent associated with public LSL removal). 
 
We also question whether EPA’s assumed cost to implement the proposed rule has included 
private side LSL replacement costs.  If “yes,” we would like to know what EPA estimates those 
private costs to be and the basis for those estimates.   
 
Revise the Definition of “Under the Control of the Water System” to Exclude Customer-Owned 
LSLs. 
 
Relatedly, we disagree with the proposed LCRI rule requirement that full LSL replacement is 
required when lines are “under the control” of the water system. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84882. The term 
“under the control” of the water system is defined as wherever a water system has adequate 
access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full-service line replacement or 
replacement of the lead connector. Id. at 84920.  

SCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 4  
 
 
4 
 
This definition is impermissibly overbroad.  The definition must clarify that water utilities are not 
obligated to replace customer-owned LSLs as EPA cannot legally require public utilities to make 
changes to private property (including modifications to landscaping, driveways, etc. that may be 
required during replacement) on infrastructure it does not own. The key aspect should be 
ownership. The present proposed incentives are written for a complete replacement (with 
customer agreement) so that water systems do not get credit for LSL replacement if it doesn’t 
include the customer’s side. We believe this is an illegal provision and although we support full 
replacements, our members cannot be required to go on private property and replace indoor 
plumbing. Those private side replacements should instead be driven by federal funding efforts 
and partial replacements should be given the credit they are due, considering they take great 
effort and expense to identify and accomplish. Instead, and as noted above, water utilities should 
be given a benefit if they achieve a certain goal for customer-owned LSL replacement as part of 
LSL replacement of publicly-owned water distribution lines. 
 
Lining and Coating Service Lines Should Qualify for Extended Removal Deadlines 
 
As noted above, removing “all” LSLs in the country in ten years is a shocking financial and 
practical proposition.  Rather than requiring removal, we believe EPA should allow a range of 
effective lead reduction approaches, such as lining or coating technologies to count equally as 
LSL replacements.  At a minimum, lined or coated service lines should qualify for deferred removal 
schedules.  
 
Lined or coated service lines immediately control lead from entering drinking water. EPA’s 
inventory and full service line replacement requirements in the LCRI will impose substantial costs 
on water systems that must simultaneously investigate unknown lead status service lines and 
connectors, finance capital projects associated with replacing known or discovered lead and GRR 
service lines and lead connectors and assemble the resources and personnel to replace all the 
service lines requiring replacement. 
 
Granting water systems an additional period to complete the replacements of coated or lined 
service lines, e.g. for the service life of the coating or lining product, will lower the personnel and 
financial burdens of the LCRI on water systems while immediately reducing lead from drinking 
water as water systems will dedicate resources to those services lines most likely posing a risk of 
lead exposure. 
 
III. 
Galvanized Replacement Service Lines. 
 
Definition of “Galvanized Requiring Replacements” 
 
Under the proposed LCRI, galvanized service lines that have ever been downstream of LSL 
require replacement (GRR). 88 Fed. Reg. at 84882. The EPA defines galvanized requiring 
replacement service lines as a “galvanized service line that currently is or ever was downstream 
of a lead service line or is currently downstream in the direction of flow of a lead status unknown 
service line.” Id. 85054 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.2). If the water system cannot demonstrate the 
galvanized service line was never downstream of a lead line, the line is a galvanized requiring 
replacement service line. Id. 
 

SCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 5  
 
 
5 
 
The EPA’s proposed definition of GRRs is unreasonable and counterproductive.  The definition 
will likely result in water systems having to replace all galvanized service lines within the same 
10-year period they must replace LSLs.  We think the presumption that a galvanized line requires 
replacement is too strong.  Rather than requiring the water system to know that there was never 
a LSL above the galvanized line, a water utility should be able to conclude, based upon available 
information, that there is no information that there was ever a LSL upstream of the galvanized 
line.  In those cases, the water system should be able to prioritize the lining/coating/removal of 
galvanized  lines over a longer compliance period – say 20 years.  Again, the longer period is 
absolutely critical if water systems are to see economies of scale with other water distribution 
system work in conjunction with LSL and galvanized line removal.  This is especially the case for 
water utilities with P90 numbers that are well below the proposed 10 ppb action level.  We 
continue to believe that the states should be given the authority to prioritize LSL (and GRR) 
removal. 
 
The Lead Connector Threshold Should be 36 Inches and Unknown Connectors Assumed to Be 
36 Inches or Smaller 
 
We disagree that lead connectors greater than two feet in length should be considered service 
lines. See 88 id. at 84919, 85083. Connectors greater than 24 inches have been sold to utilities 
and the EPA does not present evidence suggesting significantly higher lead concentrations 
resulting from a lead connector that is 36 inches as opposed to 24 inches in length. If EPA is 
going to impose an arbitrary connector length, it should be at least 36 inches.  Moreover, there 
should be a presumption that connectors of unknown size and composition are less than three 
feet in length. 
 
IV. 
Locating Legacy Lead Pipes Remains a Monumental Task for Utilities. 
 
It might be one thing for EPA to impose a 10-year LSL removal requirement if we already 
understood how many LSLs there were and where they are located.  That would allow us to better 
estimate the cost of removal and time needed.  Instead, EPA is shooting blind in that they don’t 
even have the benefit of the existing LSL inventories that won’t come due until October 16, 2024.  
Almost all of those inventories will be derived using predictive tools with only a small percentage 
of LSLs actually having been ground-truthed. 
 
The fact remains that it is a spring for most water systems to meet October 16, 2024 initial 
inventory deadline.  We suspect that hundreds, if not thousands of water systems will miss the 
deadline.  It will take many years following the development of the initial deadlines to ground truth 
where LSLs actually are in each water system.   
 
Accordingly, we request that EPA clarify what, if any, inventory update requirements are 
contemplated between the initial inventory under the LCRI and baseline inventories in the 
proposed LCRI. We suggest the EPA suspend inventory updates between the two deadlines to 
allow water systems an opportunity to develop a complete and accurate baseline inventory in light 
of the substantial difficulty most water systems will have categorizing the material composition 
and location of their service lines and connectors. Alternatively, the EPA should consider 
eliminating the initial inventory requirement and allow water systems to dedicate all of their 
resources into developing complete and accurate baseline inventories available to the public by 
2027. 
 
Baseline Inventory Requirements 

SCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 6  
 
 
6 
 
 
We request the EPA to reconsider requiring water systems to investigate connector locations and 
composition in its baseline inventory. The proposed rule would require water systems to remove 
lead connectors upon discovery. 88 Fed. Reg. at 85066 (Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(e)). The 
EPA’s justification for not requiring water systems to find and replace all lead connectors as part 
of the full-service line replacement requirement is that “regular progress towards lead connector 
replacement is made in coordination with other activities, such as planned infrastructure work, 
while resources are prioritized for replacement of all LSLs and GRR service lines as quickly as 
feasible.” Id. at 84919.  
 
EPA noted that most lead connectors will be replaced under the proposed rule because “all lead 
connectors that are attached to a lead or GRR service line would be replaced by the end of the 
mandatory service line replacement program.” Id. In addition, EPA “also expects that many lead 
connectors may be connected to aging water mains and likely to undergo replacement with 
routine main replacement activities in coming years,” especially because EPA estimates that any 
given lead connector “is expected to be a minimum of 41 years old by the LCRI compliance date 
in 2027” and the “average service life of cast iron, ductile iron, and asbestos-cement pipe is 40 
years.” Id. EPA thus acknowledged that water systems will encounter and replace the vast majority 
of lead connectors during routine maintenance as a result of aging infrastructure or as a result of 
its mandatory service line replacement requirements. 
 
At the same time, EPA acknowledges that short lead connectors pose a lower lead exposure risk 
than LSL and GRR service lines that are significantly longer. Id. at 84919 (“EPA expects that 
galvanized lines downstream of lead connectors may contribute less lead into drinking water than 
those that were downstream of much longer LSLs”). EPA therefore prioritized service line 
replacement. Because EPA accepts that its requirement for water systems to replace lead 
connectors upon discovery will address the vast majority of lead connectors in a water system 
and acknowledges that lead connectors pose less of a health risk than lead service lines, we 
request EPA to reconsider its decision to include connectors in the baseline inventory. 
 
Removing the investigation of connectors from the baseline inventory removes expensive and 
laborious investigations into the location and composition of connectors when those resources 
are best spent identifying, locating, and removing lead and GRR service lines. Water systems 
reporting the composition and location of encountered connectors and the number of replaced 
lead connectors will still provide valuable information to the water system and the public about 
the location and composition of connectors in a water system and the probability that lead 
connectors are present. 
 
Validation Pool Requirements 
 
The proposed regulation instructs water systems to develop a “validation pool” consisting of all 
lines categorized as non-lead minus the non-lead lines that already replaced LSL or GRR lines, 
non-lead lines already visually inspected at two points along the line, or non-lead lines with 
documentation demonstrating their composition. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84935, 85063 (proposed 40 
C.F.R. § 141.84(b)(5)). The rule would require water systems to randomly and visually inspect as 
many service lines in the validation pool as necessary to ensure a “95% confidence level” that the 

SCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 7  
 
 
7 
 
observed proportion of non-lead lines validated is representative of the larger validation pool 
within ten years of the rule’s publication and seven years of submitting baseline inventories. Id.; 
Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, EPA 815-
R-23-003 at 24-25 (Nov. 2023). 
 
The timing of this LSL/GRR inventory requirement reinforces the impracticality of the ten-year 
LSL/GRR removal requirement. 
 
EPA is currently calculating the number of visual inspections of lines necessary to ensure that 
lines categorized as non-lead are in fact non-lead by assuming a standard normal distribution and 
an “expected sample proportion” of 0.5. EPA assumed the expected sample proportion “to be 50 
percent, meaning that 50 percent of the non-lead service lines investigated are expected to be 
confirmed as non-lead.” Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements, EPA 815-R-23-003 at 25 (Nov. 2023). EPA acknowledged “this proportion will most 
likely be much higher since most non-lead lines will end up being confirmed as nonlead.” Id. EPA 
nonetheless maintained the proportion at 0.5 because, “an assumption of 0.50 provides the most 
conservative (or largest) sample size…meaning that any system validating this number of lines 
will be guaranteed to have met or exceeded the minimum number for statistical significance 
regardless of the true sample proportion.” Id. 
 
We question why EPA does not simply stick with the 95% confidence and allow each water utility’s 
consultant to develop a testing program that will achieve that level of confidence for the utility’s 
list.  Why does EPA pick a very aggressive 95th percent confidence level and then structure the 
rule to force an even higher level of confidence? 
 
The method for determining the number of visual inspections necessary is also not particularly 
well explained. At a minimum, EPA should clarify its validation calculations, e.g. what data it used, 
if any, to determine the expected sample proportion, what the relevant comparison EPA is making 
between the validated lines and the validation pool and what that significance of that comparison 
is, and where EPA derived its formulas for determining the appropriate sample size and provide 
citations. 
 
EPA should also assume in its sample proportion that water systems will correctly assess line 
status more than 50% of the time given its concurrent requirements to investigate lead status 
unknown lines. As EPA has explained the sample proportion, EPA is essentially assuming water 
systems will be no better at determining service line composition than flipping a coin. In light of 
the other significant investigation costs imposed by the rule, EPA should reconsider this 
assumption because it should significantly lower the number of validations water systems must 
make.  
 
We support EPA’s decision to exclude service lines which water systems have confirmed as non-
lead through records investigations from the validation pool. Id. at 84935, 85063.  
 
We also request the EPA to consider delaying the date the inventory validation must be submitted 
to better align with the categorization of lead status unknown service lines. Water systems must 
identify the material of all lead status unknown service lines within ten years from the compliance 

SCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 8  
 
 
8 
 
date. Id. at 85063. Conversely, the validation study must be submitted no later than ten years 
from the rule’s publication date or seven years from the compliance date. Id. at 85063. If water 
systems submit inventory validations before all unknown lines are categorized, then the validation 
pool will not include some lines categorized as “non-lead.” Allowing the validation to occur at least 
after all lead status unknown lines have been categorized will create a validation pool 
representative of all of the non-lead categorized service lines and provide water systems three 
more years to validate their inventories. 
 
Public Disclosure of LSL Addresses In Service Line Inventory 
 
The LCRI, like the LCRR, continues to require that a water system’s annual inventory updates be 
publicly accessible. Although the LCRR includes location identifiers (street, intersection, 
landmark, etc.) served by each LSL, the LCRI states utilities must include a street address with 
each service line and connector. Id. at 84936. We continue to disagree with the need to publicly 
publish a list of homes served by LSLs. Each home will get an annual reminder of this fact. Any 
home that tests for lead will receive its results – there is no need or clear authority for the EPA to 
mandate that this specific information must be made publicly available.  We especially think it is 
irresponsible to include unknown LSL in these lists. 
 
V. 
Lowering the Lead Action Level will be significant in many states. 
 
EPA is proposing to lower the lead action level from 15 µg/L to 10 µg/L. 88 Fed. Reg. 84880 while 
eliminating the lead trigger level that was introduced under the 2021 LCRR. If the AL is exceeded, 
the system must inform the public (Tier 1 public notification within 24 hrs of learning of 
exceedance) and reduce lead exposure while concurrently working to replace all lead pipes (for 
example, installing/adjusting corrosion control treatment). Id. 
 
Lowering the Action Level from 15 ug/L to 10 ug/L will be a big deal in some states with some 
states asserting that the number of systems exceeding the new action level could double.  This 
is likely to be the case for a number of smaller systems.   
 
We take no position on the reduction in the action level.  However, we do believe that P90 
numbers should be a basis for phasing in LSL/GRR removal requirements and that the states are 
in the best position to prioritize LSL/GRR removal.  States are also in the best position to work 
with water systems to mitigate lead levels pending LSL removal.   
 
VI. 
We Disagree With the Requirement to Make Point-of-Use Filters/Pitchers Available 
to All Households After Three Action Level Exceedances.    
 
Under the LCRI, water systems with three lead action level exceedances would be required to 
conduct additional outreach to consumers and make pitcher filters or point-of-use devices certified 
to reduce lead available to all consumers. See id. at 84954.  
 
Providing such filters/pitchers will be overkill in that it will scare many residents not served by 
LSL/GRRs into thinking their tap water is not safe.  That loss of confidence can be difficult, if not 
impossible, to overcome to the long-term detriment of the residents and the utility.   
 

SCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 9  
 
 
9 
 
Moreover, distributing filters/pitchers will be a massive administrative and financial task.  The 
filters/pitchers would have to be provided to each residential and non-residential location served 
by the public water supply.   
We are also very concerned that residents would not properly replace the filters and could end up 
concentrating lead and copper beyond what would otherwise be present in their drinking water. 
 
VII. 
Utilities Must Be Allowed to Invalidate a Homeowner Sample That Does not Follow 
Proper Collection Procedures. 
 
Under the proposed rule, a water utility could not invalidate a homeowner’s sample even if the 
sample was not taken in accordance with LCRI requirements.  This is unacceptable.  All data 
must meet applicable QA/QC/Sampling requirements.  At a minimum, the rule should give the 
water utility the discretion to use a non-conforming sample but should not mandate the use of 
such samples. 
 
VIII. 
Water Systems Must Be Able to Select Homes From Lower Tiers Where Not Enough 
Tier 1 Homeowners Are Willing to Participate. 
 
The LCRI must clarify that water systems which, despite best, good faith efforts, cannot attract 
enough Tier 1 homeowners to participate in sampling, can use lower tier homes. 
 
Otherwise, the water system will be in non-compliance due to causes (lack of homeowner 
willingness to participate) which are beyond its control. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Our member utilities work tirelessly to provide high quality finished drinking water for our 
customers in an affordable and cost-effective manner.  We appreciate EPA’s consideration of our 
concerns about the practicality and affordability of the requirements we object to above.  We also 
appreciate EPA’s consideration of our suggested improvements to the proposed rule.  In 
particular, we strongly believe that a final rule needs to provide additional time for LSL/GRR 
removal and that a state-directed phased approach over twenty years from the rule’s effective 
date, is warranted. 
 
Sincerely, 
       
 
F. Paul Calamita  
General Counsel 
  
  
C: SCWQA Members

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0824 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
A Community of Pride                 A County of Vision                Endless Opportunities 
 
P.O. Box 960  2140 William Few Parkway  Grovetown, GA 30813  Phone: 706‐863‐6928  Fax: 706‐868‐3473 
www.columbiacountyga.gov 
 
February 5, 2024 
Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center; Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
RE: Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
EPA Office of Groundwater and Drinking Water Staff: 
Columbia County Water Utility (CCWU) appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the Lead 
and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). CCWU is located in Columbia County, Georgia, and is considered 
a large system, serving a population of roughly 150,000. While the Utility agrees that lead in drinking 
water is a major health issue in our country, we do have some concerns with certain proposed 
requirements. 
Our primary concern centers around the requirement for water utilities to replace lead service lines 
(LSLs) on private property. Even with a customer’s permission, water utility employees should not be on 
private property. Our employees are licensed Distribution System Operators; not licensed contractors 
nor plumbers. We realize these services could be contracted out to the appropriate parties, but the 
liability for future issues with the customer’s line will remain with the Utility. Also, working to replace all 
of the LSLs and galvanized lines requiring replacement (GRRs) at the same time across the country will 
put an undue burden on supply chains. EPA states in the proposed Rule that it believes supply chain 
issues will be resolved by the time the Rule is in effect; we respectfully disagree. The requisite materials 
will be in higher demand, potentially creating additional shortages and increasing costs. Plumbers 
installing these lines will likely raise their rates as well.  
Our second concern is funding the LSLs and GRRs. In the Economic Analysis of the Lead and Copper Rule 
Revisions (LCRR), EPA estimates the average cost of service line replacement will be $4,700 For the 
estimated 10 million lines that need replacement. We believe the estimate of 10 million may be too low. 
If prices for supplies rise due to shortages, plumbers raise their rates due to demand for work, and the 
estimate of 10 million lines is low, the currently estimated nationwide cost to replace lines of $47 billion 
dollars may fall woefully short. At present the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law has provisions for $15 billion 

 
A Community of Pride                 A County of Vision                Endless Opportunities 
 
P.O. Box 960  2140 William Few Parkway  Grovetown, GA 30813  Phone: 706‐863‐6928  Fax: 706‐868‐3473 
www.columbiacountyga.gov 
for funding. That is not adequate to cover the EPA’s projected costs and will be less adequate if the cost 
estimate is low. 
The LCRI states: “Consistent with the lack of authority to determine how water systems charge for 
services, EPA proposes to remove from the LCRI any statements from the LCR and LCRR that address 
how a water system should or should not cover the cost of replacing services lines under the control of 
the system as well as statements on whether a water system is or is not responsible for the cost of full 
service line replacement. Instead, the proposed LCRI remains neutral on this matter of State and local 
law.” CCWU supports this position. Requiring water utilities to fund the LSLs and GRRs through regular 
water rates puts an unfair burden on customers that do not have LSLs. Customers living in houses that 
do not have LSLs should not be required to pay the replacement costs for those who do. An equitable 
solution is to share the cost of LSL replacement ‐ the utility pays for the cost of its portion and the 
customer pays for the cost to replace their portion of the line.  CCWU realizes there will be low income 
households unable to bear that burden. If the Federal government wants to have fund to assist low 
income individuals with the cost of line replacement, that funding should be designed so that individuals 
are applying directly to the federal government (or state government if the funds are dispersed to the 
states) for those funds rather than burdening the water utility with administering those federal funds. 
In the LSRI, EPA is also proposing to count full service line replacements where a non‐lead service line is 
installed for use and the lead or GRR service line is disconnected from the water main or other service 
line. CCWU supports this proposal; it is better than requiring systems to dig up and remove the old lines. 
EPA is requesting comment as to whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent should 
be more than four times (e.g., five, six, or seven times). CCWU believes four times with at least two 
different communication methods is adequate. 
Finally, any requirement by the EPA to replace LSLs and GRRs, and especially those LSLs and GRRs that 
are not owned by local governments such as Columbia County, violates the 10th Amendment of the 
United States Constitution. The proposed LCRI’s only response to these federalism concerns is to cite to 
the EPA’s previous requests for comments from multiple entities. This does not address the issue that 
the requirement exceeds the powers expressly given to the federal government. (Printz v. United States, 
521 U.S. 898 (1997)). 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the proposed LCRI. 
Sincerely, 
 
Margaret Doss 
Compliance Manager 
Columbia County Water Utility

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0913 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
The Honorable Michael Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Comments submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal: 
https://www.regulations.gov 
 
Re: NACWA’s Comments on EPA’s National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) (Docket ID: EPA-
HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
The National Association of Clean Water Agencies (NACWA) appreciates 
the opportunity to provide comments on the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency’s (EPA) proposed rulemaking to update and improve its National 
Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper published in the 
Federal Register.1 
NACWA represents the interests of 350 public clean water utilities across 
the country that everyday provide the essential services of managing 
billions of gallons of wastewater to ensure the continued protection of 
public health and the environment. Our members strongly support 
appropriate public health protections from lead exposure in drinking water 
supplies, and the proposed LCRI makes significant progress to eradicate 
lead in this regard.  
NACWA supports the comments submitted by our sister organizations, the 
American Water Works Association (AWWA) and the Association of 
Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA), whose members will be directly 
impacted by this proposed rulemaking. NACWA is submitting these 
comments to specifically provide input on how public clean water agencies 
may be impacted by the proposal. 
The proposed LCRI calls for replacement of all lead and service lines (LSL) 
within a decade and a very low lead action level of 10 parts per billion – 
which will require significant investment for public water utilities, well 
 
1 88 Fed. Reg. 84878 (December 6, 2023). 

NACWA Comments on EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
Page 2 of 5 
exceeding the historic federal investments provided in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL). NACWA 
has consistently urged a renewed federal commitment to greater infrastructure funding in rebuilding 
the nation’s aging infrastructure.  
While the BIL’s $15 billion allocation towards LSL replacement is helpful, it is a drop in the bucket 
compared to the total costs that will be borne by public water systems and ultimately passed along to 
individual ratepayers themselves to entirely replace all lead service lines, especially those that go 
beyond the utility main. This is not an argument against addressing lead but is a call to action to fully 
recognize the financial burden that will be placed on individual customers to meet these federal 
objectives, and a plea for greater federal investment as well as flexibility, where appropriate and 
backed by science, to help mitigate water rate increases. These are affordability challenges that 
customers will face on top of those already caused due to increased rates for needed clean water 
investments.  
How the LCRI Will Impact the Provision of Clean Water Services  
While this proposed rulemaking is poised to directly impact public water systems, there will be indirect 
impacts to downstream wastewater utilities and water quality. As NACWA noted during the previous 
Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, public water systems have always had flexibilities under the Safe 
Drinking Water Act in implementing corrosion control technologies (CCT) (e.g., alkalinity and pH 
adjustments, calcium hardness adjustments, and phosphate/silicate-based corrosion inhibitors) that 
reflected local water chemistry and site-specific needs within a given service area and watershed.  
In contrast, public water systems under this new proposal face a “one-sized-fits-all” orthophosphate 
dosing requirement that will add more phosphorus to the system and therefore require downstream 
public wastewater utilities to remove it before discharging to surface waters. Even if a public water 
system achieves complete LSL replacement, the current LCRI proposal leaves public water systems 
with no corrosion control option other than to continue orthophosphate dosing - essentially requiring 
phosphorus additions into the system in perpetuity. 
NACWA continues to recommend EPA not adopt a “one-size fits all” approach to mitigating lead by 
mandating orthophosphate as the preferred optimal CCT approach but rather continue to support the 
inherent flexibilities granted under the SDWA for drinking water utilities to make responsible, scientific 
decisions for their own facility’s CCT techniques. Or in the alternative, if a public water system 
achieves complete LSL replacement, there should be an “off-ramp” to continued orthophosphate 
dosing to a more flexible alternative. These recommendations would allow for locally appropriate 
protections and minimize excess phosphorus loading to water systems.  
Many surface waters throughout the United States face eutrophication from a variety of point and 
non-point sources. Federal and states regulatory agencies charged with carrying out the mission and 
goals of the Clean Water Act have responded to the enhanced nutrification of surface water by setting 
often-stringent numeric nutrient limits under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System 
(NPDES) for publicly owned clean water agencies.  

NACWA Comments on EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
Page 3 of 5 
These discharge limits require clean water agencies to significantly invest in treatment controls to 
reduce the amount of phosphorus and nitrogen discharged into surface waters. And, over the 50 years 
of the Clean Water Act (CWA), at a tremendous cost, clean water agencies have successfully 
mitigated millions of pounds of nutrients from entering surface waters and have greatly improved 
water quality for communities and the aquatic life alike that depend on clean and safe water.  
While many clean water agencies have installed nutrient removal technology to meet current water 
quality standards for phosphorus, the LCRI proposal will undoubtedly increase the quantity of 
phosphorus that downstream wastewater utilities will need to remove before discharging into surface 
waters. This will require more utilities to install nutrient controls and others to scale up their treatment 
technology. As the climate changes and water quality becomes more eutrophic in nature, it is 
inevitable that clean water utilities will face even more stringent nutrient limits to protect surface water 
quality.  
EPA Should Promote Regulatory Flexibility and Coordinate with States 
EPA estimates that anthropogenic sources deposit nearly 750 million pounds of phosphorus per year 
into surface waters, and at the high end the LCRI would contribute roughly 0.5% or 3.9 million pounds 
of the total phosphorus surface waters. EPA also asserts that the LCRI impact will be “small, relative to 
the total phosphorus load deposited annually from all other sources.”  
While EPA attempts to put the additional phosphorus loadings in perspective, it brushes over the 
simple fact that “more phosphorus in, is more phosphorus out.” In a one-water framework that is the 
result of the interconnectivity of our public water systems and wastewater treatment plants, often 
under dual ownership, there is one individual rate payer – the public. The national estimates also gloss 
over localized impacts under which certain communities will be significantly affected, based on local 
water quality conditions. And to look holistically at the impacts of the LCRI, EPA should also consider 
the increased energy demands and associated environmental impact and increased carbon footprint 
of adding, and then removing, phosphorus from our water systems. This approach may be the best 
solution in certain cases, but less so in others.   
NACWA continues to urge EPA to encourage state regulatory authorities to provide clean water 
utilities with regulatory flexibility―such as considering the development of a variance or conducting a 
use attainability analysis (UAA)―to account for increased phosphorus concentrations associated with 
the LCRI, especially where these tools are will enable clean water utilities to meet CWA permitting 
requirements. Downstream wastewater utilities, particularly those with stringent nutrient permit limits, 
will also need adequate time to assess their influent and make meaningful treatment adjustments for 
increased phosphorus concentrations coming into their systems.  
Further, EPA should help guide coordination between public water suppliers and downstream 
wastewater treatment plants when an upstream utility re-optimizes its CCT and begins adding 
orthophosphate as a treatment technique. As public water systems add orthophosphate 
concentrations to their treatment regimes, there is no requirement for upstream utilities to coordinate 
or relay their CCT techniques downstream. Knowing if, when, and how much phosphorus will be 

NACWA Comments on EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
Page 4 of 5 
added to the system and how it will impact wastewater influent will assist wastewater utilities in their 
efforts to prepare.  
Economic Analysis Misrepresents True Costs of Added Phosphorus Removal 
Given these downstream impacts of increased phosphorus loading, EPA’s economic analysis of the 
cost of phosphorus removal per pound is likely underestimated. 
As EPA notes in its proposed LCRI rulemaking, the number of POTWs with nutrient limits in NPDES 
permits is increasing over time. EPA acknowledges that 41% of the clean water utilities in the U.S. will 
likely face nutrient limits over the next 35 years. NACWA believes EPA’s growth rate estimation is 
conservative and there will likely be more utilities with nutrient limits.  
EPA derived unit costs associated with removal of $5.44 per pound of phosphorus incrementally 
added (88 Fed. Reg. 84990). NACWA believes it is impractical to standardize a single unit cost for 
removal of phosphorus because there are many variables and assumptions to consider. For example, 
some locations with more stringent permit limits have costs upwards of $13 per pound of phosphorus 
removed.  
EPA also estimates that the annual cost impacts of the LCRI to clean water utilities, at the high end, 
would be $12 million, a $5.9 million incremental increase over the baseline. NACWA believes that EPA’s 
Economic Analysis misrepresents the true costs on public clean water utilities in that it spreads the 
cost impacts over a 35-year period rather than when orthophosphate dosing begins within three years 
of the LCRI becoming final. In sum, the costs to clean water utilities will be greater in the near term, 
and much higher than the average would suggest for some utilities.  
In addition, the Economic Analysis assumes wastewater treatment plants have sufficient capacity 
already built in to manage increased loading and does not consider the added infrastructure capital 
costs that may be needed to expand capacity. In order to truly assess the cost of incremental 
phosphorus loading at upstream utilities, a life-cycle cost analysis would need to be conducted. 
Conclusion 
NACWA recognizes the critical need to address potential lead and copper contamination in drinking 
water and appreciates EPA’s efforts through the LCRI to provide needed clarity on public health 
protections from these constituents. 
However, many of NACWA’s members provide drinking water as well as clean water services and 
recognize that it is possible to provide public health protections through drinking water treatment 
without sacrificing downstream environmental and water quality.  
NACWA continues to recommend EPA not adopt a “one-size fits all” approach to mitigating lead by 
mandating orthophosphate as the preferred optimal CCT approach but rather continue to support the 
inherent flexibilities granted under the SDWA for drinking water utilities to make responsible, scientific 
decisions for their own facility’s CCT techniques. Or in the alternative, if a public water system 

NACWA Comments on EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
Page 5 of 5 
achieves complete LSL replacement, there should be an “off-ramp” to continued orthophosphate 
dosing to a more flexible alternative. In doing so, drinking water utilities can continue safeguarding 
public health while simultaneously ensuring protection of downstream water quality concerns.  
If you have any questions, please contact me by phone at 202/533-1839 or by email at 
eremmel@nacwa.org.  
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Emily Remmel 
Senior Director, Regulatory Affairs

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0733 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
GREAT LAKES WATER AUTHORITY COMMENTS ON U.S. EPA’S PROPOSED LEAD AND COPPER 
RULE IMPROVEMENTS REGULATION  
DOCKET ID NO. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
The Great Lakes Water Authority (“GLWA”) submits the following comments on U.S. 
EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (“LCRI”) regulation establishing 
requirements to replace all lead water supply service lines within ten years, with limited 
exceptions, announced in the proposed rule at 88 Fed. Reg. 84878 (Dec. 6, 2023). GLWA’s 
comments are submitted on its behalf and in support of its 85 member communities and the 
115 communities that receive GLWA drinking water.  
The communities served by GLWA drinking water represent approximately 39% of 
Michigan’s population. While a socially and economically diverse group, included amongst 
those communities are some of the State’s oldest and most economically challenged 
municipalities. Given the broad range of communities GLWA supports, GLWA appreciates the 
opportunity to submit its comments and hopes they receive serious consideration by EPA. 
GLWA supports EPA’s goal of completely removing lead service lines (“LSL(s)”) as quickly 
as possible. At the same time, GLWA believes that setting a 10-year timeframe for achieving 
that goal is not the optimal approach, may not be feasible for older, smaller, or economically 
disadvantaged communities, and omits adequate consideration of affordability, practicability, 
and sufficiency of optimized corrosion control treatment (“OCCT”) to mitigate exposures to lead 
in drinking water while LSL replacement work proceeds.   
EPA acknowledges that lead pipes are more likely found in older cities and homes built 
before 1986. EPA also recognizes that minority households and low-income households are 
more likely to live in housing built when LSLs were more commonly used. This is clearly the case 
in GLWA’s service area, and these households are already struggling to afford their water and 
sewer utility costs. Those utility costs are already being driven upward by multiple 
requirements for Combined Sewer Overflow (CSO) and Sanitary Sewer Overflow (SSO) control, 
PFAS mitigation, phosphorus control, and many other state and federal regulatory initiatives. 
GLWA has been providing optimized OCCT to its water supplies for 23 years and has 
collected years of testing data throughout its system that demonstrates the OCCT has been 
highly effective in addressing unacceptable exposures to lead in drinking water. For these 
minority and low-income communities, continued OCCT while LSL replacement proceeds 
achieves the goal of minimizing lead exposure while LSL replacement work proceeds at a pace 
based upon and aligned with community affordability criteria rather than on an artificial 10-
year time frame. 

2 
 
GLWA recognizes and supports EPA’s overall objective to ensure that systems are 
making “regular progress” toward LSL replacement. Under the approach proposed under the 
LCRI, “regular progress” would require, with limited exception, a system to meet both minimum 
annual replacement rates and a 10-year replacement completion deadline. While that approach 
may seem logical on the surface, it inadequately accounts for the innumerable variables that 
will directly and indirectly impact its implementation. Those variables include economic 
conditions, material availability and supply chain disruptions, financial affordability, and 
labor/workforce limitations, among others. 
GLWA suggests there may be another approach that would motivate LSL replacements 
while respecting the many variables that can impact LCRI implementation. Systems that can 
demonstrate they are effectively implementing OCCT could be required to allocate a specified 
percentage of their annual operations and maintenance (“O&M”) budget to LSL replacement 
operations. Throughout the public sector, annual budgets are established with careful 
consideration of rate impacts and affordability limitations. Allocation of a specific percentage of 
budget for continued OCCT and a specific percentage for LSL would provide needed flexibility to 
water systems to decide whether to add LSL replacement costs as additional O&M expenditures 
or shift funds from other O&M (and possibly capital) projects to LSL replacement operations. It 
would also smooth out abrupt variations in cost because annual budgeted expenditures would 
remain fixed. The required percentage of the O&M budget allocated to LSL replacement could 
vary based on variables such as overall rate affordability and demonstrated effectiveness of 
OCCT. GLWA believes that the rush to replace LSLs should be tempered by consideration of 
OCCT effectiveness and system and ratepayer financial constraints. 
GLWA also suggests that EPA should consider setting an interim lead action level of 
0.012 mg/L as the State of Michigan has. This would ensure that systems with higher lead levels 
act first while allowing other systems to plan for future LSL replacement work. 
GLWA supports EPA’s mission to advance environmental justice and public health. 
GLWA similarly supports individual utility efforts to remove their LSLs as quickly as possible and 
agrees that the complete removal of LSLs is a worthy goal. However, it must be recognized that 
achieving this goal will be a complicated process. GLWA appreciates the opportunity to 
comment and asks that EPA fully consider and address the challenges associated with LSL 
replacement.  
Respectfully submitted, 
William M. Wolfson 
William M. Wolfson 
Chief Administrative and Compliance Officer

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0853 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2271 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
rf'
FEB 0 7 2024.
BY:
January 31, 2024
Postmarked
JAN 3 C 2024
EPA Docket Center
RE: Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 Lead and Copper Rule Improvements
Dear Sir or Madame:
BY:
900 SW 16th Street, Suite 305, Renton, Washington 98057 ■ 206.246.1299 - 800.244.0124 ■ FAX: 206.246.1323 ■ staff@waswd.org ■ www.waswd.org
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
EPA Docket Center
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). 
The Washington Association of Sewer and Water Districts (WASWD) represents more than 180 
public water and sewer districts throughout the state, serving nearly 20% of our state’s 
population. WASWD members provide these cost-effective essential public services in the 
state’s largest population centers and in the smallest rural communities. Safe drinking water is 
a major concern to both our membership and the customers they serve. We support strong 
protections for drinking water from the source to the tap that are furthered with the LCRI. We do 
have some concerns, however, with the proposed LCRI.
Frequency of lead service line (LSL) inventories: Annual updates are impractical as they are 
required too frequently. Particularly in areas of the country where lead service lines were 
infrequently utilized, conducting LSL inventories at this frequency would take up valuable time 
and resources that could be used for other public health issues such as PFAS. For smaller 
utilities with few staff the frequency of the inventories is especially a real burden. A longer time 
frame for updating inventories is warranted for these reasons.
Timeframe for compliance: Optimized corrosion control treatment (OCCT) is working well in 
many jurisdictions where LSLs are present. These systems should have extended time frames 
for replacement of LSLs since they have already taken action and made capital investments to 
control lead and copper in their water systems. Health and safety is not at issue in these 
systems as it is in those with no OCCT, so allowing them to spread out the time and money 
needed to replace LSLs makes economic sense.
A , j 
^Systems conducting partial service line replacement must offer to replace the remaining
portion of the service line not under their control (within 45 days in emergencies)” 
lri.SOfne states, such as Washington, this is not legal. Public funds cannot be spent on private 
property. Public utilities are able to do work on private property and charge costs to the owner. 
For example, some utilities have done initial line installation and extended repayment over a 
number of years via utility billing. However, state law does not allow the utility to force the
owner to replace the line, or even to enter onto the property without the owner’s consent unless
\ Washington Association 
b! of Sewer & Water Districts
EDUCATE ■ ADVOCATE ■ COLLABORATE
4 W
* 
—■ Private service line obligations: In Exhibit 1 on page 84886 of the Register, it summarizes:
I

We appreciate the efforts of ERA in ensuring safe drinking water for all Americans.
Sincerely,
900 SW 16th Street, Suite 305, Renton, Washington 98057 - 206.246.1299 ■ 800.244.0124 ■ FAX: 206.246.1323 • staff@waswd.org ■ www.waswd.org
it is recorded on the original site plans, which it would not be with older development that is 
most likely to have LSLs. This poses a significant obstacle to compliance with this provision.
Education Requirements: Required public education and its timing need to be simplified and 
scalable for different sizes of utilities. These programs should be developed by a central 
agency, such as a state health authority, who is aware of the needs of local utilities. It is too 
much to expect small utilities to do this on their own when they have few staff.
Funding: Funding for inventories and replacements will always be an issue. The financial 
pressures for meeting these requirements at the same time as working to meet other regulatory 
requirements are high, particularly on smaller utilities. Without ongoing federal funding, 
customers will experience rising utility rates that will be unaffordable to some, and potentially 
jeopardizing secure housing in some communities.
Judi Gladstone 
Executive Director 
WASWD
Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
Page 2 of 2

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0800 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1376 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
January 31, 2024 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460  
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
Wisconsin Conservation Voters is a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization dedicated to 
engaging Wisconsinites to protect our environment. As members of Wisconsin 
Conservation Voters, we strongly support EPA's newest proposed improvements to the 
Lead and Copper Rule. These proposed improvements are an important opportunity to 
make good on the president's commitment to protecting children and families through a 
strong commitment to public health and environmental justice. 
 
Across Wisconsin, we are very worried about the serious, long-term health risks associated 
with lead contamination – and particularly how those risks can impact children. Based on 
2022 data from our Public Service Commission, Wisconsin still has at least 174,637 utility-
side service lines that contain lead or galvanized material, and 181,918 customer-side 
service lines that contain lead or galvanized material. In some Wisconsin communities, as 
many as 1 in 4 children under 6 years old are considered lead poisoned, based on blood 
lead levels that exceed 5 micrograms per deciliter. We know that no level of lead in 
drinking water is safe, and elevated blood lead levels in children are associated with 
hearing loss, lower IQs, developmental delays, behavioral changes, and emotional impacts 
like anxiety and depression. 
 
We appreciate that the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements include 100 percent 
replacement requirements for water utilities within 10 years of the rule's finalization. To 
further improve the rule, we urge you to require water utilities to cover the costs of fully 
removing both utility side, and customer-side lead lines. This will ensure that individuals 
who are already confronting the public health costs associated with lead poisoning do not 
need to cover replacement costs on their own. Unless all individuals are able to replace 
their customer-side lines, we will not be able to protect the entire community from lead 
contamination. 
 
We also appreciate that the EPA's Lead and Copper Rule Improvements include improved 
sampling, inventory, education, and notification requirements. We urge you to further build 

 
on these improvements by requiring public water systems to implement stronger testing 
and remediation plans for our schools and childcare facilities.  
 
Overall, we strongly support the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. We urge you to 
further strengthen and finalize them as expeditiously as possible. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Tracy Abler, Fond Du Lac 
Karen Ackroff, Eagle 
Sharon Adams, Milwaukee 
Diana Altstadt, Milwaukee 
Curt Andersen, Suamico 
William Andersen, West Allis 
Edna Anderson, Beloit 
Ray Anderson, Fitchburg 
Joan Arnold, Rudolph 
Mallory Arnold, Evansville 
Rachel Barko, Mcfarland 
Lynn Barrett, White Lake 
Neil Bartlett, Mount Horeb 
Deborah Bascom, Wauwatosa 
Leigh Begalske, Green Bay 
Ann Behrmann, Madison 
Mara Beldavs, Shorewood 
Jim Bennett, Mazomanie 
Karen Benson, Eau Claire 
Heather Berg, West Allis 
Michael Bernaski, Wauwatosa 
Jess Bernstein, Mount Horeb 
Charles Boardman, Madison 
Brian Boettcher, Madison 
Cynthia Boock, Mequon 
Deanna Branch, Milwaukee 
Nathan Brummel, De Pere 
Michelle Buerger, Middleton 
Peter Burress, Madison 
Jane Burress, Sister Bay 
Justin Burress, Sister Bay 
Chris Casper, Stevens Point 
Dawn Casper, Madison 
Roberta Champeau, Sister Bay 
Julie Christensen, Mukwonago 
Roxanne Ciatti, Milwaukee 
Molly Cooney, Madison 
Andrew Corbisier, Stevens Point 
Audrey Costerisan, Siren 
Madeline Crane, Milwaukee 
Kathleen Crittenden, Viroqua 
Dianne Dagelen, Wauwatosa 
John Davy, Chippewa Falls 
Paul Dearlove, Madison 
Bruce Deuchert, Green Bay 
Calvin Dexter, Wausau 
Cheryl Diehl, Hubertus 
Dick Dierks, Appleton 
Fred Dike, Madison 
Jeffrey Dix, Wausau 
Joseph Dorr, Cedarburg 
Gayle Doukas, Franklin 
Virginia Drath, Emerald 
Jedediah Durni, Viroqua 
Joyce Ellwanger, Milwaukee 
Jennifer Evans, Milwaukee 
Susan Fecarotta, Viola 
Don Ferber, Madison 
Elizabeth Fisher, Racine 
Cassandra Flagg, Milwaukee 
Heather Florian, Chippewa Falls 
Daniel Folkman, Milwaukee 
Pearl Foster, Milwaukee 
Pamela Fruth, Madison 
Donna Gasbarro, Appleton 
Ned Gatzke, Sparta 
Becky Geiser, Medford 
Terrence Gerlach, Waupaca 
Susan Gerstner, Jefferson 
Mark Giese, Mount Pleasant 
Norma Gilson, Milwaukee 
Patti Gmeiner, Niagara 
Guillermo Gomez, Green Bay 
Cheryl Goodman, Madison 
Jack Graber, Mequon 
Karen Graff, Kronenwetter 

 
Scott Graham, Union Grove 
Justice Grau, Milwaukee 
Matthew Gregersen, Saint Germain 
Benjamin Greuel, Milwaukee 
Dennis Grzezinski, Milwaukee 
Richard Guevara, Plover 
Mary Hahn, Spring Green 
Karen Etter Hale, Lake Mills 
Debbie Haman, Richland Center 
Carol Harder, Germantown 
Barry Hartup, Baraboo 
Lisa Heller, Melrose 
David Henning, Marshfield 
Carol Hernandez, Racine 
Susan Hersh, Milwaukee 
Eileen Hesseling, Milwaukee 
Mark Hinrichs, Madison 
Lisa Hoch, Superior 
Dean Hoegger, Sturgeon Bay 
Leah Holloway, Milwaukee 
Penny Howell, Green Lake 
Edward Hubbard, Madison 
David Huber, Eau Claire 
Seth Huebner, Green Bay 
Howard Hunt, Mount Pleasant 
Michael Iltis, Madison 
Darlene Jakusz, Amherst Jct 
Marcia Jesperson, Madison 
Ellen Jessen, Madison 
Keith Johnson, Muscoda 
Ann Johnson, Appleton 
Josette Jones, Milwaukee 
Janet Kaldhusdal, Oconomowoc 
Lance Kammerud, Blanchardville 
Christine Keim, Menomonee Falls 
Mary Kemnitz, Milwaukee 
Ashley Kerst, Madison 
Jeanette Knill, Green Bay 
Lynn Koob, Rice Lake 
Bruce Krawisz, Marshfield 
Michael Krueger, Appleton 
Barbara Landis, Kewaskum 
Howard Landsman, Madison 
Ellen Lang Roder, Milwaukee 
Richard Larson, Oconomowoc 
Audrey Lasse, Oconomowoc 
Noah Leary, Stevens Point 
Joan Lewis, Madison 
Bruce Lisiecki, Cascade 
Nancy Loeb, Lake Geneva 
Constance Lorig, De Pere 
Marianne Lubar, River Hills 
Catherine Lucas, Eau Claire 
Deborah Machak, Racine 
John Mahan, Iron River 
Vic Mandarich, East Troy 
Thomas Mandli, Peshtigo 
Chris Marquardt, Neenah 
Rebecca Martin, Fitchburg 
Donald McCann, Mequon 
Joan McCormick, Milwaukee 
Andrew Meindl, Wauwatosa 
Denise Mendoza, Belleville 
Diannia Merriett, Greendale 
Suzanne Metzel, Baileys Hbr 
Christine Mezera, Iola 
Lester Miller, Franklin 
Bernard Miszczak, Milwaukee 
Thomas Mittelstaedt, Washburn 
Paul Mongin, Green Bay 
Nancy Moore, Madison 
Samuel Morningstar, Shorewood 
Christine Morrissey, Appleton 
Elise Moser, Sauk City 
Edward Mrkvicka, Fort Atkinson 
Amy Mueller, Dousman 
Susan Murphy, Baileys Harbor 
Eric Murrock, Sturgeon Bay 
G N, Deforest 
Tom Nacey, Superior 
Janan Najeeb, Mequon 
Peter Nelson, Eau Claire 
Susan Nelson Venke, Marshfield 
Forrest Netzel, New Berlin 
Eric Norland, Madison 
Russell Novkov, Madison 
Teresa Nyholt, Madison 
Ellen Ochs, Menomonie 
Ruth O'Donnell, Waukesha 
Denise O'Halloran, Watertown 
Sam Orlich, Milwaukee 
Richard Ouren, Muscoda 

 
Leland Pan, Madison 
Marcia Parker, Hortonville 
Terry Pavletic, Greenfield 
Ernest Pearson, Baraboo 
Donald Pellett, Sauk City 
Patti Peplinski, Brookfield 
Catie Petralia, Milwaukee 
Karen Peugh, Milwaukee 
Richard Phillips, Waunakee 
Pat Pire, Milwaukee 
Regina Reich, Rhinelander 
Melinda Reiter-Schroepfer, Hudson 
Kyle Richmond, Madison 
David Rieckmann, Pardeeville 
Kelly Robe, Green Bay 
Eric Robson, Madison 
Gerald Roesch, Milwaukee 
Madolyn Rogers, Cross Plains 
Joy Rosenberry Chase, Madison 
Christopher Ross, Cottage Grove 
Stephanie Salgado Altamirano, Madison 
Nancy Schanke, Fremont 
Mark Schmid, Waupaca 
Roger Schmidt, Middleton 
Stephen Schmidt, Wausau 
Ian Schmitt-Ernst, Wauwatosa 
Kerry Schumann, Madison 
Tom Schuppe, Fond Du Lac 
Dave Searles, Brodhead 
Michael Seidman, Milwaukee 
Matthew Short, Menomonee Falls 
Mark Silverman, Milwaukee 
George Silverwood, Madison 
Diane Sixel, Kiel 
Susan Skubal, Madison 
Mary Smith, Eau Claire 
Erin Spoehr, Appleton 
David Statz, Baraboo 
Cécile Stelzer-Johnson, Wisconsin Rapids 
Christina Stemwell, Saint Francis 
Mary Strachota, Milwaukee 
Scott Strand, Turtle Lake 
James Tenorio, Menomonie 
Christina Thor, Green Bay 
Thomas Thrun, Oconomowoc 
Maryjo Travis, Milwaukee 
Frederick Trost, Sheboygan 
Angel Troyer, Oconomowoc 
Dara Unglaube, Ashland 
Nancy Vezner, Hudson 
John Voegeli, Madison 
Victoria Vollrath, Plymouth 
Karen Voss, Eau Claire 
Theodore Voth, Madison 
Virginia Waddick, Madison 
Daniel Waite, Cedarburg 
Kim Walmer Enders, Sun Prairie 
Barbara White, Madison 
Herman Whiterabbit, Madison 
Terry Wiggins, Milwaukee 
LeVar Wilson, Milwaukee 
Anne Winkle, Kenosha 
Karen Winter Norris, Augusta 
Bradley Wishard, Somerset 
Laurie Woltman, Malone 
Daryl Wood, La Crosse 
James Yourkovich, Mukwonago 
Patricia Zody, Beloit 
Ellen Zweibel, Madison

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0801 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy 
 
Comments to National Primary Drinking Water Regulations:  
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Service Line Inventories 
The state of Michigan (Michigan) supports the requirement to inventory lead service line 
(LSL) materials on both public and private property and the proposed requirement to 
inventory lead connectors.  Michigan also supports the annual inventory update 
requirement for supplies with lead, galvanized, lead connectors, or unknown service 
lines.  Michigan supports requirements for supplies to conduct service line material 
validation activities.  Knowledge of service line materials is essential to properly 
identifying sample sites, mitigating risk, conducting service line replacement, and 
educating consumers about lead exposure.   
 
Michigan urges consideration be given to the following:   
• The definition of an LSL currently excludes lines with lead connectors, if that is 
the only portion containing lead.  However, these components contribute to lead 
exposure.  The definition of an LSL should be revised to include these 
connectors.   
• The current definition of a service line does not address supplies without water 
mains (such as a single building with a line directly from the wellhouse to the 
building); therefore, it is unclear what the inventory or service line replacement 
requirements are in these circumstances. 
• Consider providing criteria for supplies to be “grandfathered” for service line 
validation if states have existing programs in place and/or the supply can 
demonstrate an equivalent exercise has been conducted. 
• Consider allowing supplies to exclude sites from validation requirements if 
adequate controls were in place at the time of installation (for example 
ordinances that excluded installation of lead service lines and connectors) or 
were installed after lead service lines were banned. 
 
Lead Service Line Replacement (LSLR) 
Michigan strongly supports the proposed requirement to expand full lead/galvanized 
service line replacement requirements to all water supplies, regardless of 90th percentile 
values.  The only way to eliminate the risk of lead exposure from these service lines is 
to remove them, and this proposed requirement directly addresses this issue.  Michigan 
supports the “ban” on partial LSLRs. 
 
 

Page 2 of 16 
Michigan urges consideration be given to the following:   
• The cost of removing the portion of the service line on private property should 
NOT be left to the property owner.  This is an environmental justice issue.  It 
leaves those unable to afford service line replacement, and their children, at 
continued risk of exposure.  Rental property owners may choose not to invest in 
LSLR, thereby putting renters at continued risk.  The only way to ensure all 
consumers are protected from exposure to LSLs is to fully fund replacement and 
not require individual homeowners to bear the cost of replacement on private 
property.  Michigan rules require the water supply to cover the cost of full LSLR 
from the main to the home. 
• Additional consideration should be given to replacement requirements resulting 
from customer-initiated service line replacements.  Requiring replacement of the 
supply-side service line within 45 days of a customer-initiated replacement could 
create environmental justice issues by allowing those with financial means to 
have their service line replaced before those who do not; delay prioritized or 
planned work (such as replacements at sites with high lead results or vulnerable 
populations); delay infrastructure projects, some of which could include service 
line replacements; and/or result in higher per-line costs leading to fewer 
replacements overall. 
 
Sampling Protocol 
EGLE strongly supports the proposed adoption of Michigan’s 1st  AND 5th liter sampling 
protocol at sites served by an LSL and using the highest result in the 90th percentile 
calculation.  Measuring water in contact with interior plumbing AND the service line 
better represents exposure risk than relying on the 1st or 5th liter alone.  Since adopting 
this sampling protocol in 2019, Michigan has identified action level exceedances (ALE) 
that would not have otherwise been found, leading to more water supplies taking action 
to reduce lead exposure. 
 
Michigan urges consideration be given to the following:   
• The 1st /5th liter sampling protocol should be extended to sites served by lead 
connectors or galvanized requiring replacement (currently identified as Tier 3 
sites under the proposed LCRI).  These scenarios represent lead exposure risk 
from within the service line (hence the requirements to remove these service 
lines); therefore, a 5th liter sample should be collected at these locations to better 
assess lead exposure risk. 
• Requiring a different number of sites be sampled for lead versus copper may 
cause confusion and result in monitoring violations.  This added complexity may 
not be worth the limited burden-reduction.  Additionally, how should supplies 
decide which sites are analyzed for lead and copper versus lead only?  Consider 
requiring lead and copper to be analyzed at all sites. 
 
 

Page 3 of 16 
90th Percentile Calculation 
Michigan strongly supports use of the highest result of 1st/5th liter sampling in the 
90th percentile calculation for sites served by LSLs  Michigan also supports the 
clarification regarding how to calculate the 90th percentile when both Tier 1/2 and lower-
tiered sites are needed to meet sampling requirements by permitting only the highest 
and minimum needed of the lower tier be included to avoid dilution.  Michigan supports 
proposed revisions to the invalidation criteria to include invalidation of samples that 
were not collected in accordance with required sampling methodologies. 
 
Michigan urges consideration be given to the following:   
• Only the highest lead and the highest copper result from each site should be 
used for calculating the 90th percentile.  While the rule is clear that only the 
highest of the paired 1st/5th sampling is used in the 90th percentile calculation, it 
does not address situations where a site is sampled multiple times.  Each site 
should have equal weight in the calculation, which is designed to assess the 
water supply as a whole.  A 90th percentile can be skewed and misleading if one 
site is sampled more than other sites and multiple results from that site are used 
in the calculation.   
• There are numerous conditions under which samples are collected (routine 
compliance, customer-requested, post service line replacement, site 
assessments, etc.).  Be exceptionally clear in the rules which samples should 
and should not be included in the 90th percentile calculation.  With so many 
sampling events, under varying conditions, for different purposes, water supplies 
and states will have difficulty determining and/or verifying which are appropriate 
to include in the calculation.   
 
Site Selection Criteria 
Michigan generally supports the tiering criteria as proposed in the LCRI, with the 
following comments. 
 
Michigan urges additional consideration be given to the following:   
• As noted throughout, Michigan believes service lines with lead connectors should 
be considered LSLs.  That said, it is appropriate for sites where the only lead 
component is a connector to be tiered lower than other LSLs.  Therefore, if the 
suggestion to include connectors in the service line definition are incorporated 
into the final LCRI, Tier 1 and 2 sites should be clarified to exclude LSL sites 
containing only lead connectors.    
• Consider ways to mitigate the difficultly for both supplies and states to manage 
sampling plans.  While it is desirable to identify sites and submit updated plans 
prior to each sampling round, supplies often encounter new information during 
sampling rounds (identify higher risk sites, find sites no longer meet tiering 
criteria, lack of customer cooperation, etc.).  Additionally, supplies and states are 
asked to consider results of sampling conducted at sites that may not be on the 

Page 4 of 16 
plan.  Given these challenges, it can be difficult to sample only in accordance 
with a pre-submitted plan.  It is also a resource challenge for states to verify that 
all samples were collected in accordance with plans, and the issues above make 
it more difficult.  
 
Lead and Copper Tap Sampling and Water Quality Parameter (WQP) Sampling 
 
Michigan urges additional consideration be given to the following:   
• Do not separate the sampling frequency or location for lead and copper.  This will 
result in more frequent monitoring violations.  Sampling requirements are 
complex, and this adds another opportunity for confusion and missed monitoring, 
while achieving minimal burden reduction.  Additionally, if sampling more sites for 
lead than copper, how should the supply determine which sites should be 
sampled for lead only? 
• Ongoing WQP monitoring should be required for all water supplies with corrosion 
control treatment.  Small systems should not be permitted to stop WQP sampling 
during periods where the supply is at or below the action levels.   
 
Consumer Notice, Public Notification, Public Education (PE), Public Outreach 
Michigan supports faster consumer notice to homes with lead levels above the action 
level; annual notification to residents served by a lead, galvanized, or unknown service 
line; and other measures designed to educate the public about the risk of lead and 
mitigations activities.  Michigan also supports the added requirement for copper results 
to be included in consumer notice requirements. 
 
Michigan urges additional consideration be given to the following:   
• The requirement to notify the public of a lead ALE within 24 hours, while an 
excellent goal, can be difficult to achieve.  Michigan has adopted a requirement 
to provide notice within three business days.  Three business days can be 
challenging, but achievable.  Significantly shorter periods may be logistically 
difficult to achieve in all cases.  
• The United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) should provide 
revised templates for outreach-related tasks, including improved language that 
can be read and understood more readily by consumers and available in 
additional languages (English, Spanish, Arabic).  Some language is complex, 
and some individuals may be unable to understand the documents, thereby 
leaving a portion of the population vulnerable.   
• The requirement to notify homeowners served by lead, galvanized, or unknown 
service lines should begin sooner.  Water supplies will have service line material 
information beginning with submittal of the October 2024 initial inventory and 
should not wait an additional three years to notify residents of their service line 
material. 
 

Page 5 of 16 
Corrosion Control Treatment 
Michigan supports the inclusion of re-optimization steps which provide a path for 
improving treatment at supplies with existing treatment in place.   
 
Michigan urges additional consideration be given to the following:   
• The alternative for supplies to replace LSL within five years in lieu of conducting 
treatment steps may be appropriate in cases where a lead ALE was due to 
5th liter sample results.  However, this option should not be permitted if results 
from 1st liter samples (premise plumbing) would have resulted in a lead ALE 
without inclusion of 5th liter results.  In these cases, the LSL was not the primary 
cause of the exceedance.  Additionally, it should be specified that this option is 
only be available for lead ALEs.   
• Corrosion control designation and re-optimization for consecutive systems can 
be challenging.  Please provide additional clarity regarding these situations, 
including the responsibilities of the seller and customer.  
• While robust pipe rig studies are desirable, it should be noted that these studies 
are relatively expensive, require a tremendous amount of technical support, and 
take several years to complete, resulting in continued exposure risk during the 
multi-year period of study and installation.   
 
Distribution system and site assessment 
Michigan supports follow-up sampling at sites testing over the lead action level and 
requiring a WQP sample be taken to assess water quality in the area. 
 
Michigan urges additional consideration be given to the following:   
• Unless the WQP sample collected near the site indicates a water quality concern 
and remains unresolved, the supply should not be required to permanently add 
the site to its routine WQP monitoring.  This will lead to an ever-
changing/expanding number of sampling sites and will be difficult to manage.   
• The provisions requiring assessment/re-assessment of corrosion control 
treatment present some concerns.  These steps imply potential corrosion control 
treatment decisions could be driven by results from one or two locations, which 
may not be appropriate for the supply as a whole.  Additionally, many supplies 
will not have corrosion control treatment and, therefore, no historical WQP data 
upon which to compare results.   
• Many states will receive hundreds of individuals results greater than the action 
level each year and the level of effort to approve hundreds of site-specific 
recommendations will require substantial resources.  Consider modifying 
required steps if follow-up sampling indicates WQPs are at expected levels, lead 
levels are below the action level, and no other concerns are present. 
 
 
 

Page 6 of 16 
School/daycare sampling 
Michigan supports lead mitigation in schools and daycare facilities.  However, 
Michigan’s experience with school sampling indicates a different approach would be 
more effective.  If the current approach is retained, Michigan supports provisions 
allowing waivers where state or local laws require that schools sample or require filter 
installation and maintenance. 
 
Michigan urges additional consideration be given to the following:   
• The proposed approach will be burdensome for supplies.  Michigan estimates 
there are nearly 9,000 licensed childcare facilities and 3,500 schools in the state.   
• Lead release is known to be unpredictable.  If schools have dozens or hundreds 
of taps, but only five are required to be sampled, the remaining taps may still 
present a lead exposure risk.  
• Sampling will result in “chasing” taps with high results, mitigating, moving to the 
next tap, mitigating, etc.   
 
School Sampling Alternative 
School testing in Michigan has shown that fixtures and adjoining brass 
appurtenances installed prior to 2014 introduce an elevated risk for leaching lead 
into water.  The way water is provided for consumptive purposes in schools 
needs to be rethought.  This is especially true since water usage patterns in 
schools is different than in homes or businesses.  Schools have many extended 
stagnation periods from being closed on weekends and holidays as well as 
prolonged breaks.  These excessive stagnation periods can cause a significant 
increase in lead levels until the water has been properly flushed.   Elementary 
schools are particularly vulnerable since the students are younger and more 
susceptible to the effects of lead.  In addition, there are often more points of 
distribution in elementary schools since there are often sinks with faucets and 
bubblers.   
 
Rather than sampling existing taps, a more wholistic approach would be to install 
certified lead reducing filters on consumptive taps.  These points of consumption 
should be limited, and all other points be restricted to non-consumptive purposes.  
The use of Hydration Stations (bottle filling stations with integrated lead reducing 
filters) allow students to fill water bottles which then could be consumed in the 
classroom.  With a reduced number of points of use, the school would have an 
easier time ensuring proper maintenance.  The increased water flow at the 
reduced points of consumption would also lead to improved water quality. 
 
This approach would be more effective in reducing lead exposure than a test-
and-see approach.  It would be cheaper in the long run as it immediately jumps 
to the inevitable end point of replacement.  The testing in schools across 
Michigan has been consistent in terms of identifying potential risks.  Testing 

Page 7 of 16 
Hydration Stations after installation to demonstrate they are effective is 
productive, while testing fixtures that are either currently failing or will inevitably 
fail is not a wise use of resources.   
 
Given the high number of schools, having supplies test them on a five-year 
rotational basis may be a significant burden.  This burden will be substantial both 
in terms of the number of samples each year and the necessary records 
maintenance to ensure a proper rotation each year.  There will also be issues 
with not testing all points of use in the schools since lead levels can vary 
significantly from fixture to fixture, even if the two fixtures are the same make, 
model and age.  The introduction of Hydration Stations or similar devices will 
restrict the number of points of consumption thus making monitoring much 
easier. 
 
Michigan recently passed legislation that requires schools and child care centers 
to install lead reducing filters at consumptive taps, post signage or render 
inoperable nonconsumptive taps, and sample filtered taps annually to 
demonstrate effectiveness. 
 
Additional Concerns 
• The USEPA should provide clarity on what constitutes a change in source or 
treatment for the purpose of evaluating corrosion control. 
• Additional clarity is needed regarding consecutive water systems.  What actions are 
expected of the customer supply if the seller makes changes to their source or 
treatment?  What actions are expected of the seller if a customer exceeds a trigger 
or action level?   
• Significant resource investment will be necessary for successful implementation of 
these very complex and impactful regulations.  The USEPA must commit to 
providing additional resources to regulating agencies in the form of funding for 
human resources, extensive guidance materials and training, significant data 
management upgrades, etc.   
• Data Management - The complexity of this rule will make implementation 
challenging for agencies and regulated entities.  The USEPA should provide robust 
data management tools before the rules take effect.  Successful and consistent 
implementation of these rules will require a functional data management system and 
final data entry instructions prior to implementation.   
• Federal Reporting - When developing data systems and federal reporting criteria, 
consider separating monitoring violations from reporting violations.  This provides 
more transparency and clarity for the public.  It is important to know whether a 
supply failed to monitor (and therefore water quality is unknown) or if the supply 
sampled as required but missed a reporting deadline. 

Page 8 of 16 
• Consider expanding funding available to water supplies to address the infrastructure 
investment necessary to meet these requirements, particularly LSLR on both public 
and private property. 
• See additional comments in the table below.  Some of the comments below have 
been addressed in this summary, while others have not. 
 
Citation 
Comment 
141.2 Definitions 
Connector 
A connector is a not a fixture or a joint, but a piece of pipe used to 
connect the service line to the water main and should be 
considered a portion of the service line.  It should be clarified in 
the definitions and throughout the rule that the presence of a lead 
connector makes a service line a "lead service line" regardless of 
the material in the remainder of the service line.   
Galvanized 
Requiring 
Replacement 
Unless the definition of an LSL is revised to include lead 
connectors, this definition should be expanded to include 
galvanized service lines that are/were downstream of a lead 
connector.  Lead connectors contribute to lead accumulation in 
galvanized lines and, therefore, should be replaced.  As written, 
galvanized lines must only be replaced if they are/were 
downstream of an LSL which, as currently defined, does not 
include lead connectors. 
Newly regulated 
public water system 
Consider revising the definition to include water systems that 
were not identified as a public water supply on October 16, 2024. 
Service Line 
This definition should be revised to include connectors (see 
comment above).  Specify what constitutes a service line at 
supplies without water mains.  For example, facilities with direct 
connections from a wellhouse to a building, but without water 
mains.  Some community water supplies and many 
noncommunity water supplies fit this category.  These should be 
subject to service line inventory/replacement requirements, but as 
written, do not fit the definition of a service line. 
141.80 General Requirements 
141.80(a)(2) 
Modify date by which supplies must comply with the requirements 
of the LCRI to begin January 1 of the year following three years 
after the date of publication.  Initial and ongoing implementation is 
more straightforward if requirements begin the 1st of the year.  
This avoids regulatory changes occurring during an in-progress 
monitoring period and allows for logical annual deadlines going 
forward.  
141.80(c)(3)(ii)(A) 
and (c)(3)(iii)(A) 
If copper is analyzed in both the 1st and 5th liter sample, the 
highest value should be used to calculate the 90th percentile. 
141.80(c) 
Michigan recommends adding language requiring only the 
HIGHEST RESULT FROM EACH SITE be used in the 90th 
percentile calculation.  Use of multiple results from one location 

Page 9 of 16 
can skew the 90th percentile.  When evaluating overall system 
conditions, each site should be given equal weight in the 
calculation. 
141.80(c)(3)(ii)(A) 
and (c)(3)(iii)(A) 
As worded, this implies all Tier 1 and 2 sites will have 1st and 5th 
liter samples. However, only sites served by an LSL require 5th 
liter samples.  It is possible for sites to be classified as Tier 1 or 2 
due to interior lead plumbing, but not be served by an LSL, 
therefore not requiring a 5th liter. 
141.80(c)(iii) 
Michigan supports requirements that stop lower tier sites from 
diluting higher tiers by only allowing inclusion of higher results 
from lower tiers until the minimum required number of samples is 
met.   
141.80(c)(3) 
• Consider stating interpolation may/should be used to calculate 
the 90th percentile value when the number of samples taken 
multiplied by 0.9 is not a whole number. 
• Consider re-wording (c)(3)(i)(B):  "The number of samples taken 
used in the 90th percentile calculation during the tap sampling 
period must be multiplied by 0.9."  Supplies conducting 1st/5th liter 
sampling have taken two samples at each site, but only one 
sample is used in the calculation. 
141.81 Applicability of corrosion control treatment steps to small, medium, and 
large water systems 
141.81(a)(1)(i) 
141.81(a)(2)(i) 
141.81(a)(3)(i) 
As written, supplies with optimal corrosion control treatment 
(OCCT) that exceed an action level do not need to conduct re-
optimization steps if they meet three criteria.  Provide a provision 
that allows states to require repeated re-optimization efforts if it 
believes additional benefit could be achieved. 
141.81(d) & (e) 
Consider switching the order of parts (d) and (e).  Reviewers felt it 
would be less confusing if initial OCCT steps were described 
before re-optimization steps (the order in which they would 
occur). 
141.81(d) & (e) 
Michigan supports supplies being required to continue lead and 
copper tap monitoring while proceeding through treatment steps 
rather than allowing them to discontinue during this period. 
141.81(d) & (e) 
Include language on the roles of wholesale customers/sellers in 
the corrosion control steps.  Consider language establishing 
how/when wholesale sellers can conduct studies and install 
treatment in response to ALEs at customer supplies and 
how/when this meets the customer supply's obligations under this 
section. 
141.81(d)(1)(iv) 
Clarify whether this is an option for all systems. 
141.81(f)(3) 
Michigan supports, with caveats, the alternative to conduct LSLR 
instead of treatment if it can be completed within five years.  This 
should not be an option if the lead ALE would have occurred 
based on 1st liter lead results (premise plumbing) as the LSL was 

Page 10 of 16 
not the primary cause of the exceedance.  Copper ALEs should 
be excluded from this option.   
141.82 Description of corrosion control treatment requirements 
141.82(b)(1) & (2) 
Consider whether this option should be included in 141.81 (d) and 
(e). 
141.82(c)(1) & (2) 
Michigan supports the requirement for a water system to evaluate 
an orthophosphate residual of 1 milligrams per liter (mg/L) and 
3 mg/l as part of efforts to evaluate OCCT. 
141.82(f)(3) 
Michigan supports specifying "(as PO4)." 
141.82(j) 
Michigan supports the intent of this section but has concerns 
regarding complexity and feasibility of implementation.   
• Following an ALE, water supplies are required to conduct 
comprehensive corrosion control evaluations prior to 
installing/changing treatment.  This section could result in 
treatment change recommendations being made based on an 
individual site, rather than considering the system as a whole. 
• States will receive hundreds of individual results each year 
greater than 10 parts per billion (ppb).  The level of effort required 
by the supply to conduct all required tasks, and the resources 
needed by the state to assess hundreds of site-specific 
recommendations each year will be substantial.  Some supplies 
collecting large numbers of samples frequently may be 
conducting these activities every round.   
• Consider whether it is necessary to proceed beyond step 2, or if 
modifications can be made to steps beyond step 2, if samples 
collected in steps 1 and 2 indicate appropriate WQP levels are 
present and lead levels are below 10 ppb.   
141.84 Lead service line inventory and replacement requirements 
Throughout 141.84 
as appropriate 
A connector should be considered part of the service line and any 
service line with a lead connector should be characterized as an 
LSL in the inventory and require replacement (as opposed to only 
being replaced when encountered).  
141.84(b)(1) 
Michigan supports the requirement for annual inventory updates. 
141.84(b)(5) 
Michigan supports the requirement for supplies to validate the 
accuracy of their non-lead inventory.  Consider allowing supplies 
to exclude sites from these requirements if, at the time of 
installation, controls were in place to prevent use of lead (such as 
ordinances) or where the line was installed after lead was 
banned. 
141.84 (c)(1)(v) 
Does the term "disproportionately impacted" include 
environmental justice concerns?  If not, add environmental justice 
to the list of prioritization factors. 
141.84(d)(1) 
Expand service lines replacement requirements to include 
replacement of lead connectors (not only "when encountered").   
141.84(d)(2) 
Review first sentence for possible typographical error. 

Page 11 of 16 
141.84(d) 
To address environmental justice concerns, full LSLR should be 
at water supply expense.  Otherwise, those without sufficient 
funds will not be in a position to replace the service line.   
141.84(d)(4) 
Michigan supports the requirement for all supplies, regardless of 
90th percentile value, to replace lead and galvanized service lines 
on an enforceable schedule. 
141.84(d)(5)(iv) 
Many issues beyond the number of service lines requiring 
replacement impact feasibility.  Leaving this undefined will result 
in inconsistency.  If there are circumstances where supplies 
should replace service lines more quickly, specify those criteria in 
the rule.   
141.84(d)(6)(iii)(D)(4) Michigan supports exclusion of lined/coated service lines from 
counting as replaced. 
141.84(f)(1)(i)(A) & 
(ii)(A) 
Michigan supports working with homeowners to coordinate 
service line replacement and avoid health impacts of partial 
LSLRs but is concerned this requirement could have unintended 
consequences deserving consideration.  Because water supplies 
cannot control the timing, location, or number of customer-
initiated replacements, delays and/or additional costs to overall 
service line replacement efforts may be incurred.  Considerations: 
• This requirement could exacerbate environmental justice issues 
by allowing those with the financial means to pay for service line 
replacement and "move to the head of the line." 
• Other prioritized or planned replacement work could be delayed 
due to these unforeseeable replacement obligations.  This could 
delay replacement at locations with high lead results or vulnerable 
populations; or delay infrastructure projects, which could include 
service line replacement activities. 
• A greater per-line replacement cost may result from water 
supplies "hopping" to various locations in response to customer-
initiated replacements, increasing mobilization costs.  This could 
impact water rates and/or result in fewer (or slower) replacements 
being conducted overall. 
141.84(g)(1) 
Michigan supports the prohibition on partial replacement except 
for emergency repair.  Partial replacement should not be 
permitted as part of planned work. 
141.84(h)(1)(iv) & 
(h)(3)(iv) 
Please specify that these sample results shall not be used in the 
90th percentile calculation (see wording used for distribution and 
site assessment sampling).  141.86(e)(4) does specify this, but it 
is helpful to restate here. 
141.85 Public education and supplemental monitoring requirements 
141.85 Opening 
Paragraph 
Suggested wording changes: 
• "Water systems that exceed the lead action level must offer to 
sample for lead in the tap water of any customer who requests it 
in accordance with…" 
• "All water systems must offer to sample for lead in the tap water 

Page 12 of 16 
of any person served by a lead, galvanized requiring 
replacement, or lead status unknown …" 
141.85(a)(1) 
Consider expanding sentence "Water systems must submit a 
copy of all written public education materials to the State prior to 
delivery" to include associated documents such as press 
releases, cover letters, etc. 
141.85(b)(1) 
Establish a minimum percentage served by those with limited 
English proficiency.  Allow states to be more stringent but set a 
minimum or there will be inconsistency across the country. 
141.85(c)  
Suggested wording change: “All water systems must offer to 
sample for lead in the tap water of any person served by a lead, 
galvanized requiring replacement…” 
141.85(d) 
Suggested wording change:  "All water systems must provide a 
notice of the individual tap results from any lead and copper tap 
water monitoring carried out under the requirements of § 141.85 
and § 141.86 to the persons served..."  
The requirement to provide results of supplemental sampling is in 
(c), but the content requirements are in (d).  If the same content is 
expected in the notice, supplemental samples in 141.85 should 
be referenced in (d). 
141.85(d)(2) 
Notification within three days for all compliance results, 
regardless of concentration, may be difficult to achieve.  Consider 
three business days for results over the action level and allow 
30 days for other results.  
141.85(d)(4) 
Why provide options beyond written notification (such as email or 
phone) if a water system must follow-up with written notification 
within three days?  It appears these options are not options for 
notification, but rather recommendations beyond the required 
written notice.  
141.85(e) 
Michigan supports the requirement to annually notify persons 
served by a lead, galvanized requiring replacement (GRR), or 
unknown service line. 
141.85(e) 
Lead status unknown could later be found to be GRR.  
Recommend GRR be included as follows:  "...may potentially 
contain lead or galvanized requiring replacement..." 
141.85(e)(2) 
Requiring notification within 30 days of the BASELINE inventory 
is too late.  Notification should begin soon after the October 2024 
initial inventory.  Waiting over three years for the baseline 
inventory is excessive when the water supply is already aware of 
service line material status.  Consider requiring initial notice within 
six months of the October 2024 inventory deadline. 
141.85(i) 
Sending PE materials required under (b) to health agencies 
annually is too late.  This requirement is also redundant given (b) 
requires these agencies receive PE materials within 60 days of 
the end of the monitoring period. 
 
 

Page 13 of 16 
141.86 Monitoring requirements for lead and copper in tap water 
141.86(a)(1)(iii) 
Clarify whether it is acceptable to use these sites if the device is 
bypassed. 
141.86(a)(1)(iii) 
What about water supplies where all sites have treatment 
devices, but they are not necessarily installed to meet primary or 
secondary standards?  For example, a supply where all individual 
homeowners have installed in-home devices?  Where should 
these water supplies conduct sampling? 
141.86(a)(3) 
For supplies without enough LSLs, the language states "...must 
still collect samples from every site containing lead…"  Water 
supplies frequently report that homeowners refuse to participate.  
Consider language to account for this issue.  If homeowners are 
unwilling, as worded, the supply would be out of compliance. 
141.86(a)(4) 
Explicitly state that sites of unknown material cannot be used as 
compliance sites, nor results of sampling at unknown sites be 
included in the 90th percentile. 
141.86(a)(4)(iv) 
Clarify whether supplies with treatment devices installed at all 
sites are considered Tier 5 sites. 
141.86(b) 
Samples from a nonresidential building must be one liter in 
volume and collected at a cold-water tap from which water is 
typically drawn for human consumption.  
141.86(b)(1)(i) 
Specify how a water system determines which sites to analyze for 
copper if on reduced monitoring for copper.  Michigan suggests 
sampling location and frequency be the same for both lead and 
copper to avoid confusion. 
141.86(b)(1)(ii) 
Michigan strongly supports the requirement for Tier 1 and Tier 2 
sites to collect 1st and 5th liter samples.  Michigan recommends 
the 1st/5th liter sampling requirement be extended to include Tier 3 
sites as these have sources of lead risk in the service line. 
141.86(b)(2) 
The term "reasonable proximity" is vague and difficult to enforce. 
141.86(c)(2)(I)  
Michigan requests consideration be given to establishment of 
grandfathering criteria for states where supplies have previously 
conducted monitoring substantially like the requirements of this 
section.  Supplies in Michigan with LSLs have sampled LSL sites 
using the 1st/5th methodology since 2019.  However, Michigan 
supplies may not meet the criteria established in (2)(i) (two 
rounds of standard monitoring during the three years following 
publication of LCRI).  They may have done so prior to this period 
or may have numerous rounds of reduced sampling at LSL sites 
using 1st/5th methodology. 
141.86(d)(2)(i) 
Requiring a different number of sites be sampled for lead and 
copper may cause confusion and result in monitoring violations.  
This added complexity may not be worth the limited burden-
reduction that may be realized.  Additionally, how should supplies 
decide which sites are analyzed for lead and copper versus lead 

Page 14 of 16 
only?  Michigan suggests requiring lead and copper to be 
analyzed at all sites. 
141.86(e)(1) 
Directly state whether additional samples should be included (if 
collected from properly tiered sites, using correct methodology, 
and collected during the sampling period).  Stating samples must 
be "considered" is not clear.   
141.86(e) 
While the information from customer-requested samples is 
valuable, inclusion of these samples in the 90th percentile 
calculation may be problematic in other ways, which should be 
directly addressed in the rules.  These may include: 
• Supplies could have more customer-requested samples than 
required samples.  If more customer-requested samples are 
included than samples collected pursuant to the supply's 
sampling plan, the sampling plan is partially negated. 
• It should be clearly stated that customer-requested samples 
CANNOT be used in the 90th percentile calculation if the site's tier 
is not known and/or if it cannot be verified that proper sampling 
methodology was used to collect the sample.  
• These rules place added emphasis on having pre-submitted 
sampling plans prior to each sampling round.  Customer-
requested samples cannot be predicted, so how will supplies 
comply with the requirement to sample in accordance with their 
plan?  If these are to be included, supplies should not be cited for 
including samples collected at sites not on their sampling plan. 
141.86(f)(1)(ii) 
Invalidation of samples under (1)(ii) should be expanded to 
include (a)(1)(iii) to allow invalidation of samples taken at sites 
with a point-of-use or point-of-entry treatment device. 
141.86(g)(1)(i)(A) 
Consider adding a definition for “lead plasticizer.” 
141.87 Monitoring requirements for water quality parameters 
141.87(b)(1)(i) 
Rather than collecting two samples per monitoring period, 
consider collecting quarterly to better space sampling to reflect 
variability. 
141.87(b)(1)(i) 
Adding WQP sites from distribution system and site assessment 
sampling to the minimum number of sites will make the number 
and location of sites a moving target and require frequent updates 
to WQP sampling plans.  This adds to regulatory complexity and 
will be difficult to implement.  Consider only adding sites if 
outcomes of distribution system and site assessment sampling 
indicate a concern with WQPs at that location. 
141.87(b)(4)(ii) 
The proposed LCRI continues to allow small systems with OCCT 
to sample for WQPs only when an action level is exceeded.  If a 
system is treating because it was required to minimize corrosion, 
ongoing oversight (even if less than medium/large) of that 
treatment should be required rather than only after a problem is 
identified.  Small systems could potentially go years without 
checking whether treatment is operating as intended. 

Page 15 of 16 
141.87(b)(1)(i) 
Text references Table 5 multiple times but is likely intended to 
reference Table 1. 
141.90 Reporting requirements 
141.90(a)(1)(i)(a) 
It is preferred that sampling plans be submitted prior to each 
sampling round.  However, water supplies often become aware of 
new information during the sampling period.  Are supplies out of 
compliance if this is the case and they must make adjustments 
during the round?  For example, they become aware of higher 
tiered sites, a site's tier changes during the sampling period, etc. 
141.90(a)(1)(ii) 
The sampling instructions provided to samplers is not the correct 
place to explain or verify wide-mouth bottle requirements.  The 
resident should not need to understand bottle requirements, only 
the correct collection methodology (they should receive the 
correct bottles from the supply).   
141.90(a)(1)(ii) 
Consider a provision allowing states to provide templates meeting 
sample instruction requirements and allowing systems that use 
state-provided templates to avoid submitting to the state. 
141.90(a)(2)(iv) 
Given the complexity of calculating 90th percentile values 
(determining which results to include or exclude, ensuring only 
the highest result from each site is used, only using highest of 
lower tiers if mixed tiers sampled, etc.), it is concerning to rely on 
supply-calculated values.   
141.90(a)(2)(v) 
As written, this requirement could become overwhelming.  If 
supplies must identify and explain every previously sampled site 
from all previous rounds, the list could become 100s long, 
especially for supplies removing LSLs.  Consider requiring this for 
sites that were sampled only in the most recent prior round. 
141.90(a)(4) 
Consider allowing notification in less than six months to account 
for emergency or unforeseen circumstances.   
141.90(e)(5)-(14) 
Throughout this section, supplies have 30 days from end of 
calendar year to report.  This may not be sufficient for supplies 
gathering large amounts of data for activities being conducted 
through the end of December.  Consider allowing additional time 
to ensure submittal of complete and high-quality information.   
141.90(g)(2) 
Clarify what would be inaccurate about a customer refusal? 
141.90(h)(3) 
Michigan has reservations about relying on supply-calculated 
90th percentile values given the complexity of determining which 
samples should be included in the calculation (is it properly tiered, 
is it the highest value at the site, was it collected properly, what 
was the purpose, etc.).  Michigan has found it necessary to 
review all submissions, follow-up on missing/conflicting 
information (time consuming), and conduct calculations and 
quality control activities.  This takes significant time when 
hundreds of supplies are submitting data at the same time.  
Michigan requests additional time be given for states to calculate 
and provide these values to the water supply.  The currently 

Page 16 of 16 
allowed 15 days only affords five calendar days after the reporting 
deadline to process submissions from hundreds of water 
supplies.  
141.93 Small Water System Compliance Flexibility 
141.93(c)(iii) 
Consider rewording as follows:  "…in accordance with the 
manufacturer's recommendations, or on a more frequent 
schedule if required by the State, …" in the event a water 
system has poor water quality or a specific issue that makes more 
frequent maintenance necessary for public health protection. 
141.93(c)(iv) 
Since this requires sampling of all taps every three years and 
notification when results exceed, is the supply exempt from 
sampling under 141.86?  If not, clarify that compliance samples 
should be collected from filtered taps since all are filtered and 
specify which Tier these sites represent (likely Tier 5, 
representative sites). 
141.153 Content of Reports 
141.153(d)(xiv) 
Consider adding "…unless the state has an alternative school and 
child care program."  There should be a caveat for states with 
alternative programs where the water supply is not responsible for 
conducting the sampling. 
141.202 Tier 1 Public Notice - Form, manner and frequency of notice 
141.202 
The requirement to notify the public of a lead ALE within 
24 hours, while an excellent goal, may be difficult to achieve.  
Michigan has adopted a requirement to provide notice within 
three business days.  Three business days can be challenging, 
but achievable.  Significantly shorter periods may be logistically 
difficult to achieve in all cases. 
Part 142 NPDWR Implementation 
142.15(c)(4)(iii)(B) 
Consider reporting all copper 90th percentile values, rather than 
only those that exceed the action level. 
142.15(c)(4)(iii)(E) 
Consider removing "expected date of completion."  It is an 
estimated and non-enforceable date.   
142.15(c)(4)(iii)(G) 
Clarify that if a state calculates 90th percentile values, that the 
notice is within 24 hours of the state determining the ALE. 
142.16(10) 
Provide a caveat for states with alternative school/child care 
programs that have resulted in waivers to the school/child care 
requirements.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0784 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0839 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Mingus Mapps, Commissioner 
Gabriel Solmer, Administrator 
1120 SW Fifth Avenue, Room 405 
Portland, Oregon 97204-1926 
503-823-7404 
portland.gov/water 
Please contact us for translation or interpretation, or for accommodations for people with disabilities. 
More information · Más información · Thêm thông tin · 欲了解更多信 · Дополнительная информация 
Mai multe informații · Подробиці · Macluumaad dheeri ah · अͬधक सूचना · Tichikin Poraus 
portland.gov/water/access · 503-823-7525 (Relay: 711) 
February 5, 2024 
 
Michael Goldberg 
Standards and Risk Management Division 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington DC 20460 
 
RE: Comments on the proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
        Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Dear Michael Goldberg, 
 
The Portland Water Bureau in Portland, Oregon appreciates the opportunity to review and provide 
comments on the proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI).  
The Portland Water Bureau is the largest drinking water utility in Oregon, serving nearly one million 
Oregonians every day. Portland’s primary drinking water source is the highly protected Bull Run 
Watershed, the largest drinking water supply in Oregon. Portland also has a secondary groundwater 
source, which is used as an alternative or augmentation supply when needed.  
Portland currently complies with the Lead and Copper Rule through Optimized Corrosion Control 
Treatment that adjusts pH and alkalinity. Additionally, Portland is fortunate that lead service lines were 
never used in our system and all known lead connectors were removed from the system over 25 years 
ago. As a result, in Portland, the primary source of lead in water is from home plumbing, either copper 
pipes with lead solder or from brass plumbing fixtures.  
Overall, we support the EPA’s efforts to further reduce our country’s exposure to lead in drinking water 
through the increased focus on the removal of lead service lines, the greatest source of lead in drinking 
water nationwide. As a system that has never used lead service lines and has removed all known lead 
service connectors, we bring a unique perspective to these and the other proposed revisions to the rule 
in our attached comments.   
Thank you again for the opportunity to review and comment on these draft rules. If you have questions, 
you can reach me at Yone.Akagi@portlandoregon.gov or 503-823-1251.  
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Yone Akagi, PE 
Water Quality Manger 
 
CC: Gabriel Solmer; Kimberly Gupta, PE 

 
Portland Water Bureau Comments on proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
Page 1 
Portland Water Bureau comments on the long-term revisions to the 
Lead and Copper Rule, Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Portland’s compliance history with the current Lead and Copper Rule 
As of December 2023, Portland complies with the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) through Optimized 
Corrosion Control Treatment (OCCT) that was installed in April 2022 and reduces corrosivity through 
pH and alkalinity adjustment. Previous to this OCCT designation, from 1997 through 2023 Portland 
complied with the LCR through a comprehensive Lead Hazard Reduction Program that included four 
components: corrosion control treatment and monitoring; a free customer lead-in-water testing and 
education program; an outreach and education program about all sources of lead; and a program that 
used US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) grant funding to remediate lead paint 
in homes. Portland no longer operates this program but continues required treatment and monitoring 
activities as well as voluntary water testing and education programs.  
Applicability of LCR Improvements to Portland 
The following comments from the Portland Water Bureau are influenced by the fact that Portland: 
• 
is a large utility that installed corrosion control treatment (pH adjustment) in 1997;  
• 
recently completed re-optimizing pH/alkalinity corrosion control treatment (OCCT achieved in 
December 2023); 
• 
never used lead service lines; 
• 
already removed all known lead connectors; 
• 
is close to completing its initial service line inventory through a statistical inspection approach; 
• 
inspected every current Tier 1 home that is active in our regulatory sampling program to verify 
that lead solder is present; 
• 
currently follows the revised tap sampling guidelines; 
• 
has a robust free customer lead-in-water testing and education program; and 
• 
has a free lead-in-water testing program for schools and child care facilities. 
Given these, the Portland Water Bureau submits the following comments for consideration. 
Timing of rulemaking 
We strongly support EPA’s proposed compliance approach that utilities only have to comply with the 
service line inventory components of the LCRR and then implement the LCRI three years after the final 
rule is published. This approach simplifies utility implementation and will avoid confusion over what 
actions are required in this complex set of rules. We appreciate and support this thoughtful approach 
proposed by EPA.  
However, we also recognize that publishing the final rule by October 16, 2024 – 8 months from now – is 
an ambitious and aggressive timeline to review comments, decide on final changes, and send through 
the federal review and approval process. We are concerned of the consequences that utilities would 
face if EPA is not able to meet this October 16, 2024 deadline: being required at the last minute into 
complying with all components of the LCRR.  
We strongly urge EPA to take the appropriate actions to ensure that the October 16, 2024 
publication deadline is met to avoid this outcome.  
Definitions 
Overall, we appreciate EPA’s continued efforts to make definitions included in the LCR easier to read, 
interpret, and understand. Specifically, we support: 
• 
the application of plain language principles throughout the definitions section; 

 
Portland Water Bureau Comments on proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
Page 2 
• 
the creation of separate definitions for all types of service lines; 
• 
in the Galvanized Requiring Replacement definition, the clarifying edits that removed reference 
to connectors; and 
• 
in the Wide Mouth Bottle definition, the inclusion of where the 55 mm measurement applies. 
Additionally, we provide the following comments: 
In the Connector definition, we request that EPA increases the length from 2 feet to 4 feet.  
Lead connectors attached to galvanized service lines were routinely used in our system until the 
1930s and, following an order from the state to remove all lead pipes, were systematically removed in 
the 1980s and 1990s. Our records state that these lead connectors were typically 2 feet to 4 feet in 
length. We have strong concerns that the proposed definition is too limiting. It would categorize any 
lead connector over 2 feet as a lead service line and would pull us and possibly others into lead 
service line requirements, which otherwise wouldn’t apply since we have no lead service lines in our 
system. We appreciate EPA’s attempt to balance the length of connectors versus lead service lines. 
We believe that increasing that length limit to 4 feet still meets EPA’s goal while providing an 
evidence-based definition for utilities. 
We request a new definition for “premise plumbing made of lead.”  
“Premise plumbing made of lead” is a new phrase used in 141.86 in the Tier 1 criteria, and it is 
unclear in the rule language if this is inclusive of all sources of lead – lead pipe, leaded brass, lead 
solder – or if this is limited to just lead pipe. The preamble notes that the intent of this tier is to be 
limited to lead pipe. To codify this intent, we request a definition that specifies that “premise plumbing 
made of lead” only refers to lead pipes and does not include sites with lead solder or leaded brass in 
the plumbing. 
Corrosion control treatment and optimization 
We appreciate EPA’s continued work on developing corrosion control treatment (CCT) regulations that 
are effective for the large diversity of water systems in the country. As a system that recently completed 
re-optimization with pH and alkalinity adjustment, we offer the following comments. 
We request clarification on re-optimization requirements for systems with OCCT whose 90th 
percentile results are between 5 and 10 ppb.  
The proposed rule does not provide specific criteria for requiring systems with OCCT to re-optimize if 
90th percentile lead results are consistently under 10 ppb. If a system has previously completed a 
corrosion control study, implemented and deemed OCCT, has removed or never had lead service 
lines, and consistently meets the LCRI action levels for lead and copper, it should not be required to 
complete new corrosion control studies and re-optimize OCCT.   
We request allowing state primacy agencies to grant schedule extensions to implement re-
optimized OCCT that require significant infrastructure upgrades.  
The deadline to install re-optimized OCCT within 12 months after the State designates treatment will 
not be adequate for many systems to complete design, construction, and commissioning of a new 
CCT facility. For systems required to make CCT changes that involve installation of new treatment 
facilities, we suggest allowing state primacy agencies to grant a schedule extension based on the 
time needed for design and construction.  
Outside of the LCRI regulations, we strongly urge EPA continue to support research on 
developing industry guidelines for conducting CCT studies.  
Lead corrosion is complex, influenced by many factors, and can be system specific. The coupon and 
pilot scale corrosion control studies that take all these conditions into account to fully understand 

 
Portland Water Bureau Comments on proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
Page 3 
corrosion and effective treatment can vary significantly in their design. We strongly urge EPA to 
provide updated guidance to States and water systems (with and without lead service lines) for 
conducting and approving corrosion control studies.  
Distribution system and site assessment (DSSA) 
We appreciate EPA’s clarifying changes in the DSSA from the Find and Fix steps in the LCRR. 
Specifically, we support that DSSA customer samples cannot be used as part of the 90th percentile 
calculation and support the inclusion of maximum number of water quality parameter (WQP) sites that 
can be added. Additionally, we offer the following comment. 
We suggest establishing criteria to end monitoring from added WQP monitoring sites.  
For WQP sites that are added due to a regulatory tap monitoring site exceeding 10 ppb, we request 
the ability to discontinue monitoring the added WQP site after two or three subsequent tap monitoring 
rounds at the tap location are below 10 ppb, or after the lead source has been identified and removed 
(e.g., faucet replaced). 
Water quality parameter monitoring 
We request clarification to the excursion compliance requirements for WQP monitoring.  
The LCRI specifies that a system “is out of compliance…for a six-month period if it has excursions for 
any State-specified parameter on more than nine days, cumulatively, during the period.” While this is 
consistent with current requirements, we request clarification that more than one excursion in a day 
(e.g., multiple WQP sampling locations in a single day are outside of the State-specified WQP 
ranges) counts as one day in the maximum nine days in the 6-month sampling period. 
Tap sample location tiering 
Overall, we support and appreciate EPA’s efforts in applying plain language principles in the tier 
descriptions. This resulted in language that is much easier to read, understand, and interpret compared 
to the tier descriptions in the LCRR. In addition, we offer the following comments. 
In Tier 1, we request clarification for “premise plumbing made of lead.”  
As noted in our Definitions section above, we request that a definition for “premise plumbing made of 
lead” is added to clarify that this phrase refers to just lead pipes and does not include lead solder or 
leaded brass. 
In Tier 3, we recommend exercising caution with tiering galvanized lines above lead solder sites 
without further research.  
As EPA notes in the preamble, CCT is one of the treatment techniques to protect people from 
exposure to lead in water. Tap sampling at highest risk sites is the mechanism to assess that CCT is 
providing those public health protections. To achieve the maximum public health benefits, it is 
essential that the tiers defined by EPA are accurately ranked based on data. We have observed 
through the LCRR and LCRI rulemaking processes that Tier 3 has changed at each rulemaking step. 
In the LCRI, Tier 3 is prioritizing connector and galvanized sites above lead solder sites with 
extremely limited data to support this prioritization. We encourage EPA to gather more data to 
accurately prioritize sites in descending risk. 
In Portland, where we have never used lead service lines and have removed all lead connectors, we 
have well-documented evidence that lead solder is the largest contributor of lead in water for 
customers in our system. Through our extensive voluntary home testing program, we consistently see 
that homes built during the era when lead solder was commonly used – between 1970 and 1985 – 
have higher median and 90th percentile lead results compared to all other homes. Included in that 
pool of “all other homes” are thousands of homes that had lead connectors removed in the 1980s and 

 
Portland Water Bureau Comments on proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
Page 4 
1990s. The results from our home testing program do not support the idea that galvanized pipes that 
are downstream of a historic lead connector removed 30 to 40 years ago are currently a significant 
source of lead in drinking water and does not seem to justify tiering these sites over lead solder sites.  
We appreciate the research that East Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD) is conducting to 
understand the lead load in galvanized plumbing. Of note, their data suggests that sites with an active 
lead connector and galvanized service lines have very low levels of lead in both 1st and 5th liter 
samples (P90 <1 ppb). Additionally, they note that galvanized lines that were formerly downstream of 
lead pipe have the lowest measured lead (P90 <0.4 ppb). We support their comments that EPA 
should include a regulatory mechanism in the LCRI for utilities to conduct studies to understand the 
risk posed by galvanized lines in their system. We strongly encourage EPA to review their data and 
fund similar studies around the country to gather more data before including galvanized lines in the 
tiering. 
Because of these two findings, we cannot support the tiering of galvanized sites, and most specifically 
galvanized sites that used to have a lead connector, above lead solder sites. The intent of tiering is to 
find the worst-case scenario locations and test water at those locations to assess the effectiveness of 
the utility’s CCT. This proposed tiering for lead connector and galvanized sites goes against EPA’s 
preamble which states “that sites most likely to contain lead are prioritized for tap sampling” and may 
not provide the public health protections that are the foundation of the LCRI. We strongly urge EPA to 
gather more data about galvanized pipe and lead connector sites and take a thoughtful and data-
driven approach to adding these types of sites to the tiering.  
Tap sampling 
There are a number of elements in this section that we supported in our LCRR comments and continue 
to support in the LCRI. First is that we already conduct our 1st liter sampling according to these new 
rules and continue our support in codifying these requirements in the LCRI. Second, for utilities that do 
not have Tier 1 or Tier 2 sites, we support using all results from Tiers 3-5 to calculate the 90th 
percentile. Lastly, we support improved transparency of lead data and public health information to the 
community. We appreciate EPA’s clarification in the LCRI that utilities do not need to individually post 
tap monitoring results if those are already made available by the state. We are a large system whose 
state already posts both the individual home results as well as the 90th percentiles, and we support our 
interpretation that including links to those sites on our utility page is sufficient in complying with this 
requirement. For reference, our data are available at: 
• 
Individual home results: https://yourwater.oregon.gov/lead_copper_detail.php?pwsno=00657 
• 
90th percentile results: https://yourwater.oregon.gov/leadcopper.php?pwsno=00657  
Additionally, we offer the following comments. 
We request clarification on how utilities on annual monitoring implement standard sites for lead 
monitoring and reduced sites for copper monitoring.  
We are unclear how to implement standard sites for lead monitoring and reduced sites for copper 
monitoring when lead and copper are analyzed from the same samples and simultaneously by the 
same machine. Providing the option of reduced copper sites does not provide any efficiency or 
reduction in labor – it only provides confusion on how to implement. For a utility that collects 100 
samples, can they analyze 50 of those for lead and copper and 50 of them for only lead? What 
criteria should a utility use to choose those lead and copper homes versus only lead homes? Do we 
predetermine those homes, or conduct a random selection from the samples each monitoring round? 
If we had to apply this in Portland, we would likely run all 100 samples for both lead and copper since 
the bulk of the energy is working with customers to collect the samples and it is more straightforward 
for our lab staff to run the same analysis on all samples. A reduction of copper sites while maintaining 
lead sites would provide no benefit to us.  

 
Portland Water Bureau Comments on proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
Page 5 
We request that non-lead service line utilities on annual monitoring be eligible for reduced sites 
for lead monitoring. 
For utilities that have no lead service lines and have demonstrated levels of lead below the action 
level, it is an undue burden to require they continue monitoring at a standard number of lead sites 
while on annual monitoring. We request that utilities who meet these criteria be able to monitor at the 
reduced number of sites.  
Service line inventory 
Portland supports EPA’s nationwide efforts in identifying and removing lead service lines from drinking 
water systems. As a utility that has never used lead service lines, historically had lead connectors, and 
is currently using a statistical inspection method to build our initial inventory, we offer the following 
comments.  
We request a waiver process for the inclusion of connectors in the baseline inventory if the 
utility has already removed all lead connectors.  
When Oregon banned lead pipes in 1985, it also required water providers to remove lead connectors 
and certify that no lead pipes exist in their system1. In 1985, Portland submitted its compliance plan to 
the state, implemented the comprehensive plan to identify and remove over 10,000 lead connectors, 
and in 1998 certified to the state that all known lead connectors were removed from the system2. 
Portland’s process to locate these lead connectors, which included tap cards, computer records, and 
field inspections, meets the criteria being used around the country today to locate lead service lines.  
We understand the EPA’s intent of including known, active lead connectors in the inventory to assess 
where they are currently located and provide residents important public health information; however, 
it is unclear how knowing where connectors used to exist is to be used by utilities or customers, 
especially since that information is not being collected for sites that used to have lead service lines. 
We anticipate that EPA has concerns about galvanized lines that used to be downstream of a lead 
connector, but as noted above in the tiering section, there is no existing evidence that these 
galvanized pipes continue to be a source of lead or that a location that once had a lead connector 
even has a galvanized service line still in use.  
Established by our evidenced-based and comprehensive removal of lead connectors decades ago, 
we request a waiver process for utilities that have removed all lead connectors from including 
connectors in their inventories. As part of this waiver, we support that these utilities would have to 
provide a statement on their website about how the utility inventoried and removed all connectors, 
similar to the required statement when a utility has certified that all service lines are non-lead. 
We request removing the connector category of “removed lead” or, at minimum, changing this 
to an optional subcategory.  
We are unclear on the intent for including “removed lead” as a category for service connectors. This 
category is inconsistent with service line categories, which do not keep track of where lead service 
lines have historically been located and removed. Additionally, we anticipate this connector category 
will create customer confusion and unnecessary alarm. From the customer perspective, it is not clear 
what actions, if any, they should take based on this information. We request that this category be 
 
1 Oregon Administrative Rule 333-061-0087(4): No lead pipe, lead goosenecks or similar appurtenances shall be 
used in the construction of any public water system and every water supplier must certify to the Authority that lead 
pipe, goosenecks or similar appurtenances do not exist within its water system. A water supplier that identifies the 
existence of lead components within its water system must submit a compliance schedule, acceptable to the 
Authority, for the removal of all lead components as described in this section. 
2 Portland’s certification that all lead connectors were removed: https://www.portland.gov/water/documents/lead-
pigtails-removed-1998/download  

 
Portland Water Bureau Comments on proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
Page 6 
removed from the required category list. If maintained in the final rule, we recommend listing this as 
an optional subcategory – similar to how copper and plastic are optional subcategories for non-lead 
service lines. 
We request that service line inventory statistical inspections completed by utilities with no lead 
service lines be accepted for compliance with the validation requirements. 
We understand EPA’s intent with the validation process and appreciate the necessity of this step for 
some areas of the country. In Portland, we do not have lead service lines, we have a high degree of 
confidence that lead service lines have never been used in our system, and are currently using this 
same statistical inspection approach to certify with a 95% confidence that no lead service lines exist 
in our pool of unknown service lines. The intent of the validation process is the same: prove that the 
non-lead service lines that don’t have direct evidence are in fact non-lead. If non-lead service line 
utilities are already performing that statistical inspection to prove their inventory, it doesn’t make 
sense to repeat that activity. Therefore, we request that EPA allow previous statistical inspections that 
meet the validation criteria and already confirmed there are no lead service lines with 95% confidence 
be accepted for compliance with the validation requirements. Alternatively, we request EPA grant 
states the ability to provide waivers to utilities who meet these criteria. 
We request clarification that the two-point inspection as part of the validation requirement is a 
maximum of two points for the full line, regardless of ownership or split ownership.  
As the rule is written, it is not clear that the two-point inspection applies to the full line when there is 
split ownership. We request changes to the language about split ownership inspections that a 
maximum of two points are required for the full line from the main to the building.  
Public education and outreach 
Portland has extensive experience in effective public education and outreach initiatives that provides 
consumers the information they need to reduce their exposure to lead. Part of this is a successful 
results notification process where we prioritize notifications of high results by calling consumers with 
high results within one business day and then mail results letters to all consumers within a week. Over 
the past few years, we also have noted the growth of consumer preference to receive results digitally 
and meet that need by emailing digital copies of results upon request. 
We support and commend EPA’s changes to the health effects language and required CCR statement 
that increase the inclusivity of these statements. Through the LCRR comment process, Portland 
requested that these statements be changed to be gender neutral and we appreciate EPA’s 
consideration and implementation of these changes.   
In addition to this support, we offer the following comments. 
We request changing the timing of delivering lead result consumer notices to 5 business days 
for results above the practical quantitation limit (PQL) and 10 business days for results under 
the PQL.  
We support EPA’s intent to provide lead test results to consumers sooner than the current 
requirement of 30 days. However, the proposed 3 calendar days for postmarking a letter is not 
achievable. Our concerns with how to implement this proposed 3-day requirement are numerous; 
however, the largest is the fact that utility staff have zero control over when a letter is postmarked. On 
top of the uncertainty of how quickly USPS postmarks mail once it enters their facilities, outgoing 
letters from the utility first stop at a centralized mailing and delivery office that processes all official 
City of Portland mail. Utility staff cannot guarantee or verify that outgoing mail will be processed by 
the central office, delivered to USPS, and then postmarked by USPS in 3 calendar days. Instead, we 
propose 5 business days for results above the PQL and 10 business days for results below the PQL. 

 
Portland Water Bureau Comments on proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
Page 7 
This delivery timing allows utility staff to prioritize reaching out to consumers with higher results so 
that they can take actions sooner.  
We request changing the method of delivering lead result consumer notices to electronic 
delivery (email or data portal) as the default with option to request a paper copy.  
We support the proposed flexibility of notification methods when delivering lead result consumer 
notice and specifically want to highlight our support for the inclusion of “another method approved by 
State” in the LCRI. Portland customers request and expect electronic delivery of results, and this new 
flexibility allows us to meet those community needs. We strongly encourage EPA to take this a step 
further and fully modernize the consumer notification process by making electronic delivery the 
default delivery method with paper copies available upon consumer request. Electronic delivery would 
align the LCR with: 
• 
the upcoming CCR Rule revisions, which are codifying digital delivery options for the Drinking 
Water Quality Report while also requiring that paper copies are available upon request; 
• 
the medical industry, which adopted technology solutions to digitally communicate critical 
medical and health information to patients as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act of 2009; and  
• 
the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, where one purpose of the Act is to “provide for the 
dissemination of public information on a timely basis, on equitable terms, and in a manner that 
promotes the utility of the information to the public and makes effective use of information 
technology.” 
If the EPA maintains paper letters as the default notification method, this will codify a communication 
method that is decreasing in relevance, will force utilities to use a method that is not in alignment with 
consumer expectations, and is a larger burden on staff time and environmental resources. Digital 
communications are more efficient for utility staff: email is faster to put together relative to printing, 
folding, and stuffing an envelope, and has instant delivery. We acknowledge that paper letters are still 
preferred by some consumers and recommend following the CCR model of offering an easy way to 
request a paper copy. Portland suggests including the request for a paper copy of results in either the 
test kit order form or as part of the test kit materials.  
We request changes to increase efficiency and relevance in sharing lead data with public health 
agencies.  
Portland has a longstanding and successful collaboration with our county health agency and supports 
EPA’s efforts to establish and maintain these types of partnerships around the country through data 
and information sharing. We have been sending lead-in-water results to our county and state health 
agencies that investigate elevated blood lead level (EBLL) cases on a quarterly basis since 2016. 
With this deep experience and understanding of how to make these relationships successful, we offer 
the following recommendations to support success around the country: 
• 
Change delivery method from mail to email. Paper mail is an outdated business 
communication method. Email is the most common business communication practice and has a 
better chance at reaching the appropriate person who can act on the information. An email also 
allows utility staff to attach data in a digital format or spreadsheet, which is easier for health 
agency staff to receive and compare against their EBLL cases. Lastly, email delivery would 
align with our other regulatory reporting requirements, which are all completed to our regulator 
through email.  
• 
Remove regulatory bodies from this requirement to target agencies that provide EBLL 
case management or general public health services. We recognize that drinking water 
regulators across the country come in all shapes and sizes, including counties, tribal nations, 

 
Portland Water Bureau Comments on proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
Page 8 
states, and EPA. We also recognize that some regulators are in public health and some are in 
environmental protection. Because of this, we understand EPA’s intent with requiring data 
sharing with local and state public health agencies to make sure data is shared with agencies 
who are not regulators. However, regulators are already receiving utility data and providing 
regulatory oversight through other parts of the LCRI.  We believe that this section of the LCRI 
should instead focus on data sharing to support EBLL home investigations, case management, 
and other public health services. Staff conducting these activities have different data needs than 
drinking water regulators. We strongly suggest that only data that is understandable and 
actionable (e.g. home tap monitoring results) be shared with these agencies so that this is not a 
check-the-box activity but actually results in improving public health outcomes.  
• 
Remove sharing WQP data from requirements. We request that EPA clarifies the intent of 
sharing data, especially WQP data, with public health partners who are engaged in EBLL case 
management. Those data are most meaningful to utility staff and drinking water regulators and 
we fully support reporting these data to our regulators for regulatory oversight as specified in the 
reporting section of the LCRI. However, for our public health partners who have deep training in 
lead risk assessment or in the medical field, it is unclear what those staff are expected to do 
with WQP data. We do support either providing WQP data upon request or for states to post 
these data online with tap sampling results so that everyone has access to this data. 
• 
When sharing data with state health agencies, add a provision that this does not apply if 
your regulator is your state health agency. In Oregon, our drinking water regulator is part of 
the state health agency: the Oregon Health Authority. Under this proposed regulation, we would 
be required to send these data to them twice: as required here (annually by July 1) and through 
the distribution system and site assessment process. This is a duplicate effort and an undue 
burden on utility staff sending it and for regulatory staff receiving it. We request a provision be 
added that exempts utilities from repeating this reporting if their regulator is also the state health 
agency. 
• 
Maintain “another method approved by the State” provision in final rule. This provision 
allows state and utility flexibility in how to comply with this requirement in a way that is most 
meaningful to both utility staff and public health partners.  
We request clarification on the three additional outreach activities required during an 
exceedance.  
For the list of additional exceedance activities, the current LCR requires activities from three different 
types of categories (i.e. one paid ad, one PSA, and one public meeting). However, our interpretation 
of the proposed LCRI is that utilities could comply with this requirement with three activities from the 
same category (i.e. three public meetings). Is that interpretation correct? 
We request clarification on outreach to all multifamily units during an exceedance.  
One of the new LCRI provisions is to deliver a printed copy of the required exceedance public 
education materials to all multifamily units. Portland also noticed that this activity is included in the list 
of additional outreach activities. Does the required multifamily mailing also count as one of the three 
additional activities? 
Consumer Confidence Report (CCR) mandatory language 
We request additional considerations to make this statement more accessible to modern 
audiences. 
We appreciate EPA’s effort to codify the steps people can take to reduce their exposure to lead in 
water by adding them to the required CCR educational statement. Our concern with the proposed 
CCR statement is that by adding these steps in the middle, this has created a large block of text that 

 
Portland Water Bureau Comments on proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
Page 9 
creates more barriers to the information and is less accessible. Modern audiences avoid large blocks 
of text and plain language principles include using short paragraphs and bulleted lists. We 
recommend either applying these plain language principles to the final statement or allow utilities 
flexibility to format the statement as they choose, as long as all the text is present. We also strongly 
recommend coordinating with the EPA staff working on the CCR rule revisions to ensure that the 
content and the format of this statement meets the plain language goals they are trying to achieve. 
Schools and child care facilities 
We understand EPA’s intent of including schools and child care facilities in the LCRR and LCRI to 
provide comprehensive public health protection from lead in drinking water. We appreciate and support 
the continued inclusion of a waiver process for utilities where state or local rules already exist and 
continue to urge EPA to strengthen partnerships at the federal level to address all sources of lead 
exposure in schools and child care facilities. Portland has provided free lead-in-water testing to schools 
and child care facilities since 2016 and with that deep experience, offers the following comments.  
We request the 2 required samples at child cares be changed to align with 3Ts guidance.  
Many in-home child care providers only have one tap used for potable water: the kitchen sink. We are 
concerned that the LCRI requirement of testing two samples from each child care would result in 
sampling bathroom sinks or other taps not used for drinking water. This is in direct conflict with the 
3Ts guidance and the Oregon child care testing regulations, each of which specifies that facilities only 
test potable water locations. To provide consistency of testing requirements, we request that EPA 
instead adopt by reference the child care testing requirements in the 3Ts guidance. 
We request changes to the timing of notifying facilities, health departments, and state 
regulators of results.  
We have many concerns with the rolling 30-day results notification and reporting requirement, 
including delayed reporting to facilities, staff burden, and reporting redundancy. The premise of 
requiring a rolling reporting deadline for each sample or batch of samples is fundamentally not 
feasible. We agree that facilities need their results quickly and support that this results notification 
process is treated the same as other customer results notifications. However, rolling 30-day reporting 
to health agencies and the state has no precedent in other regulatory reporting and would be an 
unnecessary burden on utility staff conducting the reporting as well as the agency staff who will be 
inundated with data that will likely not be organized or even in tables. Based on our experience with 
implementing a school and child care testing program and our long partnership sharing data with local 
health agencies, we propose the following notification and reporting timelines.  
• 
Facilities: 5 business days for results above the practical quantitation limit (PQL) and 10 
business days for results under the PQL. Elementary schools and child care facilities directly 
serve a concentrated population of children, who are the most vulnerable to health impacts from 
the exposure of lead. Given that, we are curious why notification of results to these facilities has 
a much longer timeline (30 days) compared to the proposed 3-day timeline for consumer 
notices. We strongly recommend aligning delivery of results notifications for schools and child 
care facilities with the same timeline we propose for customer notifications: 5 business days for 
results above the PQL and 10 business days for results under the PQL. This will allow utilities to 
appropriately prioritize notifications to facilities with higher results so that the facility can quickly 
take actions to remove or remediate that drinking water outlet. 
• 
Local health agency: quarterly. We understand the intent of sharing these data with public 
health agencies but want to caution overburdening these staff with rolling reporting of data that 
may be challenging for them to track and manage. We currently share residential data with our 
health agency partners on a quarterly basis, which is a manageable period of data for them to 
compare against their elevated blood lead level cases. We initially tried monthly reporting, which 

 
Portland Water Bureau Comments on proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
Page 10 
ended up being too frequent. We also request that EPA clarifies what health agencies are 
intended to do with these data. In Oregon, child care providers are already required to report 
their results to their state regulator, who has oversight on the actions taken by the facility to 
remediate high results. It is unclear what additional actions EPA would expect public health 
agencies to do with this data. 
• 
State: quarterly. As noted in the public education section above, in Oregon our drinking water 
regulator is the same as our state health agency, so requiring that we report these results to 
both is duplicative. We recommend aligning health agency and state reporting so that both are 
quarterly and further recommend that reporting of results to the state be coupled with the 
certification of results notifications that are required in the reporting section below.  
• 
Waiver process for reporting. We request a reporting waiver process for systems where 
schools or child cares are regulated and required to report their results directly. In Oregon, the 
child care testing regulations require child care facilities to report their data to their state 
regulator within 10 days of receipt. Requiring a utility to send these same data to the state is 
duplicative and a waiver process would help reduce redundancy. 
We request clarification to the sampling frequency in the waiver criteria.  
In the sampling requirements and waiver criteria, EPA has not specified a sampling frequency for 
schools and child care facilities. Based on the 20% per year for elementary schools and child care 
facilities, it is implied that the sampling frequency is every 5 years; however, this 5-year frequency is 
not specified. Additionally, for secondary schools where sampling is not required, there is no implied 
frequency. We request that EPA adds a clearly defined frequency to the waiver requirements so that 
states and utilities can easily understand if current state or local testing rules meet the waiver criteria.   
Reporting 
We strongly urge EPA to continue combining reporting requirements to further streamline the reporting 
activities and reduce burden on both utility and regulator staff. The LCRI is complex with many required 
activities. We recognize it is a large task for EPA to create a reporting structure for all these activities as 
well as for regulators to receive these reports and provide utility oversight. We appreciate EPA’s efforts 
to continue simplifying the reporting burden for utility staff and provide the following comments for 
consideration. 
We request clarification on what the tap monitoring period is for consumer-requested samples, 
school and child care samples, and distribution system and site assessment samples. 
For each of these sampling initiatives, utilities are required to report monitoring data to the state within 
10 days after the monitoring period and certify the delivery of the consumer notice to the state within 
3 months after the monitoring period. However, the monitoring periods for these sampling initiatives 
are either not specified, ambiguous, or too short to meet these reporting deadlines. We provide the 
following recommendations for each of these initiatives. 
• 
Consumer-requested samples: create calendar year monitoring period. The LCRI does not 
currently specify a monitoring period for sampling conducted by consumers on a voluntary 
basis. We currently conduct annual reporting of these data to the state, which is a manageable 
frequency for utility staff to put together and for regulatory staff to review these data. 
• 
School and child care samples: create quarterly monitoring period. The LCRI currently has 
contradictory data reporting requirements outlined in the school and child care section – report 
data to the state within 30 days of receiving results – compared to the reporting section – report 
data to the state 10 days after the end monitoring period. We recommend both these sections 
are reconciled with the quarterly reporting that we recommended in our school and child care 
comments. Additionally, there is no reporting period specified for school and child care samples, 

 
Portland Water Bureau Comments on proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
Page 11 
which creates challenges for understanding how to comply with the 3 month certification of the 
consumer notice. We recommend utilities certify the consumer notice as part of the annual 
report of outreach and testing activities due on July 1. 
• 
Distribution system and site assessment (DSSA) samples: align reporting with state 
reporting required in Step 3 of DSSA. In steps 1 and 2 of DSSA, there is a 5-day monitoring 
period for the WQP samples and a 30-day monitoring period for the follow-up customer sample. 
Does the 10-day reporting deadline begin at the end of those 5 days and 30 days? Reporting 
results to the state on that timeline is unachievable and not feasible due to lab turnaround times. 
We recommend dropping the 10-day reporting deadline for DSSA samples and instead require 
reporting these results as part of the recommendation report submitted to the state in Step 3. 
We request the reporting timeline of consumer-requested monitoring data be changed from 10 
days to 60 days. 
We support and appreciate codifying the submission of additional monitoring data, specifically of 
consumer-requested testing results. However, as we also included in our LCRR comments, we 
continue to have strong concerns that 10 days is an insufficient time for reporting this dataset. 
Portland has an extensive customer-requested sampling program, which includes analyzing 
residential samples that were collected using one of our three sampling methods and includes 
customers from our 12 participating wholesale water provider districts. In order to organize data into a 
useful and understandable format that accurately describes the sampling method and organizes 
sample sets from the same home or building together, we require more than 10 days to compile this 
report. We request that this reporting requirement be changed to 60 days after the end of the 
calendar year for reporting all results collected the previous calendar year. 
Supporting comments from other organizations 
In addition to our comments above, we also support comments submitted by the Association of 
Metropolitan Water Agencies (AMWA) including: 
• 
AMWA’s request for the connector definition that the length is increased. 
• 
AMWA’s comment that the three-calendar day results notification is infeasible. 
• 
AMWA’s “upon request” alternative for schools and child cares and aligning testing procedures 
with 3Ts guidance. 
In summary, Portland strongly supports EPA’s effort to reduce the public’s exposure to lead in water. 
Protecting the health of children and those most vulnerable to lead is an essential task for water 
providers, and developing rules that are applicable to all water utilities around the country is a 
challenging endeavor. Thank you for providing us the opportunity to review and provide comments on 
these improvements. Portland is looking forward to seeing final rule when it is published later this year.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1378 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 02, 2024
Michael Regan, Administrator
Environmental Protection Agency
Dear Administrator Regan,
Attached are 8,235 comments submitted by advocates and supporters of the National Wildlife
Federation Action Fund for the Environmental Protection Agency’s proposed rule, “National Primary
Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements” under docket EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801.
15 - 22 million Americans are still drinking water out of lead service lines, despite the many health risks
lead poses to children, pregnant people, and adults. Most of the remaining lead pipes in the country
are concentrated in just a handful of states, and they disproportionately impact low-income
households and communities of color who are already overburdened with other sources of pollution
and lead-hazards. We appreciate the necessary improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule, but your
proposal has concerning limitations that would place a disproportionate financial burden on impacted
communities and result in unacceptable waiting times for communities to see lead service lines fully
replaced.
The Environmental Protection Agency must amend your proposal so our communities see equitable
and immediate action on the issue of lead contamination in drinking water. We urge you to strengthen
and advance the proposed improvements to protect our future generations from lead poisoning.
Sincerely,
Rebecca Meuninck
Advisor, Great Lakes Region
National Wildlife Federation Action Fund

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2230 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
• ~n7a!:J2o~~fo~~!nia 
February 5, 2024 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
RE: Ensuring Safe Drinking Water at School - Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
On behalf of millions of American families, educators and concerned citizens, we urge you to 
strengthen the proposed Lead & Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) to ensure safe drinking 
water at schools and child care centers. 
Lead contamination of drinking water is a serious, longstanding and widespread threat to public 
health. A key reason this problem persists is that federal policy has only required action when 
highly variable testing detects lead. To finally ensure safe drinking water for all Americans, the 
EPA must transform that "test and fix" policy to one that prevents lead contamination at every 
drinking water tap. 
A-perfect ex'a;,,P.le of tbis pre~~~tative approach is \he LCRl's requirement that water utilitie•s 
repl~c;;e a)l)~ad ·servi~e~ lrne~ within 1 oye~r~~-fh~se ~+ million toxic;: pipes are the single ·greatest 
sourc~ of lead_ cont~m\natio~ for buildi[l~~-s~rye,.d .PY ~h~m. We wholeheartedly support turning 
President Bideri'_s·goa_l ot'.~lifriinating thes1,l~~~,pipes, within a d~cadednto an enforceable · 
reality. · 1 
· • • 
• 
• ·, 
1 • 
• 
• 
· 
· 
.-
,, 
; ' 
. 
• 
i ·. · 
I 
' . 
' 
I 
. 
' 
~ 
••• ' 
~ :· 
,.: .: 
' 
.: : 
• 
We need sirr,ilar(y bold policies to stop lead from contaminating the water 
'where_ 
~rn~r1t;i,'•s chi~dr;~ go to learn' a,_n,d,, play( ~acha-flilY, Even low Jevels ·of, lead: can: 
1
' ' ' 
damage ·chil·dren·~ b~9ItH ~.1oct1:1q1n·g leari;i[ng d_i~9t;,iliti~_s,);iet)a~iqr.pJoblems; and mor,e. Yet 
national standards have allovied_.the fountains, faucets, pipes and ·plumbing in our schools to 
contain a significant amount of lead. (Even some post-2014 faucets can cause contamination.) 
As a result, lead contamination of schools' drinking water is now widespread. 
Yet for most schools and child c;;ar:e centers, the proposed rule only requires water systems to 
offer testirig· (c;1nq vety lirnit.eq_ t~sting at t~~t);. sven f:Eid~ra,!ly,r~gl!late.d scttools and.child care 
~~~ters.~q~lcf pnly _have to r¢fnediate tap~ .~.~~:re t~sts .. l3tiaw lead concentr9tioJ1~ at 1 O .parts per 
~~lhon(~p9)_ 9r,.:m~re. ::.,./>:\ 
. '.'':''·',I•,)., 
· 
These proposed policies will fail to secure safe water for kids and educators. Because lead 
testing _is hi~~ly v_ariaq!e, thEr, water f~o.m~ fqµmaiq or .fa,upet car:i be,/'hJghly hazardous" even if 
s~ver~l ~~~pie~ fail lo_ de~~c.t l~ad: M?rf=!PY~[ •. tf;l~; 10 l?Pb action level rn_eans that no r~medlation 
will. b~ _required for a huge proportion ,.of tap~ wlil~fe,some level of lead:1s detected. This Weak · . 
policy is also contfary to t.PA's.bwn 3Ts Guidance, which urges schools,to reduce lead levels 
"to
1the lowest pbk'sible corice'r1trations." 
. 
. 
~- ( ... ~ / -.' ';: ': ' i ' • ' 
_"J' 
. 
y 
' • 
; . •• ' .: .... 
+ 
• 
.-
·· 
' r 
' 
• 
. , . ,• , . ~!~:ll \\~lt('-n Ho,\d. H11ildJn~ \ Suite .1,llJ. P\rn1m,th r~wtp1g. I'\ l'Hfi2l_-215 38·, ,,-n l 
·. 
. . 
10 S · rn1h Sheer P1ttsln11gh P\J S2UJ, ,HZ, 111-.5900 . 
• 1 • · :• ,;; : 
', 
'.' ':-' ._ 
>:·· ·'-'·' ' ,, 6110 '..:. 0 ron<l'si1'i:Te1:· 11arrisbtirg ]'>:\ 171\JJ I 1 218:'l,l, I 
. 
--., •t 
' 
t'J·-
··.: '• • 
1 
,.;J, .. ,•' ··:,, · - ,' \\:\\'\\'aftli.i nrg IJ Yf I ·1\;11;1,yl\ar1ia Cl .,·\I IJ>AlJ11io11 
,, 
'. _, ·.,., ~ .;.. !/: 
-, , : ·. <:·!J.:i]rn,1\it1c.~1 ·.\nwnc,rn leder lionn' l'l:ithers \IL 
: :.··· , .... 
\( { ~.i--J·:- ! . :'= . 
' 1 
! 
-· 
_(_1 
.,.· ·, · ! 
' · t 
_1-l· :i 
. 

America's kids and educators deserve better. Just as we must replace every lead service line, 
federal policy should aim to prevent lead contamination at every tap at schools. Except where a 
school district or child care facility affirmatively opts out, the LCRI should require Community 
Water Systems (which serve 90% of schools) to implement one of the following options at 
schools and child care facilities: 
a) Prevent lead contamination at every tap, including: 
1. Filter first: Install and maintain point of use filters certified to remove lead on every 
tap used for drinking water, cooking or beverage preparation. As fountains contain 
lead and cannot accept filters at the point where water comes out, they should be 
replaced by new water stations with filters. A growing number of jurisdictions have 
already adopted some version of this "filter first" policy for schools -
Including Michigan, Philadelphia, Portland (OR) and the District of Columbia; 
2. JChealth-basedlimit on lead: Limit lead7n schools' water to T ppb, as recornmendea 
by the American Academy of Pediatrics. Schools and child care centers are 
particularly well-situated to meet this low lead concentration because they have full 
control of their water delivery systems - all the way to the tap. Taps should be tested 
after filter installation to ensure this standard is being met; and 
3. Get the lead out: To stop the cycle of lead contamination at school, new and 
replacement taps and plumbing should meet the Qs1 standard recently adopted 
by California, where lead leached into water is less than or equal to 1 ppb; or 
b) Test every drinking water tap at least once every 6 months, and then replace taps and install 
filters whenever lead concentrations exceed 1 ppb. While not ideal, this much more robust "test 
and fix" option would be more effective at reducing the likelihood of lead-contaminated water at 
school than the infrequent testing and no required remediation in the proposed rule. 
For the roughly 10% of schools and child care facilities that are federally regulated as Non-
Transient Non-Community Water Systems, the EPA can and should simply require the much 
more protective Option a) above in the LCRI rule. 
Right to Know: To counter the strong likelihood of a false sense of safety from inherently 
variable testing, the LCRI should also require a// water utilities to regularly communicate 
(including online) the following to families, educators and the public regarding schools and child 
care facilities: full test results showing any level of lead at each tap; that tests are variable and 
can fail to detect lead; that there is no safe level of lead; prevention/remediation measures taken 
at each tap; and any school districts or chilEI care--facilities opting out of their Community Water 
System's measures outlined above. 
In addition to these requirements for schools and child care centers regulated as NTNCWS, 
EPA should also incorporate policy changes that will better prevent lead contamination at all 
other schools and child care facilities: 
• Establish a clear preference for awarding grants aimed at prevention - such as replacing 
fountains with filter-equipped water stations - rather than funding more testing. 
Condition grants on adhering to the Right to Know provisions outlined above. 
• Change the name of EPA's 3 Ts Guidance to "Preventing Lead Contamination at Every 
Tap" and replace its "test-and-fix" recommendations with the prevention-oriented 
measures outlined above for LCR-regulated schools. 

America's children and educators need safe drinking water to thrive and be healthy. We urge 
the EPA to act more boldly to get the lead out at school. 
Sincerely, 
OJhv-, C- JU.t1) l,v(; 
/njf*usw10-286*afl-cio 

•
~ 
I 
. 
AFT Pennsy van1a 
A Union of Professionals 
3031 Walton Road 
~
· 
Building A, Suite 340 
Plymouth Meeting, PA 19462 
Of£L ·8l66·7J:l 
I I 
i"ilJoa~ 
,.., 
~ 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue 
N.W. Washington, DC 20460 
204E,O-
'1 111· II fl 'I I" II, 1111 II 111 II"' II",,,,., 11 JII I, I, I• /JI,,,,, I' /I

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0952 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0906 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February, 5th, 2024 
Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801,  
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
Michael Regan  
Administrator, US Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
I am writing this letter on behalf of Milwaukee Water Commons to commend the strides taken in the 
EPA’s proposed Lead and Copper Rule improvements, and to encourage this administration to further 
strengthen this proposal's impact on eliminating the threats of lead in water.  
No level of lead exposure is safe, a reality that has impacted generations of families around this country. 
In low income census blocks on the City of Milwaukee’s north and south sides more than one in four 
children under the age of six years old are considered lead poisoned. We are privileged to live along one 
of the world’s largest sources of freshwater, and yet, families still live in fear of the water coming from 
their tap because of lead infrastructure. Milwaukee’s Lead Service Line replacement program began in 
2017, and after almost 10 years of action on removing Milwaukee’s 70,000 lead service lines, there are 
still 65,000 lead service lines remaining. Enforcement of the Lead and Copper Rule is our opportunity to 
meet the urgency of the lead emergency happening in households in our city and around our country.  
We want to begin by thanking this administration for its commitment to taking steps to eliminate the 
public health hazards of lead infrastructure around the country. In particular we would like to commend 
the Environmental Protection Agency’s proposal to: 
● Enforce a 10-year replacement timeline for lead service line replacement – Milwaukee Water 
Commons has been advocating for a 10-year replacement timeline since our organization was 
founded, following input from over 1,500 residents from around Milwaukee who were calling 
for action to address the lead emergency in a single generation. We fully support this 
administration’s call to replace all of the country's lead service lines in 10 years, and are excited 
to see the EPA following through on that commitment in the proposed Lead and Copper Rule. 
● Lower the lead action level. It is a well-accepted fact that no amount of lead is safe in the 
human body. We are encouraged to see this proposal taking the regulation of our drinking 
water closer to that standard.  

● Require that communities of all sizes update their inventories of where Lead Service Lines 
exist. Milwaukee Water Commons has connected with a range of both small and large utilities 
across Wisconsin to unpack the implementation of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, 
and we have learned that many utilities are facing significant disinvestment in the maintenance 
of water infrastructure. There are many instances around the state where communities have 
not developed a plan to approach major infrastructure replacements such as for lead service 
lines. Requiring the development of lead service line inventories will both be a major step 
towards planning for LSL removal and will help to communicate the need for funding and 
technical assistance in communities that feel underprepared to address that challenge.  
As we build momentum for lead service line replacement in the United States, both through the Lead 
and Copper Rule and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, it is critical that decision makers at all levels stay 
connected with organizers working on the ground to learn how regulations and programing can improve 
implementation and ensure that environmental justice is centered in both our national and local 
approach. We are joining many advocates from around the country both to celebrate the improvements 
in this proposal, and to do our part to continue to hone in on the role that federal regulation can play in 
ensuring that families are safe from lead in water. To further strengthen this proposal our organization is 
encouraging the EPA to: 
● Encourage equitable replacement of lead service lines, and take steps to eliminate the 
residential cost share for lead service lines. It is critical to ensure that residents burdened by 
the hazards of lead infrastructure do not foot the bill for removing lead service lines on their 
own. Requiring that utilities cover the cost does not mean that ratepayers will not be investing 
in the removal of their lead service lines, it means that we have the opportunity to lead with 
equity and affordability, and that residents restricted to living in housing with lead hazards by 
the limitations of their income are not held responsible for an injustice that they have been 
forced to endure. In many instances lead service lines, and lead poisoning, occur in a higher 
density in low income neighborhoods with older housing stock and a higher density of rental 
properties. For some families, the cost of replacing a lead service line could be an impossible 
hurdle. Renters may have no agency at all in whether, or how, the replacement of their lead 
service line is financed. Funding through the bipartisan infrastructure law has already made a 
commitment to ensure that disadvantaged communities are prioritized during lead service line 
replacement. It is critical that our approach to LSL removal does not exclude, or further burden, 
low income communities. To deliver on this administrations commitment to eliminating the 
threat of lead in water, LSL removal plans should be implemented with the assistance of 
principal forgiveness and utilizing affordability plans that spread the remaining cost of lead 
service lines equitably across the utility rate payer base.  
● Require lead testing for schools and incentivize filter installation at schools and childcare 
facilities. Under the current proposed rule, schools would be offered the opportunity to opt into 
testing for lead in water, but not required to do so. It is critical that we ensure children are safe 
from lead in water both at home and at school, and testing is one way to ensure that we are 
catching lead hazards and identifying solutions. One short term solution will be offering 
incentives for the installation of filtration systems at schools and child care facilities and 
ensuring that both internal and external lead plumbing are prioritized for replacement.  

● Lower the lead action level to an enforceable health-based standard of 5ppb or lower. Health 
professionals agree that no amount of lead is safe, and therefore our standards for lead in water 
should be the same. Though a 10-ppb standard is a major improvement, it is still insufficient 
compared to the calls to consider lead poisoning at 5 ppb.  
● Incentivize filter distribution as a short-term solution for all cities replacing lead service lines 
and strengthen the requirements for filter distribution to obtain compliance of local water 
systems with multiple Action Level Exceedances in 5 years. Filtration is a short-term solution to 
what has become a multigenerational emergency. Similar to national campaigns to distribute 
smoke detectors, a campaign to distribute filters can make households safer and educate 
residents on how to identify and avoid lead hazards. Especially in communities that have noted 
exceedances of the lead action level, filter distribution will build trust among the community 
that the issue is being taken seriously and grant more time for the utility to reach compliance.  
● Require a 10-year replacement timeline for the removal of all lead service lines. There are no 
exemptions for families facing the urgency of the national lead emergency, and so we believe 
that there should be no exemptions to the call for a 10-year replacement timeline.  
● Prepare additional resources through technical assistance centers to support utilities capacity 
to develop a workforce capable of replacing all lead service lines in a 10-year period. In 
addition to these regulatory changes, we want to acknowledge that the call for lead service line 
replacement within 10 years will be a tremendous effort and will require intentionality to grow 
the nation's water workforce. EPA should look critically at opportunities to support both public 
and private sector capacity to take on this ambitious proposal, by investing in technical 
assistance centers abilities to support equitable workforce development. This challenge will also 
be a major opportunity to create pathways to living wage employment for unemployed and 
underemployed individuals, eliminating barriers for women and people of color who are under-
represented in the nation's water sector.  
 
Sincerely, 
                                                  
 
   Brenda Coley   
 
 
                                   Joe Fitzgerald 
   Co-Executive Director   
 
 
        
      Policy and Advocacy Manager 
   Milwaukee Water Commons  
 
                     Milwaukee Water Commons

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0823 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Environmental Council of the States  
  1250 H Street NW, Suite 850 | Washington, DC 20005 
  (202) 266-4920 | www.ecos.org 
 
 
 
Elizabeth Biser 
North Carolina Department of 
Environmental Quality 
ECOS President 
  Jon Niermann 
   Texas Commission on 
   Environmental Quality 
   ECOS Vice President 
   James Kenney 
  New Mexico Environment 
   Department 
   ECOS Secretary-Treasurer 
 
   Myra Reece 
   South Carolina Department of 
  Health and Environmental Control 
 ECOS Past President 
Ben Grumbles 
   ECOS Executive Director 
 
 
February 5, 2024  
Radhika Fox 
Assistant Administrator, Office of Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Via email and regulations.gov: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Re: Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
Dear Assistant Administrator Fox: 
Members of the Environmental Council of the States (ECOS) appreciate the opportunity to comment on 
the proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI). 
ECOS appreciates EPA’s efforts on the challenging and important work of updating the 1991 Lead and 
Copper Rule (LCR). In the following comments, ECOS encourages additional resources for states to adjust 
to the proposed LCRI requirements. ECOS suggests that U.S. EPA develop timely guidance for states on 
messaging and implementation and further engage with states on data management. ECOS also offers 
ideas for strategic targeted filter distribution and lead sampling requirements. The results of these 
revisions will affect the state and territorial water programs that will implement the changes, and ECOS 
advocates for the position of the states as a group. Please look to state letters for additional information, 
technical comments, and state-specific issues. 
Funding for Lead Service Line Replacement 
While the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) is delivering funding that will make significant progress in 
removing lead service lines (LSL), it will not be adequate to meet the needs for lead pipe removal around 
the country. The BIL invests $15 billion towards LSL replacement through the Drinking Water State 
Revolving Fund (DWSRF). ECOS has long touted the importance of the DWSRF and continues to urge 
Congress to fully fund the DWSRF to support drinking water infrastructure improvements, including, but 
not limited to, LSL replacement. Water infrastructure improvements are critical to the provision of clean 
and safe drinking water, and are especially pressing in communities with populations disproportionally 
impacted by environmental issues. As stated in ECOS Resolution 16-5, Addressing Serious Needs 
Regarding Drinking Water and Clean Water Infrastructure Investment, ECOS supports efforts to prioritize 
efficient, affordable, and timely awards to those communities. 
Despite the historic BIL investments, additional funding is needed to meet the estimated $45 billion cost 
of replacing the country’s lead pipes, including to support increased workload for state primacy 
agencies. States and EPA should continue to work together to advocate for the additional needed 
funding to meet this critical public health goal.  
 
 
 

Environmental Council of the States 
  
 
 
Page 2 of 3 
 
Public Education and Messaging 
While the elimination of LSLs will significantly reduce the risk of lead contamination of drinking water, 
EPA should take care to continue to include the importance of effective corrosion control in its messaging 
since other potential sources of lead in drinking water remain. EPA should develop guidance and draft 
templates for various Public Education and Public Notices as soon as possible, and no later than six 
months prior to the compliance deadline. The guidance and templates will help the states and EPA more 
clearly and consistently convey information to the public. EPA should seek out examples from states on 
effective messaging to include in its guidance and templates. 
Implementation Guidance and Training 
Prompt, clear, and effective guidance and technical support will be necessary for states to successfully 
implement this rule. ECOS requests that EPA collaborate closely with states to develop and publish all 
implementation and data management guidance documents as soon as possible, and no later than six 
months prior to the rule’s effective date. Consistent with ECOS Resolution 11-8, On the Use of Guidance, 
timely guidance is necessary for states to effectively draft state regulations, update and align their data 
management systems, and implement the revised rule. 
Due to the complexity of the proposed rule, ECOS requests detailed guidance and training for both states 
and water suppliers on new requirements. Topics that states have identified that will require guidance 
and training include corrosion control treatment (CCT) optimization, re-optimization, and optimal water 
quality parameter designation; review and approval of CCT studies; the types of reports and records 
each agency needs to track and in what format; monitoring for lead in schools and childcare facilities; 
tap monitoring requirements including the stagnation requirements, acceptable sample tap 
descriptions, and criteria for state invalidation of samples; and small water system compliance flexibility. 
ECOS recommends the Office of Water work with states and ORD on developing the necessary guidance 
and training. 
Data Management 
Any new or modified rule has significant data management and resource implications. Prior to the rule’s 
effective date, states will need adequate time and resources to adjust their business processes, train 
staff, and implement new or modified data management systems. States, tribes, and EPA have adopted 
an E-Enterprise for the Environment Digital Strategy, September 2023 and provided expectations around 
operationalizing the principles of the EE Digital Strategy. Consistent with these principles and the EE 
Digital Strategy, EPA should engage with states as early as possible to enable timely development of the 
data management infrastructure and processes necessary to meet the rule’s requirements. Due to the 
modernization of the Safe Drinking Water Information System (SDWIS), state agencies need to 
understand what functionality changes will occur during the transition to the Drinking Water State-
Federal-Tribal Information Exchange System (DW-SFTIES), and on what timeline. EPA should plan to 
provide guidance and instruction to states with adequate time to plan for changes to SDWIS and to be 
able to effectively implement a new rule. ECOS also urges EPA to engage with states in identifying the 
best solution for reporting new data elements to EPA. Please see ECOS Resolution 13-4, Environmental 
Performance and Outcomes Data and Metrics, concerning additional considerations regarding the costs 
and burdens associated with new and ongoing data reporting requirements and ECOS Resolution 11-2, 
Respectful Use of Data, concerning collaborative data stewardship with joint governance processes 
related to data quality, change management, data context and presentation, testing data reporting tools, 
and data releases. ECOS also recommends EPA review existing data reporting requirements for any that 

Environmental Council of the States 
  
 
 
Page 3 of 3 
 
are obsolete or no longer necessary to minimize overall data management and reporting burden to 
states. 
Filter Distribution 
For drinking water systems with three or more Action Level Exceedances, states suggest that rather than 
having filters distributed to the entire service area, systems should be able target that distribution to 
customers with greater risk of exposure only. Those would include locations with LSL, galvanized 
requiring replacement, or unknown lines. Providing filters to customers with known, non-lead lines could 
hurt public confidence in the drinking water system, add extra cost and burden to the system, and may 
unnecessarily incur costs that divert funding from activities with the greatest environmental and public 
health benefits. ECOS recommends amending this requirement and providing states with the authority 
to require additional filter distribution at their discretion based on available sampling, data, CCT, and 
other factors.  
Lead Sampling in Schools and Childcare Facilities 
ECOS recommends EPA change the proposed provision to allow states to issue waivers to community 
water systems from the requirement for lead sampling in schools and childcare facilities during the five-
year period after the LCRI compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021. 
States suggest changing the sampling date to January 1, 2014, which coincides with the Reduction of 
Lead in Drinking Water Act and would include sampling efforts that resulted from funding from 
America’s Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 and the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation 
Act.  
 
ECOS continues to advocate for early, meaningful, and substantial state and territorial engagement as co-
regulators in EPA’s development and implementation of federal environmental statutes and related 
rules, as noted in ECOS Resolution 14-3, Federal Financial Resources for State Environmental Programs. 
ECOS asks that EPA consider the above comments in conjunction with the comments from individual 
states and those from the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators, which are more extensive 
and provide greater technical detail from state drinking water experts.  
ECOS members look forward to continuing to work with EPA to improve the protection of public health 
and the environment by reducing exposure to lead in drinking water. If you have any questions regarding 
this correspondence, please contact me at bgrumbles@ecos.org or 202-266-4920. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Ben Grumbles 
Executive Director 
Environmental Council of the States

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1137 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024
The Honorable Michael S. Regan, Administrator
US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
EPA Docket Center
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Mail Code 28221T
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20460
Re: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper Rule:
Improvements (LCRI), Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801
Dear Administrator Regan:
On behalf of the Environmental Policy Innovation Center (EPIC), I am grateful for the
opportunity to submit comments on the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead
and Copper: Improvements (LCRI), Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801. I thank the
Biden-Harris Administration and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for continuing
to address and attempt to reduce detrimental, and largely preventable, exposure to lead through
drinking water.
The Environmental Policy Innovation Center (EPIC) is a nonprofit organization whose mission
is to build policies that deliver spectacular improvements in the speed and scale of
environmental progress. We deliver data-driven policy analysis, innovation, and technical
assistance to eliminate disparities across water systems and ensure more residents across the
country have access to safe and accessible drinking water. With regard to lead service line
replacement, our aim has been and continues to be to ensure the country is on track to replace
lead service lines quickly, equitably, and efficiently - and within the next ten years. We are an
EPA-selected Environmental Finance Center (EFC), connecting underserved communities
throughout the country to public funds and technical assistance, including for lead service line
replacement (LSLR). We are a member of the Lead Service Line Replacement Collaborative and
a member of the White House Partnership to Get the Lead Out.
Environmental Policy Innovation Center I 7761 Diamondback Drive I College Park, MD 20742 I www.policyinnovation.org
1

In 1991, EPA established a Maximum Contaminant Level Goal (MCLG) of zero, which is based
on key toxicological and health considerations. EPIC fully agrees with and supports this MCLG,
as well as with the Biden-Harris Administration, which has publicly and repeatedly stated that
there is no safe level of lead in drinking water. Lead at any level is toxic and harmful to human
health, a finding that has been well established through years of scientific study, including by
governmental agencies including the EPA and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Despite all evidence, we simply have yet to realize a society without the devastating
effects of lead impacting generation after generation, with disproportionate impacts on
communities of color, low-income communities, children, and other vulnerable and at-risk
populations.
With this acknowledgment that no amount of lead is safe, together with the MCLG set in the
1991 Lead and Copper Rule, we have a clear goal - but one that is now thirty-three years old. In
that time from 1991 until now, we have not made substantive progress to reach this goal
because we lacked 1) the funding, 2) the momentum, and 3) a clear regulatory mandate to
achieve it. Today, we have the potential of all three, giving us an unprecedented opportunity to
achieve this goal once and for all.
In 2021, Congress appropriated $15 billion for lead service line replacement (LSLR) in the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), commonly known as the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law (BIL). These BIL LSLR funds provide an historic infusion of supplemental federal funds to
the State Revolving Funds (SRFs). BIL mandated that 49 percent of the supplemental funds be
provided as grants or forgivable loans to state-defined disadvantaged communities. While this
amount does not cover the nation’s full bill to replace an estimated 9.2 million or more lead
service lines (LSLs), it can go far, especially if we use this funding effectively and efficiently,
such as through strategic use of set aside allowances from BIL LSLR funds. There is additional
federal funding available in the form of Drinking Water State Revolving Fund (DWSRF) base
funding, other EPA-administered federal programs such as loans authorized by the Water
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act (WIFIA) and grants made available through the Water
Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation (WIIN) Act. States and localities can also use funds
appropriated through the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) State and Local Fiscal Recovery
Fund (SLFRF), Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Community Development
Block Grants (CDBG), and the US Department of Agriculture’s Water and Waste Disposal Loan
and Grant Program for LSLR. Some states - Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, New York,
and Ohio, for example - have also made state funding available.
Furthermore, the EPA under the Biden-Harris Administration has launched a significant effort to
provide technical assistance through an expansive network of WaterTA, which includes the
launch of specific programs to get the lead out such as the EPA Lead Accelerators and the Get
2

the Lead Out (GLO) Initiative. As a national Environmental Finance Center with a focus on
LSLR projects, EPIC is a partner in this effort to connect water systems who have not accessed
DWSRF funding before to these critical water infrastructure investments.
A comprehensive assessment of the degree to which LSLR funding from the first two years of
the BIL appropriations has been taken up by water systems for LSLR has not yet been tallied.
There are indications, however, that available funds are not being fully taken up, in part because
there has been no legal mandate to replace LSLs. For example, in its SFY24 funding cycle,
Wisconsin made a total of $108,802,624 from the first two years of its BIL LSLR allotments
available to water systems as loans and principal forgiveness. The state was able to allocate only
$74,340,560 of these funds to water systems, however. The reluctance to borrow to replace lead
service lines in the absence of a legal mandate may be a reason, and over the long term,
represents a barrier to 100 percent replacement. In short, funding and other resources have
been made available to help water systems replace LSLs, but a clear regulatory mandate is
now needed to go hand-in-hand with this critical funding. The LCRI, once promulgated,
provides this critical mandate.
Through this public comment, EPIC outlines: 1) provisions of the proposed rule that we believe
should be included in the final rule; 2) provisions of the proposed rule that we believe should be
strengthened in the final rule; and 3) other recommendations for the EPA and states that we
believe are key to ensure the successful implementation of the rule.
EPIC believes, first and foremost, that promulgating the LCRI by October 16, 2024 is critical,
especially if EPA is faced with a choice between a lengthy internal executive branch debate
about suggested rule changes and meeting that deadline. Furthermore, adopting a final rule as
soon as possible will seize and build on the significant momentum made to date through BIL and
other funding, WaterTA, the White House Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan, the October 2024
lead inventory mandate in the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, and other initiatives put in place
in the past few years. Delays may lead to inaction or weakening of the rule, which would
squander the unique opportunity that the LCRI now presents. If there is a choice to further refine
this proposed rule over a longer period or finalize it by October and amend it later, we believe it
is most important to move this rule forward. We took a similar position with the Lead and
Copper Rule Revisions in 2021, understanding how critical it is to move things forward in light
of the complexities and timetables of federal rulemaking. That said, we submit comments under
the current expectation that the rule can both be strengthened and promulgated by October 2024.
3

1) EPIC supports the following provisions of the LCRI and advocates for their inclusion in
the final rule:
●
Ten-year timeline to replace lead service lines.
This mandate is essential to help water systems prioritize lead service line replacement.
The timeline provides a regulatory complement to the BIL LSLR funding, which will
continue to be dispersed over the next five to seven years. Given the danger that lead
poses to human health and the lessons learned and momentum building around lead
service line replacement, a ten-year mandate is both an achievable and necessary goal.
Also, this timeline is in line with several forward-thinking states like New Jersey, whose
estimated 350,000 lead service lines place it in the top ten states in the country with high
numbers of lead service lines. Despite this considerable lead burden caused by the
presence of LSLs, New Jersey established a state-mandated timeline of ten years, with a
maximum of fifteen years, to replace its lead service lines for all of its water systems.
For those who say it cannot be done in ten years, we also point to a myriad of other
examples throughout history where the country and/or the market united behind fulfilling
an ambitious infrastructure goal, such as New York City’s subway system which was
built in four years, 1,500 miles of the Alaska Highway which were built in less than eight
months, and the Rural Electrification Act which led to the electrification of 90 percent of
US homes and farms in less than two decades. These examples are all from the last
century; clearly, we can aim higher in 2024, especially in light of the urgency of this
public health threat and the toll it has taken and continues to take on our society.
●
Mandate to replace lead service lines and galvanized lines requiring replacement
(GRR), regardless of a water system’s 90th percentile Action Level.
A focus on all water systems replacing LSLs and GRRs, regardless of their 90th
percentile Action Level, is a step in the right direction, and acknowledges that until they
are replaced, LSLs will always pose a threat to public health. This also ensures we are
moving towards the permanent solution of replacement and acknowledges that no testing
protocol involving a representative sample set can capture the water quality situation
inside every home and over time.
●
Requirement of exact addresses as identifiers in public lead service line inventories.
Including exact street addresses as a requirement in publicly accessible lead service line
inventories ensures greater transparency around where LSLs and GRRs exist. Addresses
will make more people aware of their own risk of lead in drinking water, and we support
this strengthened requirement for building accountability and trust with the public.
4

●
Elimination of the Trigger Level (TL) set in the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions.
The Trigger Level set in the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) created
unnecessary confusion and undue complexity, and we support its elimination from the
LCRI.
●
Updated tap sampling protocol requiring systems to collect 1st and 5th liter samples.
EPIC recognizes the importance of ensuring stagnant water in premise plumbing and
LSLs is part of the sampling protocols and the higher of the first and fifth liter samples is
used when calculating the 90th percentile. We support this.
●
Requirement to track and replace connectors when encountered.
Lead connectors are another source of lead in drinking water, and must be replaced. The
LCRR did not include goosenecks, pigtails, or connectors in the definition of lead service
line so that, according to the EPA, water systems would not include only connectors in
the replacement rate goal and mandatory LSLR requirements. With the LCRI, EPA is
proposing to streamline and simplify the definition of connector to include goosenecks
and pigtails, defined as a short segment of piping not to exceed two feet, and to replace
them when encountered. We support this change.
2) In order to further strengthen this rule and provide the most feasible but protective
LCRI, EPIC recommends the following improvements:
●
Set a minimum starting replacement rate and incentivize faster and increasing
replacement rates over time.
EPA is proposing an average annual replacement rate of at least ten percent across a
rolling three-year period, unless the water system is eligible for a shortened replacement
rate or deferred replacement rate, set in the first three years at the end of the third year.
EPA should instead set a minimum starting annual replacement rate that is re-evaluated
every year, acknowledging that efficiencies can be gained over time. And while states are
empowered to set shortened deadlines and faster annual replacement rates in the new
rule, they should be incentivized to do so. Over time, and with greater resources, funding,
and incentives mobilized, we are confident we will see faster rates overall and
replacement rates over 10,000 LSLs per year in some of our largest cities. Faster rates are
ultimately key to how more water systems will comply with the timeline, and incentives
for faster rates of replacement – rather than opportunities for delay – must be built into
the planned implementation of the regulation. Also, as entire water systems, regions, and
states replace 100 percent of their lead lines, more resources, attention, incentives, and
momentum can be directed to the remaining ones still not in compliance.
5

●
Eliminate the deferral system and proactively guide systems towards compliance.
The goal of replacing lead service lines in ten years is not new for this administration and
is in fact something that has been stated repeatedly since 2021 by President Biden, Vice
President Harris, the EPA, and various administration officials. Starting with the LCRR in
2021, many water systems are already updating their LSL inventories in order to comply
by October 16, 2024, applying for BIL funding, using ARPA and other funding for
LSLR, and breaking ground on LSLR construction activities. In addition, once the rule is
published, assuming it is in October 2024, it will be made effective 60 days after with a
three-year window before enforcement of the new rule commences. The ten-year
deadline in fact falls roughly fourteen years from now by 2038, depending on the exact
promulgation date, not ten years.
The proposed rule provides for two deferral mechanisms, analyzed by EPA, that would
allow some systems more than ten years to replace all LSLs. The first proposed deferral
mechanism would defer compliance for systems where replacements exceed 0.039
replacements per household per year. The second deferral mechanism would defer
compliance for systems with over 100,000 known LSLs, provided the system replaces
LSLs at a rate of 10,000 annually. EPIC does not recommend a system that replaces lead
pipes in most of the country in ten years while residents of other locations, many of
whom are low-income and communities of color, are forced to drink lead-contaminated
water for much longer. EPIC also does not recommend a system of deferrals based on
static replacement rates. In short, the focus should be on efficiency and incentives,
rather than on deferrals. We address each of these deferrals in turn.
EPIC recommends against implementing the first deferral mechanism, related to a
threshold of greater than 0.039 replacements per households served, estimated to be 716
to 2,174 of all water systems, or 1.4 to 4.4 percent, as outlined in EPA’s analysis. EPA’s
analysis indicates that 95-99 percent of systems should be able to comply without
triggering the proposed deferral mechanisms. As more and more systems do comply, we
believe that ensuring the remaining systems replace their LSLs will be less daunting as
time goes on than it appears today - with efficiencies, incentives, and other resources,
such as EPA’s WaterTA network, directed towards those systems in danger of
noncompliance.
With regard to the second deferral mechanism, rather than give an immediate deferral to
the cities with the highest numbers of LSLs, estimated at four large systems with over
100,000 LSLs, we would encourage EPA and state primacy agencies to work with these
systems to create annual plans that aim to increase replacement rates, incorporate greater
efficiencies and cost savings, and set achievable annual replacement rate targets that are
above 10,000 per year. These large systems, therefore, could start out with a 10,000 or
6

more annual rate, move to a 12,00-14,000 or more annual rate, and end on a
15,000-16,000 or more annual rate, which would put even the country’s largest systems
with the most LSLs on a path to replace lead pipes in a faster timeline than what they
would be allowed under the proposed deferral based on a static 10,000 LSLR annual rate.
EPA’s analysis, while well researched, is also based on information today, which is likely
to change over time.
As more and more systems replace all their LSLs over the next several years, even more
resources can be concentrated on the remaining systems still not in compliance. By
2032-2033, roughly five years before the compliance deadline, EPA should review its
own analysis, in addition to possible efficiencies, new technologies, and new information,
and provide additional guidance to water systems to help put lagging systems on track
with the deadline.
●
Prioritize the most impacted populations.
Given that some municipalities may take all ten years to replace all of their LSLs, and
that those taking longer include systems that are not in compliance or the largest systems,
we strongly support EPA’s recommendation of mandating a “replacement prioritization
strategy (including but not limited to local communities particularly or disproportionately
impacted by lead, populations most sensitive to the effects of lead, and high risk areas
identified through lead data).” An LSLR plan accompanied by an EPA-mandated
equity-based plan should provide transparent prioritization criteria based on health and
socioeconomic factors, to ensure the lowest income and most vulnerable populations and
neighborhoods with the fewest resources are not the last to have their lead service lines
replaced, which is a real danger. EPA should provide guidance for developing these plans
including a template and examples of possible indicators that can be used (e.g. elevated
blood lead levels). EPA should also provide technical assistance to help systems design
and implement prioritization plans, given how important they are to replacement efforts.
Some cities, e.g. Buffalo, NY and Milwaukee, WI, have already developed these types of
prioritization plans as a critical step in their LSLR plans.
●
Expand the definition of service line to include a reference to ownership.
The proposed LCRI removes the reference to private property in the definitions of “lead
service line” and “full service line replacement,” and we believe this needs to be rectified.
New York State’s Fiscal Year 2023-2024 Budget (Part UU of the state transportation,
economic development, and environmental conservation budget, or TED), for example,
expanded the service line definition to include private property as… “may be owned by
the water system, a property owner, or both.” We believe EPA needs to adopt a similar
definition for a service line that includes a reference to private property.
7

●
Remove the “access” exception to compliance.
EPA should not allow systems to avoid complying with the rule by claiming that they do
not have access to a property. As noted by other advocates such as Unleaded Kids,
removing references to private property as described above, coupled with an unclear
definition of “access” creates an unnecessary loophole that, if included, may make it
impossible for us to reach 100 percent replacement. We recommend that EPA provide
model language that would aid state and local governments in gaining access to private
property and achieve full LSLR regardless of ownership.
.
Some states and municipalities allow for LSLR to proceed where the occupant of the
premises provides permission and access, even if the property owner has not done so. For
example, by enacting local ordinances, both Newark, NJ and Benton Harbor, MI were
able to gain access to properties where landlords were unreachable, and New Jersey has
adopted state legislation clarifying that such measures are consistent with state laws. And,
where efforts to obtain permission have been unsuccessful, local ordinances mandating
LSLR in certain circumstances - including where the LSL is included in a LSLR project
planned by the water system – can provide the basis for a court order requiring property
owners and occupants to provide the access needed to enable the planned LSLR to be
completed. Such measures are necessary both to ensure that no LSLs which pose a risk to
current or future residents are left behind and also to ensure greater LSLR cost
efficiencies, as failure to obtain permission can lead to project delays and related added
costs. EPA should be doing more to provide guidance to states and water systems on how
to make full LSLR mandatory regardless of service line ownership or access being
voluntarily granted.
●
Replace the full length of the lead service line at no cost to the resident.
EPIC supports mandatory replacement at no cost to the resident as a key to achieving full
replacement in ten years. We also recognize that, despite the many funding opportunities
available through the federal and state governments, many current funding streams now
available are finite resources (e.g. BIL LSLR funding), which is also why mandating
prioritization plans with LSLR plans is critical to ensuring those most in need, most at
risk, and most vulnerable have their lead service lines replaced while funding is available.
In the end, many water systems will inevitably need to use ratepayer revenue to fill in the
gaps. Without a clear mandate and path for water systems to be able to pay for LSLR on
private property with public funds, municipal bonds, and ratepayer dollars, some water
systems will remain hesitant to replace LSLs on private property. This is a barrier that
water systems will continue to point to and, particularly when combined with the impact
of “access” challenges, may lead to inequities in whose lead service lines are replaced,
favoring higher income over lower income neighborhoods. EPA should provide guidance,
8

ideally in this rule, and work with states to make clear that it is permissible to use
ratepayer funds and municipal staff to replace private-side LSLs.
●
Mandate the use of a standardized inventory template.
We support more publicly accessible information, more detailed information
requirements, and transparency around inventories. In August 2022, the EPA issued
inventory guidelines and an inventory template. Without a mandate to use this template
from EPA, however, there is a spectrum of LSL templates now in use, with some states
using EPA’s and some developing their own. The state-developed templates also vary
greatly in quality and types of information being collected. There should be a standard
and required template of data and formatting to ensure that the inventories can be quickly
and easily reviewed by states and updated to better track LSLR progress. If this
standardization does not occur, there is a risk that this data will be difficult to track and
maintain due to the high variability in how the information is recorded. We therefore
encourage EPA to mandate the use of one inventory template to ensure more
standardization, which will facilitate tracking of replacement, provide clearer and more
accessible data to residents, and help prioritize funding.
●
Require more inventories to be publicly accessible online.
We support the EPA’s mandate to make inventories and LSLR plans publicly accessible.
While water systems serving over 50,000 persons would be required to publish
inventories and LSLR plans online in the proposed rule, we believe that threshold should
include medium systems defined in this rule as systems that are serving 10,000 to 50,000.
This is possible not only for large systems such as Newark, NJ; New York, NY; and
Washington D.C, but also for medium ones such as Platteville, WI and Benton Harbor,
MI. Increasing inventory data transparency for more water systems is crucial for residents
to make informed decisions to safeguard their health, and can encourage more
community participation and engagement in LSLR programs. EPA and states, in turn, can
also compile and publish water systems’ inventories online.
●
Require lead-certified filters be provided at no cost to the resident.
EPA proposes to require systems with three or more action level (AL) exceedances in a
five-year period to make filters available to customers. We believe a better health-based
approach would ensure lead-certified filters are more widely available immediately for
any systems with AL exceedances to ensure a focus on protecting public health. We also
suggest that EPA explicitly require lead-certified filters to be provided at no cost to the
resident and that EPA and states facilitate the procurement of filters to ensure an adequate
supply where they are needed.
9

●
Revise the definition of customers to include occupants, tenants, and renters.
The term “customers” is generally interpreted by water systems as individuals who
receive water bills. This narrow definition excludes residents of non-owner occupied
dwellings, such as tenants and renters. We suggest EPA use an expanded definition in this
rulemaking to include all occupants of a household regardless of whether they pay the
water bill. Expanding this definition will enable systems to contact occupants who can
encourage owners to grant access for LSL replacement or provide access themselves,
where laws provide that occupants can provide access even where the property owners’
permission has not been secured, as noted above. Occupants can also be notified directly
for lead test results related to home and system-wide lead monitoring information.
●
Require systems to provide schools and childcare facilities with point-of–use
lead-certified filters.
We support more stringent testing in schools and childcare facilities and recommend that
EPA also require water systems to provide lead-certified filters to all public schools and
childcare facilities while testing protocols are carried out. Increasing transparency is
crucial to advance water equity, which is why we recommend results from schools and
childcare center tap sampling be made publicly available immediately. Lastly, we urge the
EPA to consider whether the “filter first” approach being adopted by many communities
constitutes a more cost-effective and public health-protective approach than testing
schemes.
●
Further lower the Action Level (AL).
For many water contaminants, EPA sets a non-enforceable Maximum Contaminant Level
Goal (MCLG) based on health, which is then (ideally) followed by a Maximum
Contaminant Level (MCL), which is an enforceable drinking water standard. As stated
earlier in this public comment, the MCLG for lead in drinking water is zero, established
in the 1991 Lead and Copper Rule. That is why many public health experts recommend
setting an MCL for lead in drinking water, and also setting it as close to zero - the goal -
as possible. Notably, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) set a standard of 5
ppb of lead in bottled water. In 2016, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommended
that water fountains in schools do not exceed lead concentrations of 1 ppb. We believe
that the same protections should be carried to lead coming from home faucets and the
level of lead in drinking water should be as close to the MCLG as feasible. While we
appreciate the proposal to lower the AL from 15 ppb to 10 ppb, data in the LCRI suggests
that utilities can achieve a level of 5 ppb. We do not support an extended federal review
of further revisions of this (or other provisions) that would preclude the promulgation of
the LCRI by October 2024, because we believe 100 percent replacement of lead service
lines in ten years is a critical step to achieving zero lead in drinking water.
10

●
Require lead service lines be replaced with copper, not plastic.
Without clear guidance on the types of materials deemed acceptable to replace lead
service lines, we run the risk of swapping one harmful material for another. While plastic
can be a low-cost alternative, there are concerns about plastic pipes including the
possibility of chemicals leaching into water. Plastic pipes also are susceptible to melting
and contamination of the distribution system with toxic chemicals in the event of fires,
and there are issues surrounding their durability. The creation of plastic - as well as
plastic throughout its life cycle - also generates significant greenhouse gas emissions
(GHG). The Healthy Building Network recommends “copper pipes without solder, fluxes
or other filler metals.” EPA should mandate the use of copper pipes in the replacement of
lead ones.
●
Continue to strengthen public notification about the risk of lead in water.
We applaud the EPA for continuing to strengthen public notification through the LCRI,
and encourage further strengthening to protect the public health of all US residents and to
build trust with the community throughout this ten-year timeline and beyond. Even with
LSLR, there is still a risk of lead in water through premise plumbing. Any risk of lead in
water means there is a corresponding risk to public health, so this should be made clear to
all consumers. Many water systems and municipalities, especially medium and small
ones, lack staff focused on or trained to provide communications and public education on
these issues, however. Therefore, EPA should provide strong guidance to help water
systems and municipalities develop and implement effective communication plans,
including the provision of ready-to-use and accessible communication materials in
multiple languages and formats.
Clear and accessible information about the potential risks of lead in water is important to
build trust, including for communities to trust communications indicating that their water
is safe. Widespread distrust of water safety, spurred in part by failures to effectively
communicate when risks are present, can lead residents to spurn their tap water in favor
of purchased bottled water, even where the tap water is, in fact, safe to drink. This
presents another face of water inequity, as low-income households are both less likely to
trust the safety of their water and least able to afford to purchase bottled water.
11

3) As we scale up to replace 9.2 million or more lead pipes in ten years, there is more that
can be done to support the successful implementation of the LCRI, related to and even
beyond this current rulemaking, including the following recommendations:
●
EPA should provide more guidance and resources to support states.
Much of the implementation success across water systems will stem from whether states -
both primacy agencies and SRF agencies - have the funding, resources, and staffing they
need and how much innovation and outside-the-box thinking states embrace. We
recommend that EPA ensure that states receive the support they need to make meaningful
changes that result in streamlined processes and faster LSLR. We also encourage the
addition of federal funding streams, aside from SRFs, be made available for LSLR.
●
EPA should provide guidance to states on the equitable allocation of BIL LSLR funds.
Policies that need to be considered include how states rank LSL inventory and
replacement projects for DWSRF assistance; how states define disadvantaged
communities (DACs) for the distribution of BIL LSLR funds, including allowing
applicants to assess DAC metrics for LSLR projects in accordance with the area in which
LSLs will be replaced (rather than for entire service areas of the water system); caps on
the amount of principal forgiveness SRF applicants can receive for LSLR projects; and
interest rates offered on loans from the BIL LSLR funds. While federal law grants wide
discretion to states to define these policies, EPA has the authority to actively engage
states on these issues when reviewing states’ Intended Use Plans that set out how states
intend to allocate SRF assistance prior to issuing federal capitalization grants to states.
●
EPA should encourage states to maximize their strategic use of set-asides from BIL
LSLR funds.
States can maximize the strategic use of set asides from BIL LSLR funds to both improve
the efficiency and equitable outcomes of LSLR projects and improve the
loan-to-principal forgiveness ratio for LSLR project awards. States should use set aside
funds to provide direct support to water systems to inventory and track the replacement of
LSLs; support community education and outreach to facilitate the efficient, equitable
implementation of LSLR projects; develop a local workforce for LSLR projects and
achieve efficiencies in procurement and other factors that can reduce the per-pipe costs
for LSLR projects.
12

●
EPA should encourage states to ensure that BIL LSLR funds are equitably allocated to
underserved communities in line with Justice40 goals.
The Biden Administration’s Justice40 Initiative promulgates a goal of directing 40
percent of the overall benefits of certain federal investments to disadvantaged
communities that are marginalized, underserved and overburdened by pollution. In
addition, BIL mandates that 49 percent of BIL LSLR funds must be provided as grants
and forgivable loans to state-defined disadvantaged communities. States should examine
and reform how they define disadvantaged communities to align with Justice40 goals, as
well as reform other policies (e.g. caps on principal forgiveness) that limit disadvantaged
communities’ effective use of SRF funds. States should also develop methods and
requirements to systematically collect and publicly report data to assess and track
whether their allocation of SRF funds fulfills Justice40 goals. Regardless of whether each
state takes steps to report on whether their SRF funding allocations comply with
Justice40 goals, however, EPA should independently assess the Justice40 performance of
state SRF programs.
●
EPA should encourage states to adopt policies that provide longer planning windows
for LSLR projects.
Applying for funding is often cited as a barrier to accessing public funds for water
infrastructure – including for LSLR – due to the time, resources and capacity needed to
complete an application. Moreover, SRF funds are typically allocated to local projects in
annual cycles. Uncertainty about how much funding will be awarded, including how
much will be provided as repayable or forgivable loans, makes it difficult for water
systems to plan how to braid SRF funds with other sources of funding, procure supplies
and contractors in the most efficient manner or anticipate investments needed for
workforce development. States should do more to minimize these burdens on water
systems, including by enabling SRF funding awards to cover large multi-year LSLR
projects, instead of requiring municipalities to reapply for piecemeal funding each year.
●
EPA should encourage states to facilitate regional approaches to LSLR.
Regional approaches to address water infrastructure challenges have helped water
systems - particularly those serving smaller communities and/or those with limited
technical, managerial, and financial capacities - to address persistent water infrastructure
challenges more quickly and efficiently. Regional approaches to LSLR can provide
similar benefits. Regional approaches include information and resource sharing,
equipment sharing, and peer networks; exploring the use of multi-system funding
applications; multi-system procurement and contracting for lead service lines inventories
and replacement; sharing templates for bid and contracting documents; and developing
statewide technical assistance programs.
13

●
EPA should encourage states to take the lead on workforce development and
procurement of materials for LSLR.
States can also take the lead on launching workforce development strategies such as
apprenticeship and training programs, developing protocols for procurement and
contracting, and addressing supply chain issues to enable purchasing at bulk rates. We
believe states’ involvement in these strategies addresses some of the feasibility concerns
at the water system level, and will increase efficiencies.
●
EPA should encourage states and water systems to explore CBP3s and innovative
models adapted to LSLR.
EPIC suggested employing innovation and efficiencies related to LSLR in a 2021 report,
in which we highlighted Community-Based Public Private Partnerships (CBP3s) and pay
for success contracting for LSLR. Our 2022 best practices report and our 2021 Water
Data Prize results also focused on innovations, efficiencies, and equity in LSLR
programs. In 2023, EPIC joined Wausau, WI and Community Infrastructure Partners to
launch a new CBP3 model involving the public and private sectors to replace lead service
lines while prioritizing community-based benefits. This approach aims to generate
superior results in terms of speed, efficiency, cost-effectiveness, and equity, with an
alliance that includes not only EPIC but also Water Finance Exchange (WFX), Laborers’
International Union of North America (LiUNA),120Water, and BlueConduit, and
complemented by local partners such as H2N, Daar, and the Medical College of
Wisconsin. In addition to replacing lead service lines, this CBP3 model incorporates key
elements such as community outreach, workforce development, local business
development, and public health and will serve as a regional hub. More water systems
should follow this and other models that create economies of scale, and states should
incentivize and encourage them too.
This is an all-hands-on-deck effort, the likes of which may not have been seen in the water sector
before. As an organization focused on speed, with an affinity for new technologies and
innovation, EPIC believes that all levels of government need to embrace and incentivize
efficiencies in all aspects of the LSLR process, and in ways that we have not even yet identified
or done before, to ensure the funding goes further and the replacement efforts go faster.
In closing, we simply cannot wait decades while new generations of children and other
vulnerable residents of this country, disproportionately located in BIPOC and lower income
communities, continue to be poisoned by lead in drinking water while the solution is readily
available. The Biden-Harris Administration understands this perhaps more than any previous
administration, and the LCRI - coupled with the funding now available - is the opportunity to
move towards a goal of lead-free at a scale and pace that matches the urgency of this problem.
14

On behalf of the Environmental Policy Innovation Center (EPIC), I sincerely appreciate the
Biden-Harris Administration’s incredible progress, momentum, and leadership towards the goal
of safe drinking water - free of lead contamination - for all. Towards that end, I hope that you
will take the recommendations offered here into serious consideration as you promulgate the
LCRI later this year.
Sincerely,
Maureen Cunningham
Chief Strategy Officer & Director of Water
Environmental Policy Innovation Center (EPIC)
cc:
Bruno Pigott, EPA/OW
Jeffrey Prieto, EPA/OGC
Jennifer McLain, EPA/OGWDW
Eric Burneson, EPA/OGWDW
Hannah Holsinger, EPA/OGWDW/SRMD
Jeffrey Kempic, EPA/OGWDW/SRMD
Michael Goldberg, EPA/OGWDW/SRMD
15

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1133 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
United State Environmental Protection Agency
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801
Public Comment
We, the undersigned members of the Illinois Water Justice Coalition, provide the following public
comment on the above captioned proposed Rules.
The Illinois Water Justice Coalition emerged during the pandemic out of informal coordination
and collaboration between organizations working towards equity and justice in water
infrastructure decisions statewide. The coalition is composed of nearly twenty organizations that
represent a broad range of interests and geographies that have been able to act quickly and
effectively to advance shared policy goals.
First and foremost, we recognize the Agency’s commitment to strengthen the 2021 Lead and
Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR). The proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI)
include numerous changes that mitigate lead exposure. While we overall support the proposed
LCRI, we believe the following changes represent critical improvements in the Proposed Rule:
Lowered lead action level from 0.015 mg/L to 0.010 mg/L. While reducing the action level
from 15 ppb is a step in the right direction, 10 ppb is not sufficiently protective from a public
health perspective as it is well documented that there is no safe level of lead exposure. Many
health experts have recommended a maximum contaminant level of 5 ppb, the American
Academy of Pediatrics recommended an action level of 1 ppb in schools, and the state of Illinois
holds childcare providers to a standard of 2ppb. Thus we recommend the USEPA lower the lead
action as close to zero as is practical.
Updated tap sampling protocol. We support adopting the Michigan model requiring systems
to collect first and fifth liter samples at site. Testing, filtration and monitoring should be required
after lead service line replacement, including at childcare facilities.
Alternate lead service line replacement threshold. We are also pleased to see the ambitious
target timeline for full, system wide LSLR within 10 years, which will apply to the vast majority of
water systems. However, we recognize Chicago is one of the handful of cities that would be
eligible for a significantly deferred timeline, up to nearly 56 years, an amount of time we find
impractical and dangerous as another two to three generations would face lead exposure.
We know Chicago has the capacity to replace all of its lead pipes in a much shorter time frame.
EPA states that it expects significant learning, market correction, and advancement in
efficiencies throughout the implementation of the LCRI in the next decade. Offering significant
extensions beyond the national 10-year target at the outset, before these advancements have
had a chance to take root, is a slippery slope.
Moreover, Mayor Johnson has committed to accelerating the rate of replacement, reaching at
least 14,000 by 2027. The Chicago 2023 Mayoral Transition Report sets a goal to replace
40,000 lead service lines over the next four years by scaling the replacement rate from 8,000 in
2024 to 14,000 by end of 2027 (pp. 77-79). This marks both the end of this first term and the

United State Environmental Protection Agency
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801
estimated LCRI compliance date given the three-year waiting period after promulgation, which is
expected by fall of 2024. If Chicago were to continue to scale up to 16,000-18,000 LSLs
replaced annually beginning in 2028, the City would be able to replace all 400,000 LSLs within
20 years as compared to 50+ years under the proposed alternate annual replacement threshold.
And as noted below, we believe that the city and state should be able to identify additional
opportunities to further accelerate the rate of LSLR, and should be able to obtain additional
resources to address the constraints identified in the agency’s feasibility analysis to expedite
action to replace all LSLs.
Year
Target # of LSLs Replaced
2024
8,000
2025
10,000
2026
12,000
2027
14,000
TOTAL (this term)
44,000
2028 (budget year)
≥16,000
Further, in the LCRI, EPA distinguishes between emergency and planned, “proactive” LSLR.
Chicago’s Department of Water Management already reports an estimated ~5,000 emergency
repairs per year, in response to which the utility provides full LSLR. In the case of Chicago, even
if EPA’s assumption of 10,000 LSLRs per year as the upper limit of feasibility were clarified to
only include planned, “proactive” LSLR, Chicago’s goal of achieving 15,000-16,000 total LSLRs
per year by 2028 appears feasible under EPA’s existing logic. We can and should expect that
over the next decade, further efficiencies will be achieved, and the upper limit of what is
achievable will likely shift.
EPA should consider replacing long-term deferral deadlines at the point of rule promulgation
with a minimum starting rate of replacement (similar to the 10% replacement rate on rolling
3-year average applied to all other water systems), rather than a static cap based on number of
LSLs (as in the current 10,000 upper limit or even 8,000 LSLRs per year that EPA seeks
comments on). This should be paired with a review of the feasibility analysis portion of the LCRI
before the initial 10-year replacement deadline, and a commitment to deploy technical
assistance to incentivize and support over-burdened water systems to reach, sustain, and
exceed more ambitious target rates of replacement.
In the interest of equitable implementation, environmental justice, and public health, we urge
EPA to tighten up the deferral criteria and deadlines, work with states to identify opportunities to

United State Environmental Protection Agency
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801
accelerate the rate of LSLR, and direct resources to communities that face the constraints
identified in the agency’s feasibility analysis to expedite action to replace all LSLs.
Require water systems to provide full LSLR, at no direct cost to residents. While we
appreciate only allowing full LSLR to count toward the replacement rate, allowing systems to
claim that they do not “control” service lines creates a major loophole that allows systems to
pass along the costs of LSLR to residents. This is an environmental justice concern. In Chicago,
it can cost up to $30,000 to replace a lead pipe, a price that many, especially low-income
residents, cannot afford. As such, low-income residents may opt out of lead pipe replacement
and continue to consume contaminated drinking water.
Further, water shutoff policies, the management and treatment of water supply, and local codes
that dictate service line material all indicate that the entire lead service line is in fact under
control of the water system regardless of whether the soil around or above it is privately or
publicly owned. EPA should reject the practice of differentiating between public and private
“sides” of a service line, close this loophole, and expand its consideration of “access” to and
“control” of LSLs to the extent of its authority. EPA should also provide model law and ordinance
language to support expanded water system access to lead lines for the purpose of
replacement, and to encourage swift, equitable compliance with the LCRI requirements and
broader policy goals.
Prioritize water affordability in LSLR funding and financing strategies. In the LCRI, EPA
identifies several federal resources available to support lead testing and LSLR. These include
WIIN, WIFIA, DWSRF and others. While we applaud these efforts, we would like to see a clear
commitment to water affordability in the assessment of water system financial capacity by TA
providers. Where necessary or potentially helpful, water systems should be directed to
resources that can support local water affordability efforts and customer assistance programs
(CAPs).
While we have significant work to do to remove lead from community water systems and
address a range of other pressing water infrastructure needs, these efforts must be paired with
water affordability and assistance measures.
Dovetail LCRI implementation with ongoing technical assistance (TA) efforts. EPA is
already engaged in TA efforts through BIL implementation, support for Environmental Finance
Centers (EFCs), the Get the Lead Out (GLO) initiative and other activities. EPA should work with
TA providers, states, and regional actors to encourage and coordinate resource sharing across
communities that may compete for access to the same supplies, resources, and labor pool as
they work to comply with the LCRI.
In summary, we implore the Agency to make necessary changes to ensure the finalized LCRI
truly protects water quality across the nation and mitigates lead and copper exposure for
generations to come.

United State Environmental Protection Agency
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801
Signed,
Illinois Environmental Council
Little Village Environmental Justice Organization
Equitable Resilience and Sustainability LLC
Friends of the Chicago River
Elevate
Metropolitan Planning Council
Sierra Club Illinois Chapter
Alliance for the Great Lakes
Health & Medicine Policy Research Group
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC)
Illinois Aging Together

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0786 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 1, 2024 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
Via: https://www.regulations.gov/commenton/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
Re: Information Request for Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) 
 
In response to EPA’s request for comments on the proposed National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements, we suggest the following 
improvements: 
1) Service Line Inventory: EPA should require PWS to track abandoned and 
disconnected lead service lines and other lead connectors identified during lead service 
line replacement projects. A new fifth category should be included in the inventory 
requirements to account for these lines. 
Some large water systems have indicated that they are leaving behind large sections of 
abandoned lead pipes during service line replacement projects (see for example Denver 
Water https://www.denverwater.org/your-water/water-quality/lead/lead-service-line-
replacement-program#group-3). These methods to replace lead pipes include the use of 
a directional boring technique that disconnects and abandons the lead service line in 
place. 
We are concerned that lower cost methods that leave abandoned sections of lead pipe 
in the ground may later contribute to soil and groundwater contamination.   Although 
very little research has directly examined lead contamination from lead pipes, the extent 
of soil and groundwater contamination from other sources of lead are well studied. The 
contamination of soil and groundwater from lead has been extensively studied in similar 
situations where lead bullets contaminate firing ranges, around industrial lead smelters, 
or from lead mine tailings. 
 
The Wall Street Journal published a series of articles describing soil contamination from 
underground and overhead lead cables (https://www.wsj.com/articles/lead-cables-
telecoms-att-toxic-5b34408b?mod=article_inline).  We can expect similar contamination 
from abandoned lead pipes as they continue to deteriorate. 
 
The rate that lead pipes will leach into soil and groundwater will vary by soil type and 
particle size, pH, soil chemistry, and the depth of groundwater.  The application of road 
salts on driveways, walkways and roadways, however, will likely accelerate the 
mobilization of lead into soil and groundwater (see: Nelson, S. S., Yonge, D. R., & 
Barber, M. E. (2009). Effects of road salts on heavy metal mobility in two eastern 
Washington soils. Journal of Environmental Engineering, 135(7), 505-510.) 
 
Although the EPA is requiring PWS to maintain an inventory of all lead service lines and 
to update these inventories over time, there is no requirement for including abandoned 
or disconnected lines in the inventory. 
 
To better improve the ability to track potential sources of soil and water contamination in 
the future, EPA must require that all lead service lines and lead goosenecks and pigtails 

 
that are not completely removed during pipe replacement projects be continually tracked 
in the required inventories.  Furthermore, we encourage EPA to require that this 
information be made publicly available and accessible by address from online 
databases.  
 
Because future renovation, remodeling or demolition work may impact these abandoned 
underground lead pipes and cause further disturbance to these materials, tracking them 
in the lead pipe inventory would also be useful to notify owners and contractors of their 
presence.  
 
The additional burden of requiring the long-term maintenance of existing records to track 
abandoned lead pipes left underground will be relatively inexpensive and easy to 
maintain. As we grow increasingly concerned about lower-level lead exposures with 
additional research, it will be become increasingly important to track potential sources of 
lead in the environment. 
 
We urge EPA to extend the requirements for lead service line inventories to include 
abandoned pipes and connectors that remain in place following service line replacement 
projects. 
2) Action Level:  We believe that EPA should adopt an action level of 0.005 mg/l 
instead of the 0.01 mg/l proposed. The health impacts of lead exposure are well 
documented and the proposed action level is not health protective.   
The recently released Integrated Science Assessment for Lead (January 2024) indicates 
that there is causal relationship with lead exposure and cardiovascular mortality and total 
(nonaccidental) mortality. The scientific evidence has been building for decades but as 
repeated studies now show consistent results, it is now time for EPA to act on this new 
information to further reduce sources of exposure. 
3) Lead Service Lines:  The lack of a clear definition and the described scope of lead 
service line replacement is inadequate.  The proposal excludes galvanized pipe, 
connectors (gooseneck and pigtails), and service lines on private property.  The final rule 
must correct these deficiencies.  
Sincerely, 
 
Perry Gottesfeld, MPH 
Executive Director 
 
Occupational Knowledge International 
Website: okinternational.org

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0769 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1400 Eye Street NW Suite 450 | Washington DC 20005 | t. 202.657.0670 | f. 202.657.0671 | www.firstfocus.org
Submitted via www.regulations.gov
January 19, 2024
Dr. Jennifer L. McLain
Director, Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1201 Constitution Ave NW
Washington, DC 20004 
Re: Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036, “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations
for Lead and Copper: Improvements”
On behalf of First Focus on Children, thank you for the opportunity to comment on the proposed rule
concerning national regulations for lead and copper levels in our drinking water. Lead poses unique
health risks to developing children and can cause complications that may follow them for a lifetime.
Low-income children are especially at risk of lead exposure, and regulating lead levels in their water can
help narrow the health disparities that they face. We applaud the EPA for taking the steps to update
America’s outdated infrastructure and provide clean, safe drinking water for all.
Health Impacts on Children
There is no safe blood lead level (BLL) for children, meaning that any and all lead exposure could
potentially lead to severe health consequences. Children drink more water per pound of body weight
than adults, making them more susceptible to smaller levels of lead. Additionally, lower blood levels of
lead cause greater impacts on children than in fully-developed adults.1 Infants are perhaps at the most
risk of consuming lead in drinking water, as those who consume formula may receive up to 60% of
their lead exposure via water (as compared to 20% for the average person).2
Elevated BLLs are associated with myriad health complications among children. Children exposed to
even low levels of lead may develop stomach aches, headaches, and digestive disruptions.3 They may
experience slower development and neurological damage that can lead to clumsiness, drowsiness, and
3 “Lead Exposure in Children.” American Academy of Pediatrics. October 02, 2023.
https://www.aap.org/en/patient-care/lead-exposure/lead-exposure-in-children/.
2 Ibid.
1 “Basic Information about Lead in Drinking Water.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. January 5, 2024.
https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/basic-information-about-lead-drinking-water.

convulsions.4 Even low BLLs are associated with attentional issues, decreased academic performance,
and behavioral challenges.5 In the most severe case, it can lead to coma or death.6
These complications can cause long-term damage both physically and socio-economically. Children
who experience severe lead poisoning during childhood may develop lasting behavioral and intellectual
disabilities that will follow them for a lifetime.7 Additionally, academic challenges may lead to poorer
economic outcomes for children as adults. Research shows that children who were exposed to lead are
more likely to have lower socioeconomic statuses than their parents in adulthood.8
How Children are Exposed to Lead
Drinking water remains children’s largest source of lead exposure. Lead seeps into our drinking water
via lead pipes, which corrode over time and release lead particles into passing water. They are most
prevalent in older homes and buildings. Certain water properties (like acidity, temperature, and mineral
content) can increase the risk of lead entering the water system.9
Aging school buildings often serve as a significant source of lead exposure for children as well. There is
currently no mandated lead testing for school buildings, and some schools may bypass testing to avoid
having to fix a revealed lead problem. An estimated 400,000 schools and child care centers may have
elevated levels of lead in their water.10 Research conducted by the U.S. Government Accountability
Office (GAO) found that more than half of schools did not test for lead or did not know if they had
ever tested for lead.11 Of the 43% that did test, more than one-third found elevated lead levels in their
water.12
This new regulation requires all community water systems (CWS) to replace 10% of their lead pipes
annually, resulting in the total elimination of lead pipes in CWSs by 2037. The rule also proposes
requiring CWSs to test for lead in all schools and childcare centers, allowing students and families to be
informed about their lead exposure at schools.
Inequities in Lead Exposure
12 Ibid.
11 “Protecting Children from Lead Exposure in Schools and Child Care Facilities.” U.S. Government Accountability Office. October 27,
2020. https://www.gao.gov/blog/protecting-children-lead-exposure-schools-and-child-care-facilities.
10 “FACT SHEET: The Biden-⁠Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan.” The White House. December 16, 2021.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-lead-pipe-and-paint-action-pla
n/.
9 Basic Information about Lead in Drinking Water.”
8 Marshall, “Lead-Exposure and Childhood Brain Outcomes.” https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6980739/.
7 “Lead Poisoning.” World Health Organization. August 11, 2023.
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/lead-poisoning-and-health.
6 “Learn about Lead.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. August 28, 2023. https://www.epa.gov/lead/learn-about-lead.
5 Marshall, Andrew T. et al. “Association of Lead-Exposure Risk and Family Income with Childhood Brain Outcomes. Nature Medicine,
Vol 26(1). July 13, 2020. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6980739/.
4 Ibid.
2

Research shows that children of color and children in poverty are more likely to have greater BLLs.13
Specifically, Black children are at the greatest risk of lead exposure and are more likely to have elevated
BLLs than their white peers.14 The same is true for children in low-income homes and communities
compared to their peers in higher-income communities. Black and low-income families are more likely
to occupy older homes, which are more likely to contain lead pipes.15
Replacing lead pipes, as required by this rule, will lead to tremendous benefits for the children most
impacted by lead exposure in communities of color and impoverished communities across America. We
also applaud EPA’s work to ensure that this process is equitable and addresses environmental injustices.
This regulation requires that water systems prioritize replacements for those who are disproportionately
impacted by lead exposure, meaning that these historically excluded communities will see positive
health impacts quickly.
Conclusion 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments on this proposed rule. We are grateful that EPA is
taking responsible steps to manage lead contamination and provide safe, clean drinking water for all.
Please reach out to Abbie Malloy, Director, Health, Environmental, and Nutrition Policy, at
abbiem@firstfocus.org with any questions.
Sincerely,
Bruce Lesley
President, First Focus on Children
15 Hauptman, Marissa et al. “Neighborhood Disparities and the Burden of Lead Poisoning.” Pediatric Research. March 10, 2023.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10000346.
14 “Biomonitoring - Lead.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. October 9, 2023.
https://www.epa.gov/americaschildrenenvironment/biomonitoring-lead.
13 Sampson, Robert J. “Legacies of Inequality, Legacy Lead Exposures, and Improving Population Well-Being.” PNAS. March 28, 2022.
https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2202401119.
3

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0805 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0720 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Re: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements
To Whom It May Concern,
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for 
Lead and Copper: Improvements. I am a Registered Nurse who works with the most vulnerable 
population in our nation, and I stand behind this regulation proposed to eliminate lead from our 
drinking water completely. 
I would like to provide supporting evidence of why it necessary to pass this the 
legislation regarding The National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvement:
1. According to the EPA, there are no safe levels of lead exposure.
2. According to the EPA and WHO, lead is seriously dangerous to the human race, 
especially children and women of child-bearing age, and it’s effecting communities of 
minority the most.
3. This regulation will have a positive impact on the nation by saving lives and cut down on 
unnecessary healthcare spending by reducing health conditions caused by exposure to 
lead.
In summary, I am for legislation passing this regulation and implementing it right away, starting 
with the communities who have the highest exposure risks at this moment. Please see below for 
additional details and pertinent literature.
Sincerely,

LaKenya McGhee
Registered Nurse, CSUEB BSN Student
The fact that there are no safe levels of exposure to lead, prompts me to believe that 
implementing this regulation is the best thing for our people because this regulation is proposing 
that water systems be replaced, remove lead trigger levels, reduce the lead action level to 
0.010mg/L, and strengthen tap samples. Since there are no safe levels when it comes to lead 
exposure, implementing these actions can reduce the significant health conditions that lead 
exposure causes. This new regulation has added to the original LCRR proposal, and was 
reviewed and updated, as requested by President Biden in 2021. The Federal Register gives great 
detail of what the requested changes to the original proposal by President Biden, and the EPA 
has addressed these concerns, and now this proposal is much better, and should be passed.
The WHO, EPA, and other Environmentalist all agree that lead exposure is harmful all forms. 
They also agree that the most vulnerable population is subjected to lead exposure the most, and 
this needs change. All Americans have a right to clean water and air, and it’s unjust for a certain 
population to exposed to such dangerous chemicals. Replacing 100% of all lead and copper pipes 
is going to change the country, and as a nurse, I want to see this change happen because the 
healthcare team carries the burden to care for these sick people and have to give answers of why 
this happening, and this just isn’t fair to us either. So, I stand with this new regulation, and I hope 
that you hear the people of America concerns and make to this crisis.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/12/17/2021-27457/review-of-the-national-
primary-drinking-water-regulation-lead-and-copper-rule-revisions-lcrr
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/lead-poisoning-and-health

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1110 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
SOUTH CAROLINA SECTION AMERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION 
121 Executive Center Drive, Suite 115, Columbia, South Carolina 29210  
(803) 358-0658, Fax (803) 358-0646, www.scwaters.org 
 
 
February 5, 2024  
 
The Honorable Michael Regan Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20460  
FOR ELECTRONIC DELIVERY  
Comments conveyed via internet at  
https://www.regulations.gov/commenton/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
 
 RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (Docket 
Id#: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801)  
 
Dear Administrator Regan,  
 
The Water Utility Council of the South Carolina Chapter of the American Water Works 
Association (SCAWWA) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the Proposed Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI or Proposed Rule).  SCAWWA currently has 732 individual 
members and 85 utility members.  These members provide safe and reliable water to their 
customers daily.   
 
In general terms, we are concerned that a number of the proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Revision Improvements (LCRRI) impose unnecessary costs on our members’ customers and 
create a regulatory framework that is excessively difficult to administer.   Some examples 
include an unfeasible requirement for a utility to provide 3-day notice of sample results and for a 
utility to contact a customer within 24 hours of learning of an action level exceedance.  Of 
significant concern in South Carolina is that the service line between the meter and the dwelling 
is typically part of the privately owned household plumbing.  Utilities do not have the legal ability 
to unilaterally trespass on private property to perform construction on these lines.   
 
Also, the removal of 10% of all lead service lines per year for 10 years is not feasible.  The 
LCRRI should be revised to allow a utility to provide the state regulatory agency with a plan to 
address the eventual removal of all lead service lines.  The timing of the completion of the lead 
service line removal program should be determined at that level.  
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide these comments to EPA and thank you in advance for 
consideration of our recommendations. 
 
If you have any questions, please contact me at david@scwaters.org or the phone number 
below. 
 
 
Sincerely,    
 
                                                 
David G. Baize, Executive Director 
SCAWWA/WEASC 
803-206-3407

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0934 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
10435 Ashford Street, 2nd Floor I Rancho Cucamonga, CA 91730 
P 909.481.7200 I F 909.291.2107 I www.ca-nv-awwa.org 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking 
Water Docket, Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 (Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, LCRI) 
 
The California-Nevada Section of the American Water Works Association (CA-NV AWWA) appreciates 
the opportunity to comment on the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) proposed in the above 
referenced docket.  CA-NV AWWA is a professional association historically focused on drinking water 
safety, with over 5,000 members collectively responsible for serving nearly all water consumers in our 
two states. Lead exposure is a serious public health issue in many communities across the United 
States. CA-NV AWWA appreciates EPA’s actions to reduce lead and copper exposure and the efforts to 
foster a collaborative approach to resolving the problems by working with the states, drinking water 
utilities, and many other stakeholders.   
 
Overview: LCRI Makes Positive Improvements 
CA-NV AWWA appreciates that the LCRI continues to approach lead contamination with a treatment 
technique.  CA-NV AWWA also supports a proactive approach with lead service line (LSL) replacement 
as a program that promotes utility service to customers, as opposed to reactive posture of 
replacement triggered by a lead exceedance. CA-NV AWWA supports the extension of LCRR 
compliance deadlines.  
 
One Size Does Not Fit All 
The risk of lead exposure from water distribution systems varies tremendously by region. California 
utilities have taken significant steps toward reducing lead exposure in drinking water, including school 
testing and early action to inventory and replace lead service lines. In California, community water 
systems were given a deadline of July 1, 2020 for submitting a final inventory of known partial or total 
lead service lines in their distribution systems. On a per-capita basis, California has the least LSLs and 
the real numbers are low. In Nevada the Bureau of Safe Drinking Water has publicly reported that only 
three small water systems had lead exceeding action levels, and that all three were taking steps to 
address the issue.  These results are far different from conditions in the East or Midwest regions, and 
EPA should consider the extremely lower risk.  
 
Similarly, in cooperation with the California Department of Education, schools and daycare centers 
were offered free sampling for lead and technical assistance in the event of an elevated lead sample. 
The public water system may not be the best entity to perform testing at these facilities, however. We 

California-Nevada Section, AWWA 
EPA Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
Page 2 
 
 
encourage EPA to explore assigning oversight responsibility for this testing to other federal agencies 
that have more regular interaction with education and daycare providers. 
 
Comments that follow draw in part on these experiences that showed extremely low incidence of lead 
service lines and related sources of possible lead contamination.  We respectfully offer the suggestions 
that follow with the intent to improve implementation and efficient compliance with the LCRI.  
 
1. Waive Testing That Duplicates Previously Completed Work 
California's existing lead testing programs for schools and childcare facilities should be granted a 
waiver from duplicative federal requirements. Inventories that community water systems (CWS) have 
already completed voluntarily or by order of the primacy agencies should be accepted to meet EPA 
requirements in the LCRI. 
 
2.  Remove Lead Connectors from LCRI Inventory Requirements 
A requirement to inventory all lead connectors presents many practical obstacles, with limited public 
health benefits. Where lead service lines were previously removed from the system, creating an 
extensive inventory of lead connectors will require utility resources with little or no expected health 
risk reduction benefit. The LCRI proposed definition of lead connectors as having a maximum length of 
two feet is not based on any utility survey and should be modified.  Many utilities don’t have connector 
length data or will exceed this length in some or all instances. This definition could result in needlessly 
excessive work to identify, inventory, and depending on composition, potentially replace every 
connector in the entire service area. For many community water systems, this would be infeasible.  
 
3.  Modify the Service Line Definition with Respect to Galvanized Pipe 
CA-NV AWWA recommends a change in the definition of “galvanized requiring replacement service 
lines” in the LCRI. In the proposed LCRI, utilities are required to know the complete history of any 
galvanized service line in order to treat it as lead. It is uncommon for a utility to have the necessary 
records going back decades or more to make this demonstration.  We suggest that the LCRI should 
consider them as lead service lines only if they are currently, or are known to have been downstream 
of lead lines.  
 
4.  Provide an Off-Ramp to Reclassify Galvanized Requiring Replacement to Non-Lead 
The treatment in LCRI of galvanized requiring replacement (GRR) as equally harmful as lead service 
lines forever and without exception, is mistaken and unjustified. CA-NV AWWA recommends revision 
of the GRR definition to specify conditions, based on time thresholds and testing, by which a galvanized 
line may be designated as non-lead. Research1 is showing that where utility owned LSLs were removed 
some years ago, tap samples (1st or 5th liter) may not exceed the detection limit for reporting (DLR).  
 
5.  Define “Control” Based on “Ownership,” Not “Access” 
CA-NV AWWA appreciates that EPA recognizes that water systems face legal constraints on the 
replacement of service lines on private property, however we suggest that the definition remains 
problematic and should be changed. The LCRI would require replacement of LSLs and GRR service lines 
 
1 Details may be found in a comment letter submitted by the East Bay Municipal Utility District, for example.  

California-Nevada Section, AWWA 
EPA Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
Page 3 
 
 
“under the control of” the CWS and defines control as “adequate access (e.g. legal access, physical 
access) to conduct full service line replacement.” A property owner who objects to offers for pipe 
replacement is more truly in “control” and this reality should be reflected in the LCRI. While we 
applaud voluntary arrangements made by CWSs to assist customers with replacement of LSLs or 
GRRs on private property, there is a significant liability in doing so. Because of the tremendous 
burden a CWS would have in replacing service lines on private property, and the very substantial 
liability they would incur in doing so, the responsibility for replacement of LSL or GRR on the 
customer side should be with the property owner. 
 
6.  Compliance Timeframes and Flexibility 
CA-NV AWWA appreciates the aggressive service line inventory and replacement requirements 
outlined in the draft regulations §141.84.  We agree that the approach to evaluate and replace 
inventories would be effective for removing all water service lines containing or potentially containing 
lead. However, we caution the approach is not feasible in the proposed timeframe due to the expected 
large number of service lines and connectors that would need to be inventoried, validated, and 
replaced, particularly for those of “unknown” composition. Moreover, pursuant to primary drinking 
water regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] 141.33), public water systems must keep 
records of chemical analysis, sanitary surveys , and written reports and summaries for at least 10 years. 
As such, it is not expected that water systems would have retained sufficient inventory records and 
would need to indicate and likely prove that inventories of “unknown” materials do not contain lead, 
regardless of whether water quality results are consistently below existing action levels. Additionally, in 
regions with large numbers of LSLs to replace, utilities will encounter procurement bottlenecks that 
delay implementation as all water systems try to replace unknown or known lead materials within the 
same compliance period. EPA should provide greater flexibility to systems with low or no lead 
occurrence at customer taps and we suggest not requiring replacement of all “unknown’ inventory 
materials for systems with consistent low or no lead occurrence. It makes better economic sense for 
EPA to focus on the biggest issues instead of enforcing replacement plans where there are no obvious 
or apparent health risks. 
 
CA-NV AWWA has only sought to comment on a few of the top concerns of the LCRI to our members.  
We do also wish to amplify the extensive comments raised by the American Water Works Association 
on behalf of members across the United States. We sincerely thank the EPA for the opportunity to 
offer the suggestions expressed above. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Sue Mosburg 
Executive Director 
CA-NV Section, AWWA

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1119 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations  
for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI) 
88 Fed. Reg. 84,878 (Dec. 6, 2023) 
 
Comments of: 
Natural Resources Defense Council | Earthjustice 
Campaign for Lead Free Water | Concerned Pastors for Social Action 
Flint Rising | Newark Education Workers Caucus 
United Parents Against Lead | Water You Fighting For? 
 
 
Submitted via Regulations.gov 
Docket No. EPA-HW-OW-2022-0801 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
 
 

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. Executive Summary ....................................................................................................... 1-1 
2. EPA Should Require Full Replacement of 100% of Lead Service  
Lines, Irrespective of Ownership and Paid for by Water Systems .............................. 2-1 
A. Overview .............................................................................................................. 2-1 
B. Statutory Provisions Regarding Treatment Techniques  
and Feasibility ...................................................................................................... 2-3 
C. LSL Replacement in 10 Years or Less is Necessary and Feasible ....................... 2-4 
i. The LCRI cannot authorize extensions beyond 10 years  
for systems that would be required to remove 8,000 or  
10,000 LSLs per year ............................................................................. 2-11 
ii. Response to EPA request for comment on whether primacy  
states must approve deferred deadlines and whether required  
rate should increase after 10 years ......................................................... 2-14 
iii. EPA cannot allow systems with a high concentration  
of LSLs to avoid removing all lead pipes in 10 years ............................ 2-16 
iv. EPA should include a mandatory minimum number of  
annual LSLRs......................................................................................... 2-20 
D. Service Lines and Connectors Subject to Mandatory Replacement .................. 2-21 
i. Definitions of Lead Connector and LSL and Replacement  
of Lead Connectors ................................................................................ 2-21 
a. Connector Definition ................................................................. 2-22 
b. Lead Service Line Definition  .................................................... 2-22 
c. Lead Connectors ........................................................................ 2-23 
d. Galvanized Lines and Lead Materials ........................................ 2-24 
e. Responses to EPA’s Specific Requests for  
Comment .................................................................................... 2-24 
ii. Partial Lead Service Line Replacement ................................................. 2-25 
iii. Filters ..................................................................................................... 2-27 
iv. The proposed LCRI greatly undermines the promise of  
replacing all lead service lines by incorrectly and narrowly  
defining “control” .................................................................................. 2-27 
a. EPA should require that water systems replace all  
lead service lines and that water systems, localities,  
and states overcome any barriers or EPA will retain  
primacy for the LCRI ................................................................. 2-28 
1. EPA should presume water systems have  
control over full service lines ......................................... 2-28 
2. EPA should require primacy states to adopt  
rules stating water systems are presumed to  
have control over full lead service lines and  
to have authority to fully replace them, as a  
condition of primacy ...................................................... 2-29 
3. EPA can institute different conditions for  
primacy as an alternative .................................................... 2-30 

ii 
4. EPA should institute accountability for  
claims of barriers to access ............................................ 2-31 
b. EPA previously presumed that water systems had  
control over the full lead service lines and should  
revert to that position ....................................................................... 2-31 
1. Using the definition of control in the 1991  
LCR is logical and would help achieve true  
lead service line replacement, rather than  
in name only ................................................................... 2-31 
2. EPA’s focus on access in the proposed  
LCRI supports reverting to the definition  
of and presumption regarding control from  
the 1991 rule ........................................................................ 2-33 
c. The proposed LCRI permits water systems to easily  
avoid replacement of some or all LSLs in their  
system with no effective mechanism to change  
such actions ................................................................................ 2-36 
d. Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comment about  
Control, Access, and Consent .................................................... 2-39 
v. The LCRI must prohibit water systems from charging  
customers for full service line replacements .......................................... 2-41 
a. Environmental Justice Concerns ................................................ 2-42 
b. EPA has authority and responsibility to prohibit  
charging customers for LSLRs .................................................. 2-44 
1. SDWA ............................................................................ 2-45 
2. Fair Housing Act ............................................................ 2-46 
3. Title VI ........................................................................... 2-47 
c. Madison, Wisconsin’s LSLR program is not  
comparable to the LCRI ............................................................. 2-48 
d. EPA’s concerns that prohibiting cost-sharing  
would impermissibly encroach on state and  
local authority are unfounded .................................................... 2-50 
E. EPA should help guide selection of materials used in replacement  
service lines, and take steps to ensure those materials are safe ......................... 2-53 
i. EPA should give guidance on replacement material that  
urges use of copper rather than plastics ................................................. 2-53 
a. EPA should recommend use of copper service  
lines because of the harms caused by production  
and disposal of plastic ................................................................ 2-53 
b. EPA should recommend use of copper to avoid  
drinking water contamination from plastic service  
lines by hazardous chemicals and micro-  
and nanoplastics ......................................................................... 2-54 
c. Plastic service lines are not a good option because  
they are vulnerable to degradation and highly toxic  
releases during fires ................................................................... 2-57 

iii 
d. Among the types of plastic that could be used in  
replacement service lines, it is most critical to  
avoid use of PVC and CPVC ..................................................... 2-58 
e. Copper generally lasts much longer than plastic,  
reducing long-term costs and making the necessity  
for replacements in 20-30 years much less likely ...................... 2-59 
f. Additional cost, lifecycle, and other considerations .................. 2-59 
ii. EPA should undertake or fund studies needed to conduct  
the analyses that state and local governments need to make  
sound decisions about replacement service lines ................................... 2-60 
iii. EPA should ensure that its drinking water standards and  
action levels are set at optimal values for substances that  
are likely to enter drinking water from all potential  
replacement service line materials .............................................................. 2-61 
F. Lead Pipe Disposal Concerns ............................................................................ 2-61 
G. Service Line Replacement Plans (§ 141.84(c)) .................................................. 2-63 
i. Specific Changes to Replacement Plan Requirements  ......................... 2-63 
ii. Response to EPA’s Specific Request for Comment  .............................. 2-64 
 
3. The LCRI’s Compliance Date .............................................................................................. 3-1 
A. Background .......................................................................................................... 3-1 
B. The LCRI’s compliance date should be less than three years  
after the date the rule is promulgated ........................................................................ 3-2 
C. To ensure compliance with SDWA, the language describing  
the mandatory LSLR requirements should be modified  ........................................ 3-5 
D. Responses to EPA’s requests for comment .......................................................... 3-6 
4. The Threshold for Lead Action Level Exceedances Must Be More  
Stringent and Actions Required After a Lead Action Level  
Exceedance Should Be Strengthened ........................................................................... 4-1 
A. A lead action level lower than 10 ppb is necessary to prevent  
harm to the extent feasible as required by the SDWA ......................................... 4-1 
i. Lowering the LAL will better prevent adverse  
health effects ............................................................................................ 4-1 
ii. Lowering the LAL below 10 ppb is feasible ............................................ 4-4 
B. Responses to EPA’s requests for comment about the Lead  
Action and Trigger Levels ................................................................................... 4-6 
C. Additional requirements for systems with multiple lead action  
level exceedances ................................................................................................. 4-7 
i. EPA must require water systems with a lead action level  
exceedance to provide filters to all consumers in the system .................. 4-7 
ii. Filters should be delivered to all consumers in the water  
system at no charge .................................................................................. 4-9 
D. Responses to EPA’s requests for comment about Additional  
Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level  
Exceedances ....................................................................................................... 4-11 

iv 
E. EPA must adopt a higher percentile benchmark than the 90th  
percentile benchmark adopted in 1991 for a LAL exceedance. ......................... 4-14 
i. A Percentile Higher Than 90th Would Better Prevent  
Adverse Health Effects .......................................................................... 4-14 
ii. A Percentile Higher Than 90th is Feasible ............................................ 4-17 
5. Service Line and Connector Inventories ...................................................................... 5-1 
A. Initial Inventory and Annual Updates .................................................................. 5-1 
B. Public Availability of Inventories  ....................................................................... 5-2 
C. Validation Deadlines, Material Identification Deadlines,  
and Inventory Validation Requirements  .............................................................. 5-2 
i. Deadlines.................................................................................................. 5-2 
ii. Validation ................................................................................................. 5-3 
D. Replacements in Systems Reporting Only Non-LSLs ......................................... 5-5 
E. Responses to EPA’s Specific Requests for Comment  ......................................... 5-5 
6. Small System Flexibility ................................................................................................ 6-1 
A. The LCRI’s Approach to Small System Flexibility ............................................. 6-1 
B. EPA must strengthen requirements for point of use devices ................................ 6-2 
C. EPA should require annual monitoring and eliminate the  
nine-year monitoring waiver ................................................................................ 6-4 
D. EPA should state that any extension of the LSLR mandate  
would result in an “unreasonable risk to health” ................................................. 6-4 
7. Tap Sampling and Monitoring Lead and Copper in Tap Water ............................... 7-1 
A. Revised Tier Definitions  ..................................................................................... 7-1 
B. Sampling protocol requirements have been improved  
but should be tightened ........................................................................................ 7-2 
i. Wide mouth collection bottles  ................................................................ 7-2 
ii. EPA should require both first- and fifth-liter  
sampling at Tier 3 sites ............................................................................ 7-2 
iii. Maximum stagnation times ...................................................................... 7-3 
iv. Customer-requested supplemental monitoring ........................................ 7-3 
v. Other changes to sampling protocols needed  .......................................... 7-3 
vi. Make sampling data publicly available .................................................... 7-4 
C. EPA must prohibit triennial and nine-year reduced tap  
monitoring periods ............................................................................................... 7-5 
D. Copper monitoring is not adequately considered in the  
proposed LCRI  .................................................................................................... 7-6 
E. EPA must address confusing messaging regarding sampling  
and public education ............................................................................................ 7-7 
F. Responses to EPA’s requests for comment on tap sampling  
for lead and copper ............................................................................................... 7-8 

v 
8. Public Education and Outreach, Public Notification, and CCRs  ............................. 8-1 
A. Public education and public notification materials must include  
clear, accurate, and robust information regarding risks of lead  
exposure at individual taps .................................................................................. 8-2 
i. Content changes needed for public education and public  
notification materials  .............................................................................. 8-2 
ii. Translation assistance  ............................................................................. 8-5 
B. Notification of individual tap monitoring results  ................................................ 8-6 
i. Speed and manner of notification  ........................................................... 8-6 
ii. Supplemental customer-initiated tap monitoring  .................................... 8-6 
iii. Content requirements  .............................................................................. 8-7 
C. Other public notification requirements ................................................................ 8-7 
i. Notification of service line material  ....................................................... 8-7 
ii. Notification of a service line disturbance  ............................................... 8-8 
D. Copper action level exceedance public notifications ........................................... 8-8 
E. Public outreach requirements should be expanded so that  
activities are required of all water systems and enhanced for  
systems with action level exceedances ................................................................ 8-8 
i. Outreach activities required of systems with a LAL  
exceedance ............................................................................................... 8-9 
ii. Required outreach activities for systems failing to  
meet the SLR replacement rate  ............................................................. 8-10 
iii. Outreach activities must prioritize environmental  
justice communities ............................................................................... 8-10 
iv. EPA should require annual outreach activities of all  
systems, independent of 90th percentile performance ........................... 8-11 
F. “Consumer Confidence Report” requirements are insufficient,  
misleading, and should be changed  .................................................................. 8-12 
G. Responses to EPA’s requests for comment about public  
education and outreach issues ............................................................................ 8-14 
H. Conclusion ......................................................................................................... 8-16 
9. Schools and Child Care Facilities ................................................................................. 9-1 
A. The Filter First approach is the best way to protect children ............................... 9-4 
B. EPA’s authority to require installation of filters ................................................... 9-5 
C. The proposed rule does not protect children ........................................................ 9-6 
i. The program is voluntary ......................................................................... 9-7 
ii. The testing will not demonstrate that water is safe .................................. 9-8 
iii. Testing once in a five-year period is inadequate ...................................... 9-9 
iv. The testing and notification requirements do not  
support public education .......................................................................... 9-9 
v. There is no remediation requirement ..................................................... 9-10 
vi. The provisions will create or exacerbate environmental  
justice issues........................................................................................... 9-10 
vii. Conclusion ............................................................................................. 9-11 
D. Waivers and Exemptions .................................................................................... 9-11 

vi 
E. Definition of Child Care Facility ....................................................................... 9-12 
F. Responses to EPA’s Specific Requests for Comment. ....................................... 9-12 
10. The LCRI’s CCT and WQP Provisions Must Be Strengthened .............................. 10-1 
A. § 141.81(f): The five-year deferral of CCT actions fails to  
protect public health to the extent feasible, will not achieve  
EPA’s stated goals, and must be eliminated or modified ................................... 10-3 
i. EPA’s rationales for allowing a five-year deferral of  
CCT actions ........................................................................................... 10-3 
ii. Water systems taking advantage of the five-year  
CCT deferral would not actually be required to replace  
100% of LSLs and GRRs ....................................................................... 10-4 
iii. The five-year deferral fails to protect public health to  
the extent feasible in multiple ways  ...................................................... 10-5 
a. Implementing OCCT does not always require  
five years .................................................................................... 10-5 
b. The five-year deferral of OCCT fails to account  
for the widely varying numbers of LSLs and GRRs  
in water systems, even in systems of similar size  ..................... 10-6 
c. Proposed section 141.81(f) lacks necessary criteria  
for determining which systems are eligible to defer  
CCT actions  .............................................................................. 10-7 
d. Proposed section 141.81(f) unduly and unreasonably  
delays feasible public health protections that could  
otherwise be achieved through OCCT ....................................... 10-7 
iv. If it is retained, proposed section 141.81(f) should be  
narrowed to defer only CCT studies focused on LSLs  ......................... 10-8 
v. Recommendations regarding proposed section 141.81(f)  .................... 10-9 
B. §§ 141.2, 141.81(a), (b): The LCRI’s definition of OCCT should  
be clarified and provisions inconsistent with the OCCT definition  
should be modified  .......................................................................................... 10-10 
C. § 141.82(c): The LCRI’s provisions regarding the conduct of  
CCT studies should be strengthened  ............................................................... 10-12 
i. CCT studies should be required to test more orthophosphate 
concentrations  ..................................................................................... 10-12 
ii. CCT studies should measure additional water quality  
parameters that are necessary for determining OCCT ......................... 10-14 
iii. Only CCT studies compliant with the LCRI should be used  
for determining OCCT  ........................................................................ 10-15 
iv. The LCRI should include transparency requirements for  
all CCT studies  .................................................................................... 10-15 
v. Metal coupon studies should be eliminated ......................................... 10-15 
vi. The LCRI should account for lead dioxide (PbO2) scales  
as a possible CCT and as a possible impediment to safe  
orthophosphate use .............................................................................. 10-16 
vii. DBP pre-cursor removal as CCT ......................................................... 10-17 

vii 
D. § 141.81(d) & (e): The LCRI’s procedures for designating OCCT  
for small and medium systems should be modified  ........................................ 10-17 
E. § 141.81: The LCRI should require more water systems to  
conduct CCT studies and implement OCCT  .................................................. 10-18 
i. More water systems should be required to conduct  
CCT studies .......................................................................................... 10-18 
ii. All systems with CCT should have an ongoing duty  
to re-optimize CCT after action level exceedances ............................. 10-19 
iii. Medium and small systems should not be excused  
from the consequences of exceeding an action level ........................... 10-22 
iv. Re-optimization requirement for systems currently  
using a polyphosphate or a polyphosphate blend for CCT .................. 10-24 
F. § 141.81(g) & 141.90(a)(4): Requirements for systems  
planning a treatment or source change  ............................................................ 10-24 
G. § 141.82(g): CCT requirements for consecutive and wholesale  
systems must be strengthened .......................................................................... 10-25 
H. § 141.87: Water quality parameter monitoring should be expanded,  
simplified, and more transparent...................................................................... 10-27 
I. § 141.82(j): Distribution system and site assessment  
(formerly find-and-fix) ..................................................................................... 10-29 
J. The lead practical quantitation limit (PQL) should be lowered  
to reflect current scientific and laboratory methods  ....................................... 10-31 
K. EPA should create incentives to address the identified shortages  
of CCT experts  ................................................................................................ 10-33 
L. Responses to EPA’s requests for comment about CCT issues ......................... 10-34 
11. EPA Should Establish a Maximum Contaminant Level for Lead ........................... 11-1 
A. The SDWA requires a EPA to set an MCL because it is feasible  
to ascertain the level of lead............................................................................... 11-1 
B. EPA’s previous justifications for refusing to set a maximum  
contaminant level no longer apply  .................................................................... 11-2 
C. EPA’s stated concern about water system “responsibility” is  
internally inconsistent and arbitrary ................................................................... 11-6 
12. Analysis of the LCRI’s Benefits and Costs ...................................................................... 12-1 
A. The LCRI Economic Analysis Presents Reasonable Estimates  
of Per-LSLR Costs, and There are Strategies Available to  
Water Systems to Further Reduce LSLR Costs  ................................................ 12-1 
i. EPA’s estimated per-LSLR costs are reasonable and  
AWWA’s estimated costs are exaggerated. ............................................ 12-1 
ii. There are many strategies readily available to water  
systems to further reduce costs .............................................................. 12-2 
B. Analysis of LCRI Benefit Analysis.................................................................... 12-3 
i. General Comments ................................................................................. 12-3 
ii. Discount Rate ......................................................................................... 12-8 

viii 
13. Water Systems Can Replace all LSLRs Without Making Water  
Bills Unaffordable  ................................................................................................................ 13-1 
A. AWWA has consistently overstated the likely costs of compliance ................... 13-1 
B. LCRI compliance costs would be a small fraction of water  
systems’ overall capital and operating expenses. ............................................... 13-2 
C. Compliance costs can be funded without making bills unaffordable 
 for low-income residents. .................................................................................. 13-2 
i. Maximize the use of available federal funding, especially for 
disadvantaged communities ................................................................... 13-3 
ii. Maximize use of other non-ratepayer sources of funding to  
replace lead service lines ....................................................................... 13-5 
iii. Adopt equitable rate structures and other programs to increase  
utility revenue without burdening low-income customers ..................... 13-5 
14. EPA Must Insert Provisions in the Final LCRI that Improve  
Compliance with and Enforcement of the Rule and Provide  
Transparency to EPA and the Public ......................................................................... 14-1 
A. EPA must implement and require direct electronic reporting  
of violations so it can increase compliance with the LCR  
through oversight and affected communities can receive  
timely and accurate information  ....................................................................... 14-2 
B. EPA must create an accessible web-based portal for public  
access to national drinking water sampling data and other  
important information ........................................................................................ 14-6 
C. The final LCRI must contain incentives for water systems  
to comply with the LCRI ................................................................................... 14-7 
D. Response to EPA’s request for comment about promoting  
compliance outside of enforcement ................................................................. 14-10 
15. Environmental Justice Concerns  ............................................................................... 15-1 
A. Weaknesses in the proposed LCRI will disproportionately harm  
communities of color and low-wealth communities .......................................... 15-1 
i. The proposed LCRI would allow disproportionate lead  
exposure for renters, which is an environmental justice  
issue because tenants are disproportionately people of  
color and low-wealth .............................................................................. 15-5 
B. EPA must strengthen the LCRI to prevent adverse effects on  
environmental justice communities to the extent feasible ................................. 15-6 
16. Compilation of Responses to EPA Requests for Comment ...................................... 16-1 
17. Conclusion .................................................................................................................... 17-1 
 
Due to the volume of cited references in these comments, batches of appendices compiling cited 
references are being submitted separately to Docket No. EPA-HW-OW-2022-0801. Each 
appendix contains an index of its contents.  
 

1-1 
Section 1: Executive Summary 
On behalf of the undersigned organizations—Natural Resources Defense Council 
(NRDC), Earthjustice, Campaign for Lead Free Water, Concerned Pastors for Social Action, 
Flint Rising, Newark Education Workers Caucus (NEW Caucus), United Parents Against Lead, 
and Water You Fighting For?—and their millions of members and online activists nationwide, we 
respectfully submit these comments on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) 
proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI).1 The signatories of these comments are 
local and national organizations that have extensive lived experience with lead-in-drinking-water 
crises in communities across the nation, deep legal and technical expertise in drinking water 
safety and regulation, and a long history of advocating for strengthened protections against the 
risks posed by lead in drinking water.  
We strongly support EPA’s goal to strengthen and simplify its regulation of lead and 
copper in drinking water. As EPA candidly acknowledges, there is no safe level of lead exposure, 
and lead that leaches from water pipes and fixtures, especially lead service lines (LSLs), is a 
major source of dangerous lead exposure nationwide.2 To address this threat, the Safe Drinking 
Water Act3 requires EPA to specify treatment techniques for controlling lead and copper in 
drinking water that “would prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons 
to the extent feasible.”4 However, for more than three decades, EPA’s 1991 Lead and Copper 
Rule5 (LCR) has proven to be a porous safety net that allows unsafe levels of lead to persist in 
America’s drinking water systems, resulting in a long string of lead-in-drinking-water crises in 
cities and towns including Washington, D.C., Flint, Michigan, Newark, New Jersey, Benton 
Harbor, Michigan, Portland, Oregon, Clarksburg, West Virginia, and many others. Tragically, 
time and again these crises have fallen hardest on the most vulnerable, particularly children 
living in lower-wealth communities and communities of color.  
EPA’s 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions6 (LCRR) failed to meet the urgency of the 
moment. As EPA acknowledged later that year, the LCRR left “significant opportunities to 
further improve upon it to achieve increased protection of communities from lead exposure 
through drinking water.”7 Accordingly, EPA embarked on its development of the LCRI to 
“protect public health and fully and equitably meet the requirements of the Safe Drinking Water 
Act.”8  
We applaud EPA for continuing to work diligently to improve its regulation of lead and 
copper in drinking water. The proposed LCRI includes many positive changes that will help to 
 
1 88 Fed. Reg. 84,878 (Dec. 6, 2023).  
2 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,879, 84,897.  
3 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f et seq. 
4 Id. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). As discussed later in these comments, EPA could (and should) regulate lead and copper 
through a maximum contaminant level (MCL), rather than with treatment techniques, but that is not the regulatory 
approach that EPA has employed since 1991.  
5 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460 (June 7, 1991). 
6 86 Fed. Reg. 4198 (Jan. 15, 2021).  
7 86 Fed. Reg. 71,574, 71,577 (Dec. 17, 2021).  
8 86 Fed. Reg. at 71,578.  

1-2 
protect public health for decades to come. We strongly support the core structure of the LCRI 
including EPA’s proposals to: 
 Require most water systems to replace lead service lines within 10 years, including 
water systems of all sizes; 
 Require water systems to complete inventories of lead service lines, update their 
inventories regularly, and verify service lines of unknown materials; 
 Improve tap water sampling by requiring testing of both the first and fifth liter of water 
at locations served by a lead service line, which will better characterize the water that has 
been sitting in the service line; and 
 Reduce the action level for lead that triggers requirements for water systems to study 
and implement corrosion control treatment, source water treatment, and public education 
and outreach. 
Nevertheless, the proposed LCRI contains weaknesses, loopholes, and shortcomings that 
we fear may imperil the LCRI’s ability to achieve President Biden’s and EPA’s laudable goals to 
reduce lead exposure in drinking water fully, quickly, and equitably. In the final rule, we urge 
EPA to make a variety of changes to strengthen and simplify the rule further and to help ensure 
that its implementation will live up to its promise. To safeguard the LCRI’s success, it is essential 
that EPA, at a minimum: 
 Close loopholes that will allow many lead service lines to be left in place indefinitely. 
As proposed, the LCRI would allow water systems to leave lead service lines in use if the 
system asserts that it lacks access to the full service line for any reason, including because 
the property owner is unable or unwilling to pay a portion of the replacement cost. The 
rule should presume that water systems control their service lines, as EPA has concluded 
previously. The final LCRI must require water systems to provide full lead service line 
replacements at no direct cost to the customer and to assert “control” over and take 
responsibility for the replacement of all lead service lines. The LCRI should require that 
primacy states ensure that their rules will include these measures. Without these changes, 
the LCRI will fail to achieve full, equitable replacement of lead service lines, and risks 
exacerbating environmental injustices by disproportionately leaving lead service lines in 
place in lower-wealth communities and communities of color.  
 Close loopholes that will allow some water systems up to four or five decades to 
replace lead service lines. As proposed, the LCRI would automatically give extensions 
of the ten-year deadline for lead service line replacements (LSLRs) to water systems in 
many hundreds or thousands of communities nationwide. The final LCRI must eliminate, 
or at a minimum narrow and shorten, any extensions to ensure that lead service lines are 
replaced as quickly as possible, and that extensions of time are allowed only in truly 
exceptional circumstances. The communities affected by any proposed extensions should 
get notice and an opportunity for comment and a local hearing so their views can be 
considered before any lengthy extensions are approved.  

1-3 
 Adopt a more stringent standard for lead action level exceedances by lowering the 
lead action level to no more than 5 ppb and increasing the percentile used to assess 
compliance. Although the LCRI’s proposed lead action level of 10 ppb is a substantial 
improvement, it is not sufficient. There is no safe level of lead in drinking water, and 
EPA’s own evidence demonstrates that a lower action level is feasible. A lead action level 
of 5 ppb or lower is essential for triggering health-protective actions, including corrosion 
control treatment and public education, in all water systems where tap sampling finds 
unsafe lead levels. EPA also must reconsider the continued use of a 90th percentile for 
calculating compliance with the action level. This allows up to 10 percent of homes at 
highest risk to suffer from contamination exceeding the action level—often by many-
fold—without violating the rule. EPA should assess compliance with the lead and copper 
action levels using a higher percentile.   
 Prioritize filter distribution following an action level exceedance. As proposed, the 
LCRI would require water systems to make available filters certified to reduce lead only 
after three lead action level exceedances within a five-year period. Providing filters is the 
fastest, most health-protective immediate action available after an action level 
exceedance. The final LCRI must require water systems to deliver certified filter and 
replacement cartridges to all customers, at no direct charge to the customer, after any 
action level exceedance. Filter provision is essential to protect public health in the near-
term after any action level exceedance. It also will spur water systems’ desire to be 
relieved of filter-provision obligations, providing a strong incentive for water systems to 
work swiftly and diligently to identify and implement effective, optimized corrosion 
control treatments and to fully remove lead service lines as quickly as possible.  
 Further improve public education and outreach requirements. Although the LCRI 
includes some improvements in public education and the mandatory language on lead 
health effects, the final rule must do more. Effective public education about lead in 
drinking water is a critical component of the rule and, in many circumstances, is the 
primary mechanism to protect public health, such as in the years following an action level 
exceedance and before longer-term corrosion control or other infrastructure changes can 
be implemented. The final rule must require public education materials to more clearly 
explain the risks of lead in drinking water—even in the absence of an action level 
exceedance—and how customers can proactively protect themselves using point of use 
filters certified to remove lead. It also must expand water systems’ outreach obligations, 
particularly to compel water systems to provide point-of-use filters at no direct cost to all 
customers after an action level exceedance.  
 Better protect children in schools and childcare facilities. As proposed, the LCRI 
would largely maintain the LCRR’s weak provisions for testing drinking water at schools 
and childcare facilities. Children are uniquely vulnerable to the pernicious effects of 
chronic lead exposures. In the final LCRI, EPA must require water systems to choose 
between providing and helping to maintain filtration stations at schools and childcares, or 
providing robust regular testing and public reporting of lead levels in schools’ and 
childcare facilities’ drinking water. Testing requirements should be relaxed only if a water 
system installs lead-removing filtration stations to ensure that children’s drinking water is 
safe.  

1-4 
 Strengthen and simplify corrosion control treatment requirements. As proposed, the 
LCRI both perpetuates and creates numerous loopholes that allow water systems to avoid 
studying and installing effective, optimized corrosion control treatment to prevent lead 
from leaching into drinking water. It also fails to require water systems to test corrosion 
control treatments that are based on the most current and best available science. In the 
final rule, EPA must strengthen and simplify these provisions to remove unnecessary 
loopholes and require more water systems to study and install optimized corrosion 
control treatments.  
 Strengthen enforcement and reporting. As proposed, the LCRI fails to address widely 
identified shortcomings in the LCR’s mechanisms (or lack thereof) to ensure compliance, 
facilitate timely and transparent data reporting, and streamline enforcement of the rule. 
The final rule must incorporate changes that promote accurate, transparent data 
submission and reporting and prevent continued rampant noncompliance with the rule.   
 Require compliance with the LCRI sooner. As proposed, the LCRI’s critical public 
health protections would not go into effect until three years after the rule is promulgated. 
Consistent with the SDWA, EPA should determine that it is “practicable” for most or all 
of the rule to go into effect no later than one year after promulgation. A faster compliance 
schedule would maximize the public health benefits from the LCRI and would also align 
better with the federal funding sources that are available now to assist water systems with 
lead service line replacements and other safety improvements.  
 Ensure environmental justice. The proposed LCRI includes many provisions that raise 
serious environmental justice concerns. The final rule must require water systems to pay 
for full LSL replacement. Homeowners of color and those with low wealth often cannot 
afford to pay, and landlords in low-wealth communities and communities of color are 
likely to refuse to pay these costs. As a result, LSLs at these locations will remain in use, 
exacerbating the already serious inequities in lead exposure of these communities. The 
proposed lead action level, while an improvement, combined with the continued use of a 
90th percentile to determine compliance, is not health protective. This is particularly true 
for Black children who have the highest blood lead levels. Violations and inadequate 
enforcement of drinking water standards disproportionately hit communities of color and 
of low wealth, and the LCR is infamous for lack of water systems’ compliance. Because 
lead is a greater threat to environmental justice communities, noncompliance with the 
regulations again disproportionately impacts those communities. The final rule should 
include direct and transparent electronic reporting of monitoring and violations data, as 
well as stronger incentives for compliance, to help address these serious environmental 
injustices.    
These urgently needed changes, and many others, are discussed in greater detail below. The 
remainder of our comments are organized topically, with deep dives into the nuances of the 
proposed LCRI, detailed proposals for how EPA can strengthen and streamline it, and responses 
to EPA’s specific requests for comment.  
* * * * * 

1-5 
At its core, the LCRI rests on a solid conceptual foundation: eliminate lead service lines 
and strengthen and simplify the treatment techniques of public education and corrosion control 
treatment that, along with source water treatment, will be the pillars of lead and copper control 
after all lead service lines are gone. Done right, it can create a clean break from more than 30 
years of ineffective regulation of lead and copper in drinking water that has failed over and over 
to protect public health.  
But, as proposed, the LCRI is riddled with provisions rooted in overly optimistic 
expectations that all water systems and states will be eager partners seeking to achieve EPA’s 
goals and may even choose to do more than the minimum regulatory requirements. There are 
many states and water systems that take seriously the problem of lead in drinking water, will do 
their utmost to comply in good faith, and are already working hard to address this crisis. But the 
ultimate purpose of the LCRI must be to compel action by the laggards. EPA must write the final 
LCRI with an eye toward incenting and forcing necessary, health-protective actions by water 
systems and states that are averse to change, unpersuaded that lead in drinking water is a serious 
concern for them, and prefer to direct their resources to other priorities. The final LCRI’s 
provisions must have in mind the water systems and states that will, first and foremost, prioritize 
doing the bare minimum they can get away with to reduce costs and minimize burdens. To 
realize the LCRI’s full potential, EPA must eliminate unnecessary loopholes that would allow 
water systems and states to dodge the LCRI’s core requirements, and EPA must strengthen the 
remaining provisions to fulfill SDWA’s mandate to “prevent known or anticipated adverse effects 
on the health of persons to the extent feasible.”9 
We look forward to working with EPA to ensure that every person—no matter their race, 
income, or zip code—enjoys the right to safe, affordable, lead-free drinking water.  
 
9 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 

2-1 
 
Section 2: EPA Should Require Full Replacement Of 100% of Lead Service Lines, 
Irrespective of Ownership and Paid for by Water Systems 
 
A. 
Overview 
 
We strongly support President Biden’s, Vice President Harris’s, and EPA Administrator 
Regan’s stated goal of the LCRI to replace 100 percent of lead service lines (LSLs) within 10 
years.1 As EPA notes, where present, LSLs are the predominant source of lead in drinking 
water.2  Fully removing these pipes is the most effective and permanent method of reducing their 
contribution to lead in tap water. The monetizable health benefits of removing LSLs also 
outweigh the costs by manyfold—by our estimate at least 14-fold over 35 years.3 
 
While we vigorously support the 10-year goal, unfortunately several provisions in the 
proposal would undermine achievement of that objective. Specifically, we are deeply concerned 
about the following key provisions of the proposal that will serve as significant impediments to 
achieving the goal of removing 100% of lead service lines in 10 years. They also will exacerbate 
the already serious environmental justice problems posed by lead in drinking water, by making it 
likely that wealthier, predominantly white communities will get their LSLs replaced, while 
lower-wealth homeowners and tenants who are disproportionately people of color will be far less 
likely to have their lead pipes removed.4 These issues are discussed in more detail after this 
overview: 
 
• Systems with large numbers of LSLs get long extensions. The proposal would allow 
systems that would have to replace more than 10,000 LSLs per year under a 10-year 
deadline (i.e. systems with >100,000 LSLs, of which EPA says there are about four, 
including Chicago) to only replace 10,000 LSLs/year. The proposal also requests 
comment on allowing as few as 8,000 LSL replacements (LSLRs) per year. That means, 
for example, that Chicago would get 44.6 to 55.8 years to complete its LSLRs. The 
proposal says states would be required to determine whether faster LSLR would be 
feasible, but there is no accountability to ensure this. It is entirely feasible to remove 
more than 10,000 LSLs per year (Newark was removing 2,200 a month and there is no 
reason much larger cities cannot do far better) and extending the time frame even longer 
by going to a cap of 8,000 per year is even more clearly unnecessary and dangerous. This 
is a serious deficiency in the proposal as it applies to the handful of big systems with 
 
1 The White House, Fact Sheet: Biden-⁠Harris Administration Announces New Action to Protect Communities from 
Lead Exposure (Nov. 30, 2023), available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2023/11/30/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-announces-new-action-to-protect-communities-from-
lead-exposure/; The White House, Fact Sheet: The Biden-⁠Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan (Dec. 16, 2021), 
available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-
lead-pipe-and-paint-action-plan/.  
2 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI): Proposed Rule, 88 
Fed. Reg. 84,878 at 84,909 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
3 NRDC, Getting the Lead Out: Removing Lead Pipes Would Yield Hundreds of Billions of Dollars in Health 
Benefits (Oct. 2023), p. 8, available at https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/2023-10/getting-lead-out-health-
benefits-ib.pdf. See, section 12 of these comments for further discussion of the costs and benefits of reducing lead 
levels in drinking water and LSL removal. 
4 See also, section 15 of these comments for further discussion of the environmental justice concerns with the 
proposed LCRI, 

2-2 
 
significant numbers of LSLs like Chicago, Cleveland, New York City, and possibly 
Houston. 
 
• Systems with a high concentration of LSLs can get extensions. The LCRI also allows 
states to approve extensions for systems exceeding 0.039 replacements per household per 
year. In other words, for example, if a system serves 50,000 households and would have 
to complete >1,950 LSLRs per year, they could get an extension. Thus, if that system had 
35,000 LSLs, it would get 18 years to replace them. EPA projects that about 700 to over 
2,100 systems (1.4 to 4.4 percent of all systems) would exceed this threshold. This is a 
significant deficiency that will hit hardest those communities with the highest 
concentrations of lead pipes—the very communities, often environmental justice 
communities, that are most important to address. 
 
• In addition, more extensions are available, particularly for small systems, further 
delaying important health protections.  EPA notes in the LCRI proposal that the 
substantive treatment technique requirements do not go into effect until 3 years after 
promulgation and may be extended by states another 2 years.5 In addition, primacy states 
can extend the deadlines up to six more years for systems serving 3,300 people or fewer.6 
Taken together with other extensions, this means that some systems will not have to 
complete LSL replacement for decades after promulgation.    
 
• 
Systems are also not required or replace LSLs that they claim they do not “control,” 
narrowly defined as utilities having legal or physical access to such pipes. The LCRI 
excuses utilities from having to replace LSLs if they don’t “control” them. The proposal 
defines control far more narrowly than EPA defined that term previously in the 1991 
LCR, which included a rebuttable presumption that utilities control their service lines. 
Indeed, water systems can always shut off water to any service line, the ultimate measure 
of control. As EPA found in 1991, systems generally retain the authority to set standards 
for construction, repair, or maintenance of the line, have authority to replace, repair, or 
maintain the service line, or own the line. Furthermore, most utilities either required or 
installed lead service lines, or required utility approval of the material used in service 
lines and strongly encouraged use of lead.7 An additional concern is that under the 
proposal, if a property owner cannot be located or fails to respond to four attempts at 
reaching them for approval of a LSLR, the utility is excused from having to replace that 
LSL. We have seen in Flint, Newark and elsewhere that often property owners, and 
absentee landlords in particular, cannot be located or persuaded to agree to allow access 
to the property for LSLR. The proposal would excuse the utility from replacing those 
lines, rather than taking an approach such as that used in Newark and Benton Harbor, 
where all LSLs were required to be replaced, and the property owner was given the 
choice of either completing the LSLR themselves by a specified date, or was presumed to 
agree to having the utility have access to complete the LSLR at no cost to the property 
 
5 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,897. 
6 Id. 
7 See Richard Rabin, The Lead Industry and Lead Water Pipes “A MODEST CAMPAIGN,” Am. J. of Pub. Health 
Vol. 98 Issue 9 at 1585 (2008), available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2509614/   

2-3 
 
owner, with access granted by any building occupant. The LCRI should require such an 
arrangement.      
 
• Systems are not required to pay for full LSL replacement, so lead pipes used by low-
wealth families and renters are unlikely to be replaced. EPA is not requiring water 
systems to cover the full cost of LSLR situated under private property. This is a major 
concern with substantial equity implications. EPA says it has worries about its legal 
authority to require this.  However, as discussed below, we disagree and believe EPA has 
clear authority under the SDWA to require utilities to pay for full replacement of LSLs. 
 
B. 
Statutory Provisions Regarding Treatment Techniques and Feasibility  
 
 
The Administrator may promulgate a national primary drinking water regulation that 
requires the use of a treatment technique in lieu of establishing a maximum contaminant level 
(MCL) only if the Administrator makes a finding that “it is not economically or technologically 
feasible to ascertain the level of the contaminant.”8 As discussed below in section 11, we do not 
believe that EPA has made an adequately justified determination that it is not economically or 
technically feasible to ascertain the level of lead. Therefore, EPA should establish an MCL for 
lead at the tap. However, if the Administrator were to appropriately make such a finding, any 
treatment technique must “prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons 
to the extent feasible.”9  
 
The SDWA defines feasible as “feasible with the use of the best technology, treatment 
techniques and other means which the Administrator finds, after examination for efficacy under 
field conditions and not solely under laboratory conditions, are available (taking cost into 
consideration).”10 As EPA has repeatedly recognized for decades, including in the LCRI,11  this 
provision was clarified in the legislative history of the Act, which explained that in using the 
phrase “feasible . . . (taking cost into consideration),” the Congress “intends that the 
Administrator's determination of what methods are generally available (taking cost into account) 
is to be based on what may reasonably be afforded by large metropolitan or regional public water 
systems.”12 And as the agency has correctly noted in the LCRI,13 the D.C. Circuit in City of 
Portland v. EPA14 upheld EPA’s treatment technique for Cryptosporidium and the Agency’s 
interpretation that “‘feasible’ means technically possible and affordable and does not include a 
cost/benefit determination.”15 
 
842 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). As discussed in the following section, the statute further provides that in certain 
circumstances, water systems may not have to comply with the treatment technique, noting that the agency’s rules 
“shall specify each treatment technique known to the Administrator which meets the requirements of this paragraph, 
but the Administrator may grant a variance from any specified treatment technique in accordance with section 300g–
4(a)(3) of this title.” Id. 
9 Id. 
10 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(4)(D). 
11 88 Fed. Reg. 84,978, at 84,901. 
12 H.R. Rep.  93–1185 (1974), reprinted in 1974 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6454, 6471. See also, S. Rep. No. 104–169, at 3 
(1995) (feasibility is based on best available technology affordable to “large” systems). 
13 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,901. 
14 507 F.3d 706 (D.C. Cir. 2007). 
15 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,901 (emphasis added). 

2-4 
 
 
Neither the statute nor its legislative history requires that EPA must find that a treatment 
technique is feasible for every single system in the nation. Rather, the statute provides that EPA’s 
“regulations shall specify each treatment technique known to the Administrator which meets the 
requirements of this paragraph....”16 Many large water systems already have removed their lead 
service lines in less than a decade, and it has been demonstrated to be technically possible and 
affordable already in multiple cities. Moreover, EPA has found that lead service line 
replacement within 10 years is feasible for more than 96 percent of water systems.17 
Therefore, it is feasible to remove all lead service lines in 10 years.   
 
EPA’s original 1991 LCR required LSL replacement for systems exceeding the lead 
action level at a rate of 7 percent per year (or to be done in about 14 years), so clearly the agency 
has held the position for decades that replacement at that rate is feasible.18 While we oppose any 
extensions beyond 10 years, there certainly is no justification for backsliding from the 
original LCR’s outside time frame; any extension beyond 7 percent per year for systems 
exceeding the action level would constitute an unlawful backsliding prohibited by the 
SDWA.19 
 
Thus, under the SDWA,20 as clarified by the legislative history, decades of EPA 
administrative history, and judicial interpretation, the treatment technique for lead must prevent 
known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent that is technically 
possible and affordable for large public water systems. Luckily, no guesswork is required in the 
case of LSL replacement. There are numerous large public water systems that have completed 
lead service line replacement within 10 years or less, and EPA has found that 96 percent or more 
of water systems can achieve this requirement. Replacement of all LSLs in 10 years is necessary 
to reduce lead levels and prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects and is not only 
technically feasible but also affordable.  
C. 
LSL Replacement in 10 Years or Less is Necessary and Feasible 
 
If EPA issues a treatment technique in the final rule, it must include a universal mandate 
for full lead service line replacement, independent of any finding that an action level has been 
exceeded.  We strongly agree with the agency’s finding that “mandatory service line 
replacement programs initiated by 90th percentile lead levels are now known not to be 
sufficient to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects from lead exposure in 
 
16 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). The statute does provide that in certain limited circumstances, the Administrator or 
primacy state may grant a variance from any specified treatment technique in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 300g–
4(a)(3). Additionally, systems that contend that they cannot comply can in certain cases apply for an exemption 
under 42 U.S.C. §300g-5. As discussed in the section on effective dates, we do not believe exemptions can be 
granted for LSLR, as prolonged exposure to lead service lines is per se an unreasonable risk to health. 
17 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,913. 
18 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,552 (40 C.F.R. 141. 84(b)). 
19 42 U.S.C. 300g-1(b)(9) (“Any revision of a national primary drinking water regulation...shall maintain, or provide 
for greater, protection of the health of persons.”) 
20 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 

2-5 
 
drinking water to the extent feasible.”21 The agency has made a compelling case for the need 
for a universal LSL replacement requirement, including finding that: 
Over the 30 years of implementing the LCR, EPA has found that the sampling and 
process steps of that rule created implementation uncertainties, difficulties, and errors 
that, in some cases, resulted in significant lead exposures. Improper implementation of 
the sampling and corrosion control treatment process has been the cause, or one of the 
primary causes, of significant lead exposures in multiple water systems. Moreover, 
disturbances of LSLs can potentially cause lead particulates to be released into drinking 
water, causing higher lead levels at those sites. Although the proposed LCRI includes risk 
mitigation requirements for water systems if they disturb the service line, other utilities or 
heavy traffic may also disturb the line [citations omitted], events which would be 
unknown to the water system and not subject to risk mitigation steps. In addition, 
particulate lead can be released sporadically (i.e., not associated with a disturbance), even 
in systems that have OCCT and have measured generally low lead levels. [citation 
omitted]. Research has also shown that lead exposure is not fully eliminated by CCT due 
to a variety of factors including individual home and service line characteristics, water 
quality, water use (including water stagnation following extended periods without water 
use), treatment, infrastructure, and disturbances to service lines (e.g., meter installation, 
road repair, and freezing of the ground that can have unintended and unpredictable 
effects), causing lead releases in the water when LSLs or GRR service lines are present 
[citations omitted]. Examples of isolated cases of lead poisoning in children have been 
documented and attributed to drinking water in communities whose systemwide lead 
levels remained below the action level of 0.015 mg/L [citations omitted].22 
Thus, a mandatory LSL replacement regime is necessary, because the regulatory scheme under 
both the original 1991 LCR and the 2021 LCRR are simply inadequate action “to prevent known 
or anticipated adverse health effects from lead exposure in drinking water to the extent feasible,” 
as required by SDWA section 1412(b)(7)(A). 
 
As noted earlier, the statutory test of whether a treatment technique such as lead service 
line replacement within 10 years or less is feasible is whether a large municipal water system can 
technically achieve this action affordably.23 There are abundant examples of such systems that 
have completed such actions in EPA’s record and available elsewhere, and at least two states 
(New Jersey and Rhode Island) have mandated lead service line replacement within 10 years, 
making it clear that this is feasible. As established in Tables 1 and 2, many large and small public 
water systems have done so, generally voluntarily without being required to do so by regulation.  
 
 
That a 10-year LSL replacement requirement is feasible also is made clear by the 
agency’s admission that “a 10-year replacement deadline is feasible for 96 to 99 percent of 
CWSs nationwide.”24 Nowhere in the statute or the legislative history is it required that EPA 
must find that a treatment technique is feasible for every single system in the nation. Thus, by 
 
21 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,912. 
22 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,911.   
23 See 42 U.S.C. § 300g–1 (b)(4)(D) (definition of feasible). 
24 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,913. 

2-6 
 
definition, lead service line replacement within 10 years or less (i.e. a 10 percent annual 
replacement rate) is feasible under the statute and must be included in the LCRI by law.   
 
 
As shown in Table 1 below, an EPA-conducted analysis in the record for the LCRR 
shows that a 10-year mandate for all LSL replacement—i.e. a 10 percent annual replacement 
rate—is entirely feasible. According to this analysis, large water systems (serving a population of 
more than 100,000) conducting voluntary full lead service line replacement did so at an average 
annual rate of 11.5 percent where the utility claims it does not own the full LSL, and 21.5 
percent where the utility owns the full LSL.25 Thus, a 10-year mandate with a 10 percent annual 
replacement rate for LSLs is feasible for large systems. 
 
Table 1 
EPA Analysis of Average Lead Service Line Replacement (LSLR) Rates by Size of Water 
Systems and Type of LSLR Replacement Program 
 
Type of LSLR Program 
Population Served 
< 
10,000 
10,000 - 
100,000 
> 
100,000 
Bin 1: LSLs only replaced when found during routine 
construction work (not relevant if LSLR is required on 
specific schedule) 
  
7.3% 
5.3% 
Bin 2: LSLs replaced on aggressive schedule, utility does not 
own private side of LSL. Funding is from loans or rates or 
funding does not cover entire private side cost. 
33.3% 
13.2% 
11.5% 
Bin 3: LSLS replaced on aggressive schedule, utility owns 
private side of LSL or there are few LSLs. Funding is in the 
form of grants and covers entire private side cost. 
  
73.1% 
21.5% 
Source: EPA LSLR Rates. 2019 EPA Unpublished Raw Data, Nov 13, 2019 (tab 4, table 1b)  
EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-0699 
 
Similarly, as highlighted in yellow in Table 1, the average LSL replacement rate for 
systems serving 10,000 to 100,000 people also was more than 10 percent per year, showing that 
such a requirement is feasible. 
 
Furthermore, as noted in Table 2, after further factfinding EPA determined that dozens of 
large and small water systems have fully replaced lead service lines at a rate faster than ten 
percent per year. While some other systems took longer, it is important to remember that these 
systems were undertaking LSL replacement programs without a regulatory requirement to do so 
within 10 years.26 With a regulatory mandate to complete LSLR within a decade, these data 
 
25 EPA, LSLR Rates. 2019 EPA Unpublished Raw Data, Regulations.gov, EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-0699, at tab 4 
“Summary Tables”. (Table 1b)(average replacement rates for systems serving more than 100,000 people). 
26 Neither the NJ nor the RI 10-year LSL replacement laws were in effect yet, and the 1991 LCR 7 percent 
replacement per year requirement for systems with lead action level exceedances was generally not the driving force 
for these replacements since few if any were documented to have such ongoing exceedances, and in any event the 
LCR did not require 10 percent replacement per year. 

2-7 
 
show that a 10-year mandate is “feasible” for large public water systems and thus under the 
statute must be required by the rule.27  
Table 2 
EPA-LISTED SYSTEMS MEETING OR EXCEEDING  
10-YEAR LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT GOAL (10%/YEAR) 
From EPA, 2023, Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements,  
at 3-6 (Ex. 1) 
 
City 
State Population 
Size 
Category 
Total 
Number 
of LSL/ 
GRR 
Duration 
of LSLR 
Program 
 
 
Avg. # Replaced Per 
Year (% of Total 
LSLs and GRRs) 
Fort Worth (Fort 
Worth) 
TX 
853,762 
Large 
1,790 
2016 to 
2021 
233 (13%) 
Central 
Arkansas Water 
(Sweeney, 
2020) 
AR 
330,667 
Large 
175 
2016- 
2017 
 
115 (66%) 
Saskatoon (City 
of 
Saskatoon) 
Can. 
313,000 
Large 
4,582 
2017 to 
2022 
488 (11%) 
Newark (City of 
Newark) 
NJ 
294,274 
Large 
23,189 
2019 to 
2022 
7,730 (33%) 
Grand Rapids 
(City of Grand 
Rapids, 
2022) 
MI 
273,005 
Large 
1,608 
2021- 
2022 
 
304 (19%) 
Spokane (Feist 
2018) 
WA 
244,817 
Large 
486 
2016 to 
2018 
162 (33%) 
Sioux Falls 
(Kelley, 
2017) 
SD 
198,524 
Large 
230 
2016- 
2017 (32 
months) 
 
115 (50%) 
York (The 
York Water 
Company, 
2023) 
PA 
197,177 
Large 
2,300 
2017- 
2021 
 
380 (17%) 
Green Bay 
(Green Bay 
Water) 
WI 
107,395 
Large 
2,028 
Jan 2016 
to Sep 
2020 
 
357 (18%) 
 
27 42 U.S.C. §300g-1(b)(7)(A). 

2-8 
 
City 
State Population 
Size 
Category 
Total 
Number 
of LSL/ 
GRR 
Duration 
of LSLR 
Program 
 
 
Avg. # Replaced Per 
Year (% of Total 
LSLs and GRRs) 
Quincy 
(MWRA
, 2023) 
MA 
101,636 
Large 
285 
April 
2017- 
Septemb 
er 2018 
 
206 (72%) 
Flint (City of 
Flint) 
MI 
98,310 
Large 
12,035 
2016 to 
2022 
1,946 (16%) 
Newton 
(MWRA, 
2023) 
MA 
89,103 
Large 
433 
2017- 
2019 
144 (33%) 
Somerville (City 
of 
Somerville) 
MA 
81,045 
Large 
449 
2021 - 
2022 
86 (19%) 
Revere (City 
of 
Revere, 2023) 
MA 
59,075 
Large 
350 
2019- 
2021 
83 (24%) 
Bozeman (City 
of 
Bozeman, 
2020) 
MT 
56,000 
Large 
170 
2016- 
2019 
35 (20%) 
Bloomfield 
(Bloomfield 
Water 
Department, 
2021) 
NJ 
47,315 
Medium 
500 
2018 - 
2021 
 
130 (26%) 
Marlboroug
h (MWRA, 
2023) 
MA 
38,499 
Medium 
1,350 
May 
2018 - 
Sept 
2018 
 
176 (13%) 
Galesburg 
(IEPA, 
2023) 
IL 
31,745 
Medium 
3,500 
2016 to 
2023 
530 (15%) 
Village of 
Montgomery 
IL 
28,956 
Medium 
106 
Fall 2019 
to 
106 (100%) 
Norwood 
(MWRA, 
2023) 
MA 
28,284 
Medium 
200 
2004- 
2008 
40 (20%) 
Winchester 
(MWRA, 2023) 
MA 
22,800 
Medium 
21 
2017 to 
2019 
7 (33%) 

2-9 
 
City 
State Population 
Size 
Category 
Total 
Number 
of LSL/ 
GRR 
Duration 
of LSLR 
Program 
 
 
Avg. # Replaced Per 
Year (% of Total 
LSLs and GRRs) 
Birmingham 
(City 
of 
Birmingham) 
MI 
20,472 
Medium 
730 
2020 to 
2022 
182 (25%) 
Frankfort 
(IEPA, 
2023) 
IL 
20,296 
Medium 
82 
2021- 
2022 
41 (50%) 
Menasha 
(Menasha 
Utilities, 2023) 
WI 
14,792 
Medium 
636 
2017 to 
2023 
 
106 (20%) 
Stoughton (City 
of 
Stoughton 
Utilities 
Committee, 
2022) 
WI 
13,078 
Medium 
700 
2021 
700 (100%) 
Mayville (City 
of 
Stoughton 
Utilities 
Committee, 
2022) 
WI 
5,112 
Medium 
220 
2021 
220 (100%) 
 
 
 
These EPA-generated data demonstrate that a 10-year LSL replacement requirement is 
feasible. This is reinforced by the agency’s admission that “a 10-year replacement deadline is 
feasible for 96 to 99 percent of CWSs nationwide.”28 
 
If EPA determines that there truly is a very small percentage of systems that may not be 
able to meet the treatment technique requirements, this can be dealt with through the 
enforcement process.29 If the agency chooses to allow extensions beyond 10 years in any case, 
 
28 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,913.  
29 Negotiated consent decrees allowing extensions of time should be subject to public comment. See, for example, 
Department of Justice, Proposed Consent Decrees (requesting public comment on proposed EPA consent decrees 
including enforcement cases) https://www.justice.gov/enrd/consent-decrees; EPA, Proposed Consent Decrees and 
Draft Settlement Agreements (soliciting public comment on settlement of cases filed against EPA) 
https://www.epa.gov/ogc/proposed-consent-decrees-and-draft-settlement-agreements; Michael Regan, EPA 
Administrator, “Consent Decrees and Settlement Agreements to Resolve Environmental Claims Against the 
Agency.” March 18, 2022 (requiring proposed settlements of claims against EPA to be made available for public 
 

2-10 
 
which as noted we believe is unnecessary and unlawful, at a minimum they should not be 
automatic under the rule. They should be governed by a reasonable cap on allowed time 
(certainly not decades) and should only be approved on a case-by-case basis after public notice 
and a local public hearing held with ample opportunity for affected residents to express their 
views on a possible extension. This is a minimum protection, particularly for environmental 
justice communities that may be especially hard hit by the impacts of any extensions of the LSL 
replacement requirements. We note, for example, that in Illinois,30 New York City,31 and 
Washington D.C,32 studies have indicated that LSLs or LSLR projects can disproportionately 
affect communities of color, and thus automatic extensions of the sort proposed in the LCRI 
would disproportionately harm these communities without providing them any opportunity to 
provide comment on the issue.33    
 
Moreover, as briefly noted earlier, EPA’s original 1991 LCR required LSL replacement 
for systems exceeding the lead action level at a rate of 7 percent per year (i.e. to be completed in 
about 14 years).34 The agency has thus held the position for more than 30 years that replacement 
at that rate is feasible. So, while we oppose any extensions beyond 10 years, the LCRI certainly 
should not allow backsliding from the original LCR‘s outside time frame of 14 years. Any 
extension beyond the 7 percent per year requirement for systems exceeding the action level 
would constitute an unlawful backsliding prohibited by the SDWA.35   
 
In sum, EPA should adopt a mandatory 10-year full LSL replacement requirement (which 
as noted below should be paid for by the water utility.) Such a deadline is, according to the 
agency’s findings, readily feasible for virtually all water systems. 
 
 
review and comment for at least 30 days unless a different period of time is required by law). 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-03/ogc-22-000-2698_0.pdf The DOJ and EPA practice of 
soliciting public comment on consent decrees in enforcement and defensive cases could and should be applied to 
any consent decrees extending timelines for LSL replacement.   
30 Justin Williams, Data Points: the environmental injustice of lead lines in Illinois, Nov. 10, 2020, available at 
https://www.metroplanning.org/news/9960/Data-Points-the-environmental-injustice-of-lead-lines-in-Illinois.  
31 Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health, Lead Service Lines in NYC Disproportionately Impact 
Hispanic/Latino Communities and Children Already At Risk, Aug. 30, 2023, available at 
https://www.publichealth.columbia.edu/news/lead-service-lines-nyc-disproportionately-impact-hispanic-latino-
communities-children-already-risk-lead-exposure;  Nigra AE, Lieberman-Cribbin W, Bostick BC, Chillrud SN, 
Carrión D. Geospatial Assessment of Racial/Ethnic Composition, Social Vulnerability, and Lead Water Service 
Lines in New York City. Environ Health Perspect. 2023 Aug;131(8):87015. doi: 10.1289/EHP12276. Epub 2023 
Aug 30. PMID: 37646509; PMCID: PMC10467360.   
32 Baehler KJ, McGraw M, Aquino MJ, Heslin R, McCormick L, Neltner T. Full Lead Service Line Replacement: A 
Case Study of Equity in Environmental Remediation. Sustainability. 2022; 14(1):352. available at 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010352.  
33 See also section 15 of these comments regarding the environmental justice implications of the proposed LCRI and 
of the LSL replacement requirements. 
34 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,552, 40 C.F.R. §141.84(b). 
35 42 U.S.C. 300g-1(b)(9)(“Any revision of a national primary drinking water regulation ... shall maintain, or 
provide for greater, protection of the health of persons.”). 

2-11 
 
i. 
The LCRI cannot authorize extensions beyond 10 years for systems that 
would be required to remove 8,000 or 10,000 LSLs per year   
 
 
Under the LCRI proposal, EPA says that about six to seven systems with large numbers 
of LSLs could get long extensions beyond the 10-year deadline.36 As highlighted in Table 3 
below, some systems would be given additional decades to comply because they would have to 
replace from 8,000 to 10,000 or more lead service lines per year if the 10-year deadline applied 
to them, with Chicago as an extreme example receiving nearly six decades to comply. EPA 
refers to this extension as a “technical possibility deferral,”37 based upon the implied contention 
that it would be technically impossible for this handful of systems to comply within 10 years. 
The agency also proposes a second extension program that it calls an “affordability deferral,”38 
applicable to one to four percent of water systems, which means hundreds or possibly thousands 
of systems would be eligible.39 This second program is discussed in the following section of 
these comments. 
 
 
Both extensions are unnecessary and unlawful. The SDWA requires the treatment 
technique to “prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent 
feasible.”40 As noted above, EPA acknowledges that removing all lead service lines within 10 
years is feasible for more than 96 percent of water systems, and the Act does not authorize EPA 
to carve out a regulatory exclusion for hundreds or thousands of systems. This is particularly the 
case because the systems that would receive regulatory extensions are likely to be those with the 
biggest lead pipe problems. The extensions would allow more generations of Americans to 
continue to be exposed to toxic lead in their water with no legal consequence. In addition, since 
they would be automatically granted by regulation, there would be no local hearings or 
opportunities to weigh in for community members who are most directly affected and whose 
children and vulnerable family members could exposed to high lead levels, potentially for 
decades.  
 
 
These extensions also run contrary to the goals of the lead service line replacement 
program. They would allow the very systems posing the most significant health risks to continue 
threatening the health of their customers with lead-contaminated water for up to several decades. 
 
 
 
36 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,914. 
37 EPA, Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, 2023, at 15 (Exhibit 7: 
Deadlines for systems eligible for the technical possibility deferral compared to their affordability deferral status), 
available at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0709  
38 Ibid. 
39 Ibid; see also LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,914 (“663 to 2,134 systems (1.3 to 4.3 percent of all systems) would . . . 
be eligible for the proposed deferred replacement deadline”). 
40 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 

2-12 
 
Table 3. EPA’s Proposed deadlines for systems eligible for an extension based on 
the number of LSLs vs. an extension based on their per household rate of 
replacement. Systems could choose the longer of the two deadlines. 
Source: EPA, 2023, Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements, at 15 (Ex. 7) 
 
System 
Population 
Estimat-
ed 
Number 
of LSLs 
or 
GRRs* 
Replace-
ments per 
Household 
per Year 
Deadline 
Based 
on Per- 
Househo
ld 
Rate 
 
Deadline 
Using 10,000 
Threshold  
Deadline 
Using 8,000 
Threshold 
Chicago 
2,700,000 
446,489 
0.042 
10.7 years 
44.6 years 
55.8 years 
Houston 
2,202,531 
331,689 
0.038 
N/A 
33.1 years 
41.5 years 
Cleveland 
1,308,955 
185,409 
0.036 
N/A 
18.5 years 
23.2 years 
New York 
City 
8,271,000 
137,542 
0.004 
N/A 
13.8 years 
17.2 years 
North Texas 
MWD 
1,835,456 
95,558 
0.013 
N/A 
N/A 
11.9 years 
Detroit 
713,777 
84,616 
0.030 
N/A 
N/A 
10.6 years 
Wichita 
395,699 
80,612 
0.051 
13.2 years 
N/A 
10.1 years 
* “GRR” is a service line that is galvanized requiring replacement because it is now or previously was downstream 
of a lead pipe 
 
 
Under the proposal, systems that would have to replace more than 10,000 LSLs per year 
under a 10-year deadline (i.e. systems with >100,000 LSLs, of which EPA says there are about 
four, including Chicago, Houston, Cleveland, and New York City) will have to replace only 
10,000 LSLs/year.41 The proposal also requests comment on allowing as few as 8,000 LSL 
replacements (LSLRs) per year.42 We oppose both of these options. 
 
As highlighted in Table 3, that would mean that Chicago, with a presumed total number 
of LSLs and GRRs of 446,489, would get 44.6 to 55.8 years to remove said lines. If the city were 
to determine that it had more than the currently assumed number of LSLs and galvanized lines 
requiring replacement (GRRs), it could get an even longer extension. The LCRI proposal would 
provide that states are required to determine whether faster LSLR would be feasible, but there is 
no accountability to ensure this. Based on EPA's estimate of about 9.2 million LSLs 
nationwide,43 the handful of systems in Table 3 have a wildly disproportionate number of LSLs. 
The four that would get more time based on 10,000 LSLRs per year have a total of 1,101,129 
LSLs, or nearly 12% of EPA's estimated nationwide total. All seven have 1,361,915 LSLs, or 
 
41 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,065 (§ 141.84(d)(5)(v)). 
42 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,914. 
43 EPA Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water, Lead Service Lines, available at https://www.epa.gov/ground-
water-and-drinking-water/lead-service-lines (last accessed Feb. 2, 2024). 

2-13 
 
almost 15% of the nationwide total. These seven systems are less than 0.02% of CWSs (~50,000 
total, 88 FR 84912)) nationwide.  
 
We also note that some cities have large numbers of service lines listed as ”unknown.” In 
New York, for example, an analysis by Columbia University researchers found that of over 
850,000 residential service line records analyzed, over 136,000 (16 percent) were potentially 
made of lead, and over 227,000 (27 percent) were made of an unknown material, which could 
also include lead.44 In total, over 40 percent of service lines in the city could contain lead. If the 
227,000 unknowns were listed as lead in the city’s inventory used to determine whether it would 
get an extension, that could mean that there were 363,000 LSLs, allowing 36 years for the city to 
remove its lines with a 10,000 LSLRs per year cap, or 45 years with an 8,000 LSLRs per year 
cap. 
 
EPA says that it selected 10,000 as the proposed upper threshold for what is technically 
possible because of potential system capacity to replace up to 10,000 LSLs per year.45 The 
agency notes that Detroit’s water system announced they intend to replace 10,000 LSLs per year, 
which the agency says, “suggests that Detroit’s water system expects that this many annual 
replacements is technically possible.”46 EPA cites as another example the rates achieved by 
Newark, New Jersey, between January and March 2020, when “Newark replaced as many as 100 
LSLs per day and maintained this rate 4 to 5 days per week.”47 The agency concludes that “if 
this rate of 100 LSLs per day had been maintained for 20 weeks of the year, it would have 
resulted in between 8,000 and 12,000 replacements,” and therefore this “indicates that 10,000 
annual replacements could be technically possible for systems.”48  
 
There are several problems with this analysis. First, Newark has reported that in fact it 
was replacing “as many as 120 pipes a day as 25 crews worked around the City.”49  EPA 
perplexingly concludes that the number of pipes Newark replaced each day was the maximum 
number it was able to replace each day, or the maximum that any city could each day. And 
EPA’s arbitrary limitation that crews can only work 20 weeks a year at removing 100 LSLs a 
day (which would total 10,000 LSLRs) is also unexplained. Despite a COVID slowdown, 
Newark was replacing LSLs during the winter, far more than 20 weeks a year.  
 
But even accepting the agency’s assumption that 100 LSLs per day is the peak number 
that can be removed by any city, and assuming that workers can remove LSLs only during 
 
44 Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health, Lead Service Lines in NYC Disproportionately Impact 
Hispanic/Latino Communities and Children Already At Risk, Aug. 30, 2023, available at 
https://www.publichealth.columbia.edu/news/lead-service-lines-nyc-disproportionately-impact-hispanic-latino-
communities-children-already-risk-lead-exposure;  Nigra AE, Lieberman-Cribbin W, Bostick BC, Chillrud SN, 
Carrión D. Geospatial Assessment of Racial/Ethnic Composition, Social Vulnerability, and Lead Water Service 
Lines in New York City. Environ Health Perspect. 2023 Aug;131(8):87015. doi: 10.1289/EHP12276. Epub 2023 
Aug 30. PMID: 37646509; PMCID: PMC10467360. 
45 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,914. 
46 Id. 
47 Id. 
48 Id. 
49 Kareem Adeem, Director, Newark Department of Water and Sewer Utilities, Witness Testimony before the House 
Committee on Energy and Commerce, Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change, “Hearing: Trusting the 
Tap: Upgrading America’s Drinking Water Infrastructure.” March 24, 2022. available at 
https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF18/20220329/114537/HHRG-117-IF18-Wstate-AdeemK-20220329.pdf. 

2-14 
 
spring, summer and fall (March through October, or 35 weeks), and assuming that work occurs 
only 5 days a week, that would mean 17,500 LSLs could be removed per year.  
 
Each of these assumptions could be challenged as underestimates.  First, Newark was 
removing up to 120 LSLs per day, not 100. Indeed, the city was replacing up to 2,200 LSLs per 
month.50 Second, LSLs can be removed more than 8 months out of the year (Newark continued 
replacing lines during the winter, for example).51  
 
Third, and perhaps most important, the agency is assuming a fixed availability of crews 
and equipment. But unions have made it clear that they are ready to train more crews. As a White 
House press release notes, “[t]he EPA and the Department of Labor will collaborate with labor 
unions to accelerate the replacement of lead pipes, including the potential to leverage existing 
union training centers to host state training seminars on lead service line replacement 
technologies and to create good paying union jobs.”52 This is exactly what Newark did, working 
with its local Laborers’ International Union of North America that trained dozens of local 
residents, some of them previously unemployed, to remove lead pipes, expanding the available 
workforce.53 As noted above, Newark had 25 crews working simultaneously.54 A city like 
Chicago, Cleveland or New York could replicate such an approach and work with local union 
training centers to train enough workers to have dozens of crews available to replace lead pipes, 
more than Newark’s 25 crews that were replacing an average of 4 to 5 LSLs per crew per day. 
The market can be expected to respond over the 10-year implementation period to increase the 
availability of both workforce and equipment as needed, particularly the decades-long extensions 
will not be allowed. Allowing extensions would decrease the pressure and incentive for cities, 
contractors and unions to train, hire and deploy crews, thus undermining the likelihood of 
expeditious LSL replacements. 
ii. 
Response to EPA request for comment on whether primacy states must 
approve deferred deadlines and whether required rate should increase after 
10 years 
 
EPA has requested comment on whether to require states, as a condition of primacy, to 
approve the use of the deferred deadline provision where the water system qualifies for it and/or 
whether to require the primacy agency, as a condition of primacy, to assess whether it would be 
feasible for a system to meet the 10-year deadline or a shorter deadline even if they system meets 
 
50 Jay Tokasz, New Jersey’s largest city showed how Buffalo could solve its lead pipe problem, The Buffalo News 
(Feb. 2, 2024), available at https://buffalonews.com/news/local/new-jerseys-largest-city-showed-how-buffalo-
could-solve-its-lead-pipe-problem/article_146d84da-bbb9-11ee-a242-7f1d5da158fe.html. 
51 Personal communication of Erik Olson, NRDC, with Kareem Adeem, Director, Newark Dept. of Water and Sewer 
Utilities, January 2024. 
52 White House. “Fact Sheet: The Biden-⁠Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan.” Dec. 16, 2021, available at 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-lead-pipe-
and-paint-action-plan/  
53 Kareem Adeem, Director, Newark Department of Water and Sewer Utilities, Witness Testimony before the House 
Committee on Energy and Commerce, Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change, “Hearing: Trusting the 
Tap: Upgrading America’s Drinking Water Infrastructure.” March 24, 2022. 
https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF18/20220329/114537/HHRG-117-IF18-Wstate-AdeemK-20220329.pdf. 
54 Id. 

2-15 
 
the regulatory criteria for the deferred deadline.55While we oppose any such extensions beyond 
10 years, assuming arguendo that they will be made available in certain circumstances, we would 
support such a requirement that primacy states must assess whether it would be feasible for a 
system to meet the 10-year deadline or a shorter deadline even if they meet the criteria for an 
extension. At an absolute minimum, the system should be required to make a compelling 
demonstration with supporting data to the primacy state, and the state should have to formally 
determine after full consideration and providing notice and public comment that compliance with 
the 10-year deadline, or a shorter one, is not possible. 
 
The agency also seeks comment on whether the identified maximum replacement rate 
threshold could increase after ten years, such whether the threshold could double from 10,000 
annual replacements to 20,000. Id. Assuming arguendo that EPA does include extensions in the 
final rule, it should at least ramp up the minimum number of LSL replacements to double or 
triple the rule’s maximum required rate after the first 10 years. 
 
EPA notes that the agency anticipates that “after ten years, when most systems have 
completed their service line replacement programs, there will be less competition for workers as 
well as supplies to conduct replacements.”56  The agency also says that it anticipates that 
“following ten years, supply chains will have expanded significantly to meet increased demand 
and that service line replacement efficiency will increase following a decade of system 
experience and the potential availability of new technologies or procedures to expedite service 
line replacement.”57 . But as noted above, the data from Newark and other cities speaks for itself. 
Replacing Newark’s peak 120 lead service lines per weekday for 9 months a year would allow a 
system to replace over 20,000 lead service lines a year. After the 10-year deadline passes for the 
vast majority of systems, there will be substantial excess capacity in terms of available 
equipment and trained workforce otherwise out of work. In addition, there will be expanded 
materials availability in the supply chain and expanded equipment availability from the past 
decade of work, as well as additional expertise, experience, new technologies, and better 
procedures for LSL replacement. This all makes a doubling or tripling of the maximum number 
of LSLs that must be replaced per year a reasonable expectation.  
 
Finally, while EPA has not specifically requested comment on how it proposes to 
calculate the number of service lines that would allow extensions under either of the two 
proposed approaches, this will be an extremely consequential question if the final LCRI includes 
such extensions. The proposed regulatory language states the deferred deadlines are based on 
"the total number of known lead and galvanized requiring replacement service lines."58 This is 
crucial, because if service lines of unknown material were included, this would create the 
incentive for systems to say that they have a large number of unknowns and could therefore 
potentially qualify for a prolonged extension. For example, we note that in Illinois, the initial 
inventories found that 41 percent of all service lines were unknowns;59 if extensions were 
 
55 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,914. 
56 Id. 
57 Id. 
58 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,065 (§ 141.84(d)(5)(v)(A) & (B)). 
59 EPA, 2023, Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, at 19-20 (Ex. 
11), EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0709, available at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-
0709.  

2-16 
 
allowed based on the assumption that unknowns were lead, this would add many decades to the 
LSL replacement deadlines under the EPA proposed extension provisions. Therefore, we 
strongly urge that if the agency includes extensions, they should only be based upon known 
LSLs and GRRs. 
iii. 
EPA cannot allow systems with a high concentration of LSLs to avoid 
removing all lead pipes in 10 years 
 
 
The LCRI also proposes that public water systems with a high concentration of LSLs can 
get extensions. States would be authorized to approve extensions for systems that would have to 
exceed 0.039 replacements per household per year if it were to comply with a 10-year deadline.60  
We oppose this extension and do not believe that it is lawful or necessary under the statute. As 
illustrated in Figure 1 below, EPA calculates that many systems would get as much as 20 years, 
and some as long as 28 years to replace all of their lead service lines under this extension 
proposal.  
 
 
While we conclude that these extensions are unlawful and unwise, if EPA proceeds with 
them, it is incumbent upon the agency to provide full disclosure of the number of LSLs and 
GRRs estimated to be in the systems that would qualify for these extensions. The agency also 
must disclose which systems are eligible for these extensions. It is puzzling how the agency 
believes it can codify such extensions and not be clear on how many systems would qualify (the 
range EPA cites, from about 700 to 2,100 systems,61 is a threefold difference) and how many 
lead service lines are at issue. It is entirely plausible, based on the data the agency has provided 
publicly, that the agency has underestimated the number of systems that would be getting 
extensions. We are also concerned that some systems might provide an initial overestimate of the 
number of LSLs they have to get an extension, and then report that these lines were determined 
not to be lead many years into the extension. These issues further support the need for a local 
public hearing and public comment, as well as a requirement that the primacy agency make an 
individualized determination that an extension is warranted for each system.  
 
 
An analysis of the Michigan data,62 which is more detailed than publicly available 
national data, examined the expected impact of the proposed extensions. This analysis by Elin 
Betanzo of Safe Water Engineering yields the following results:  
 
• 74 Michigan water systems qualify for deferrals out of  
• 200 Michigan water systems that took 5th liter samples in 2023 out of  
• 275 that reported potential LSLs out of  
• 1357 that submitted a preliminary inventory out of  
• 1360 that took LCR samples during the last 3 years. 
 
60 LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,065 ((§ 141.84(d)(5)(v)(B)). 
61 The agency’s LCRI Federal Register notice, 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,913, says “EPA projects that a total of 663 to 
2,134 systems (1.3 to 4.3 percent of all systems)” would be affected, citing its Technical Support Document. 
However, the Technical Support Document says 720 to 2,178 systems will likely be affected (See Technical Support 
Document at 16, Ex. 8). We assume the latter is more up to date and correct. 
62 Elin Betanzo, Safe Water Engineering, Jan. 22, 2024, personal communication. This analysis uses total number of 
service lines as a surrogate for households, since EPA does not define households.   

2-17 
 
• The deferred replacement rate would vary up to 25 years for River Rouge  
o River Rouge has a population of 7,224, with a reported 3025 known LSLs.  
 
So, according to this analysis, more than one fourth of Michigan water systems with lead service 
lines (74 out of 275 reporting potential LSLs) would be allowed to take longer than 10 years to 
replace their lead service lines.  
 
 
Under this type of exemption, if a system serves 50,000 households and would have to do 
>1,950 LSLRs per year, it could get an extension. Thus, if that system had 35,000 LSLs, it would 
get 18 years to replace them. EPA projects that a total of 720 to 2,178 systems, (1.4 to 4.4 
percent of all systems)63 would exceed this threshold. Indeed, EPA's supporting materials for the 
LCRI indicate that EPA's "Best Estimate" is that 2,178 systems would be eligible for extensions 
based on the threshold of 0.039 replacements per household per year,64 and we are concerned 
based on these estimates that the actual upper bound may even be higher. This could become a 
major loophole that would allow hundreds or thousands of water systems, including many of the 
systems that by definition have major lead service line problems because they have a high 
concentration of these lead pipes, to get a prolonged extension of the 10-year deadline.  
 
As noted above, A 10-year deadline is feasible by the agency’s own admission for the 
vast majority—97.6 to 99.3 percent of large water systems65 which are the systems required to 
be considered in evaluating feasibility—and therefore the extension contemplated in section 
141.84(d)(5)(v)(B) should not be included in the rule. This is a significant deficiency that will hit 
hardest those communities with the highest concentrations of lead pipes, including many 
environmental justice communities that are disproportionately saddled with LSL and other 
sources of lead exposure—the very communities that are most important to address. 
 
 
 
63 LCRI Technical Support Document at 16, Ex. 8. 
64 Id. at 11, Ex. 4.  
65 See id. 

2-18 
 
 
Figure 1  
EPA estimate of the number of systems getting extensions because they exceed maximum 
number of replacements per household threshold (red) or exceeding the 10,000 
replacements per year threshold (blue) 
Source: EPA, 2023, Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements,  
at 17 (Ex. 9) 
 
EPA justifies this extension by noting that it reviewed the LSL replacement programs of 30 large 
systems and considers that the “95th percentile normalized rate (0.039 replacements per 
household per year)” is the “affordability threshold because it avoids setting the rate at the 
maximum recorded replacements per year rates, which were achieved by systems known to have 
received technical and financial assistance to support their replacement program that is unlikely 

2-19 
 
to be broadly available when there is a national requirement to replace LSLs and GRR service 
lines.”66  
However, our review of EPA’s Technical Support Document makes clear that there are several 
reasons why this 0.039 replacements per household per year rate is likely to be an underestimate 
of the rate at which systems can be expected to replace their lead service lines to the extent 
feasible to protect public health. EPA admits: 
All the identified replacement programs reflect replacement rates achieved before 
the significant [Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL)] funding became available. 
Therefore, it is possible that an even higher per-household rate is affordable with 
the availability of BIL funding for some systems than the rates identified in this 
proposal. In fact, EPA is aware of several systems that project accelerating their 
annual service line replacement rate as a result of receiving additional funding, 
including BIL funding [citations omitted].  Secondly, the service line replacement 
programs identified in this analysis generally had no requirements to replace 
service lines as quickly as feasible to protect public health “to the extent feasible” 
… and, therefore, the identified per-household rates might not reflect the limit to 
what is affordable by systems. Thirdly, … many identified systems are also in the 
early years of their program, so their per-household replacement rates may not 
reflect the ability of these systems to conduct service line replacement at full 
scale.67 
 
Moreover, as EPA admits in its Technical Support Document, a replacement rate of 0.066 
LSLs per household per day was achieved by Newark.68 While it is true that Newark succeeded 
in raising bonds to support its effort, Newark received no Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) 
funding and is by no means a wealthy or uniquely well-resourced city. Newark has a median 
household income of $46,460 and has a 95.3 percent Black, Latinx and mixed-race population,69 
compared to the far higher U.S. median household income of $74,580.70 With the availability of 
funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, Drinking Water State Revolving Fund, 
American Rescue Plan Act, Water Infrastructure Innovation and Finance Act, and other federal 
funds discussed at length on EPA’s website,71 as well as bonds and ratepayer dollars, there is no 
reason any other large water system that is motivated to comply with a 10-year deadline to 
 
66 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,913. 
67 EPA, 2023, Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, at 10, EPA-HQ-
OW-2022-0801-0709, available at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0709.  
68 Ibid, at 4 Ex. 1. 
69 US Bureau of the Census, Quick Facts: Newark, NJ,  available at 
https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/NJ,newarkcitynewjersey/PST045221  
70 US Census Bureau, Income in the United States: 2022, available at 
https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2023/demo/p60-
279.html#:~:text=Highlights,and%20Table%20A%2D1. 
71 EPA, Identifying Funding Sources for Lead Service Line Replacement, available at https://www.epa.gov/ground-
water-and-drinking-water/identifying-funding-sources-lead-service-line-
replacement#:~:text=Bipartisan%20Infrastructure%20Law%20(BIL)&text=The%20Bipartisan%20Infrastructure%2
0Law%20invests,State%20match%20is%20not%20required . 

2-20 
 
replace its LSLs could not do what Newark did.72 Nor should concerns about water affordability 
drive calls for these extensions. As discussed in section 13 of these comments discussing 
affordability, there are many ways to replace all LSLs and still ensure that water is affordable to 
low-wealth people. For these and other reasons, we do not believe this additional extension is 
necessary for systems that would have to replace more than 0.039 lead service lines per 
household per year.  
iv. 
 EPA should include a mandatory minimum number of annual LSLRs 
As proposed, the LCRI’s ten-year LSL replacement mandate does not account adequately 
for the widely varying numbers of LSLs and GRRs in water systems, even in systems serving 
similarly sized populations. As a result, it would allow some water systems to replace very low 
numbers of LSLs and GRRs per year even if the water system has the resources to complete 
LSLRs much faster.   
EPA collected multiple examples of cities with similar population sizes that had total 
numbers of LSLs and GRRs that vary by an order of magnitude or more.73 For example, among 
large systems, Washington, D.C., had 28,000 LSLs and GRRs, which is two orders of magnitude 
more than the slightly larger (by population) city of Tucson, which had only 600 LSLs or 
GRRs.74 Among medium-size systems, Bloomfield, NJ, had 500 LSLs or GRRs compared to 
5,000 in Battle Creek, MI, despite similar population sizes.75 Overall, EPA estimates that the 
vast majority of water systems nationwide—about 96.5 percent—have fewer than 1,000 LSLs 
and GRRs and provides examples of multiple systems of varying sizes that were able to replace 
all LSLs in one or two years.76  
The LCRI should account for these differences by requiring a minimum number of 
LSLRs per year. At a 10% annual replacement rate, many water systems with low quantities of 
LSLs and GRRs would be required to replace comparatively few service lines per year, despite 
the water systems having similar resources to systems that would be required to replace an order 
of magnitude more service lines per year. Using one of the above examples, if a water system 
serving a city similar to Battle Creek would have to replace 1,000 LSLs per year, a water system 
serving a similarly sized city that has one-tenth as many LSLs and GRRs could reasonably be 
required to conduct replacements at a similar rate and replace all of its LSLs and GRRs within 
one year.  
 
72 We note again that Newark did not access federal funding for its LSLR program and yet managed to conduct 
replacements with haste. With additional monetary support, many water systems would be able to match or surpass 
the success of Newark’s program. 
73 EPA, 2023, Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, at 3-6 (Ex. 1), 
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0709, available at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-
0709.  
74 Id. 
75 Id. Other examples of cities with similar populations and vastly differing numbers of LSLs and GRRs from 
Exhibit 1 in the LCRI Technical Support Document include: Sioux Falls, SD (198,524 people, 230 LSLs/GRRs) and 
York, PA (197,177 people, 2,300 LSLs/GRRs); Quincy, MA (101,636 people, 285 LSLs/GRRs) and Flint, MI 
(98,310 people, 12,035 LSLs/GRRs); and Framingham, MA (72,362 people, 184 LSLs/GRRs) and Madison, WI 
(71,160 people, 8,000 LSLs/GRRs).  
76 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,912 (“the majority of systems—only approximately 1,700 out of nearly 50,000 CWSs 
nationwide (3.5 percent) are expected to have more than 1,000 LSLs and GRR service lines”). 

2-21 
 
Relying on states to set faster replacement rates on a case-by-case basis is inadequate 
because many states prohibit state requirements that are more stringent than federal rules.77 To 
address this problem, the LCRI’s baseline LSLR requirement should be adjusted to be at least 
10% of all LSLs and GRRs in the system or at least 500 LSLRs per year, whichever is higher, 
and States should have authority to require an even faster rate if the State deems it feasible. This 
would ensure that all systems replace LSLs and GRRs at a reasonable, expeditious, and feasible 
rate. For example, Newark, New Jersey, was able to replace 100 to 120 LSLs per day once its 
LSLR program was fully operational,78 so a minimum rate of 500 LSLRs per year would be 
equivalent to the rate that Newark achieved per week. EPA’s Technical Support Document 
provides many more examples of water systems of various sizes that successfully replaced at 
least 500 LSLs per year, including Cincinnati, OH; Washington, DC; Pittsburgh, PA; Trenton, 
NJ; Aurora, IL; Kalamazoo, MI; Lansing, MI; Flint, MI; Madison, WI; Galesburg, IL; and 
Stoughton, WI.79 At least two other systems with fewer than 500 total LSLs—Mayville, WI, and 
Village of Montgomery, IL—completed all of their replacements in a single year.80 These results 
show that a minimum annual replacement rate of 500 LSLs per year is feasible.  
 
D. 
Service Lines and Connectors Subject to Mandatory Replacement 
 
i. 
Definitions of Lead Connector and LSL and Replacement of Lead 
Connectors 
 
We are supportive of EPA’s inclusion of lead connectors longer than two feet in the 
definition of a lead service line to be replaced. However, all lead plumbing poses a public health 
risk and must be proactively identified and removed, including shorter lead connectors. The 
proposed rule should be changed to reflect this public health threat. Additionally, EPA’s 
definition of a lead service line leaves open the possibility that the portion of a lead service line 
that enters a customer’s home will remain in place. This too must be remedied to the extent 
possible in the final rule. 
 
 
77 See, Association of State Drinking Water Administrators, Costs of States’ Transactions Study (CoSTS) 
For Potential Long-Term Revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule (LT-LCR), April 2018 (”Many states have 
constitutional amendments or state-level policies such that their regulations must exactly match 
the federal regulations and are no more stringent than the federal regulations.”) available at 
https://www.asdwa.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/CoSTS-Report-Final-2018.pdf  
78 Kareem Adeem, Director, Newark Department of Water and Sewer Utilities, Witness Testimony before the House 
Committee on Energy and Commerce, Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change, “Hearing: Trusting the 
Tap: Upgrading America’s Drinking Water Infrastructure.” March 24, 2022. 
https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF18/20220329/114537/HHRG-117-IF18-Wstate-AdeemK-20220329.pdf;, 88 
Fed. Reg. at 84,914.  
79 EPA, 2023, Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, at 3-6 (Ex. 1), 
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0709, available at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-
0709. 
80 Ibid. 

2-22 
 
a.  Connector Definition  
 
While we are supportive of EPA’s inclusion of lead connectors longer than two feet in its 
definition of a lead service line to be replaced,81 all lead plumbing poses a public health risk and 
must be removed. Pipes such as pigtails and goosenecks can release lead similar to the way a 
lead service line releases lead,82 and therefore pose a public health risk.83 Under some very 
common circumstances even a short lead connector can pose a substantial threat because of 
galvanic corrosion. It is well-established that when lead is joined with copper or another metal,84 
lead levels can increase exponentially, even if the remaining lead pipe is relatively short.85 Both 
lead spikes and constant increased lead levels have been observed under these circumstances and 
worsened over time.86 Further, the SDWA defines a lead service line as “a pipe and its fittings, 
which are not lead free...that connect the drinking water main to the building inlet.”87 For these 
reasons EPA must include these shorter fittings as part of its definition of a LSL. If EPA decides 
not to include these shorter lead pipes in its definition, at a minimum EPA should require the 
proactive identification and replacement of lead connectors that are two feet or shorter as 
opposed to the proposal’s suggestion that lead connectors only be replaced when discovered.  
 
b. Lead Service Line Definition 
 
Additionally, EPA’s proposed definition of a lead service line does not include the portion 
of the line that enters the customer’s home. The current definition cuts the service line short, 
 
81 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,054 (§ 141.2), defining a lead service line as “a service line that is made of lead or where a 
portion of the service line is made of lead,” and defining a connector as “a short segment of piping not exceeding 
two feet that can be bent and is used for connections between rigid service piping, typically connecting the service 
line to the main.” 
82 A pilot study by San Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC) found lead spikes as high as 1,400 ppb after 
the replacement of lead connectors (whips). SFPUC, Memo from Elaine Adan Kawaii to Manouchehr Boozarpour 
Re: LUSL Pilot Study Update 2 (Oct. 1, 2020). 
83 Even EPA recognizes the risk posed by any length of lead plumbing; the LCRI’s preamble explains that sites with 
interior leaded plumbing should be either a tier 1 or tier 2 sample site as these sites are “likely to have elevated lead 
levels.” EPA does not specify a minimum amount of interior lead plumbing, contrary to what is proposed for 
connectors.  88 Fed. Reg. at 84,930.  
84 Chang et. al, Prediction of lead leaching from galvanic corrosion of lead-containing components in copper pipe 
drinking water supply systems, 436 Journal of Hazardous Materials 12,9169 (Aug. 15, 2022), available at  
 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0304389422009591. 
85 Cartier et. al, Impact of treatment on Pb release from full and partially replaced harvested Lead Service Lines 
(LSLs), 47 Water Research 661, 664 (Feb. 1, 2013), available at 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0043135412007634, finding that even when lead pipes were 
80% replaced, the remaining lead materials released more lead than the original full LSL due to galvanic corrosion. 
See also Diana Lutz, Washington University St. Louis, The Source Newsroom, Lead levels in drinking water spike 
when copper and lead pipes joined, (accessed Jan. 31, 2024) https://source.wustl.edu/2011/12/lead-levels-in-
drinking-water-spike-when-copper-and-lead-pipes-joined/, Hu et. al, Copper-Induced Metal Release from Lead Pipe 
into Drinking Water, 68 Corrosion The Journal of Science and Engineering 1037 (Nov. 1, 2012) available at  
 https://meridian.allenpress.com/corrosion/article-abstract/68/11/1037/163020/Copper-Induced-Metal-Release-from-
Lead-Pipe-into?redirectedFrom=fulltext (finding increased lead release due to galvanic corrosion); and St. Clair et. 
al, Long-Term Behavior of Simulated Partial Lead Service Line Replacements, 33 Environmental Engineering 
Science 53, 55–56 (Jan. 1, 2016) available at 
 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4770854/ (demonstrating galvanic corrosion increased over time). 
86 Id. 
87 42 U.S.C. § 300j-19b(a)(4), emphasis added. 

2-23 
 
ending at the point at which the lead pipe touches the building. But typically, an additional 12 to 
18 inches of line continues beyond the entrance point into the building into a customer’s home, 
to the point at which there is a shutoff valve or meter in the building. EPA should clarify that 
replacement of this indoor portion of a LSL or GRR is required if a system has access into a 
customer’s home. This is similar to Michigan’s Lead and Copper Rule which requires 
replacement of the entire line, including “…to customer site piping or to the building plumbing 
at the first shut-off valve inside the building, or 18 inches inside the building, whichever is 
shorter.”88 Illinois has adopted a similar definition, that a service line “means the piping, tubing, 
and necessary appurtenances acting as a conduit from the water main or source of potable water 
supply to the building plumbing at the first shut-off valve or 18 inches inside the building, 
whichever is shorter.”89 EPA should define “inlet” as the point at which the lead service line 
formally ends in the building and connects into the premise plumbing, that is, where it reaches its 
first shut-off valve or meter inside the building, or 18 inches inside the building, whichever is 
shorter. 
 
c. Lead Connectors  
 
As discussed above, we are supportive of EPA’s inclusion of lead connectors longer than 
two feet in its definition of a LSL requiring replacement.90 We are similarly supportive of EPA’s 
proposed requirement to identify lead connectors of two feet or less when systems create their 
inventories,91 and the proposed requirement that such connectors are replaced. However, 
connectors should be proactively replaced, not only when they are (apparently physically) 
encountered, as the LCRI currently proposes.92 As outlined above, the SDWA’s definition of a 
LSL includes lead fittings, and customers can be exposed to lead via even a small lead connector; 
therefore, all lead fittings should be proactively identified and removed. This means that when a 
system creates its inventory and determines a connector is present and that connector is either 
categorized as “lead” or “unknown,” the system must either replace the lead connector by the 
mandatory LSLR deadline or identify the material by the deadlines outlined in Section 5 below 
and take action according to the material encountered (replacing if lead).  
 
Water systems must be required to promptly and physically verify connector material if 
records indicate a lead connector is present or likely present93 and replace the connector and 
downstream galvanized service line if the system finds the connector is in fact lead. The fact is, 
there are many systems wherein the majority or even the totality of known lead plumbing takes 
 
88 Mich Admin Code R. 325.10108. 
89 415 Ill. Compiled Statutes (ILCS) 5/17.12(c). 
90 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,054 (§ 141.2), defining a lead service line as “a service line that is made of lead or where a 
portion of the service line is made of lead,” and defining a connector as “a short segment of piping not exceeding 
two feet that can be bent and is used for connections between rigid service piping, typically connecting the service 
line to the main.” 
91 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,062 (§ 141.84(a)(2)(ii)). 
92 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,066 (§ 141.84(e)). 
93 Because galvanized lines are inflexible and historically were most commonly installed with a lead connector, 
systems should assume that a galvanized line has a lead connector, meaning the presence of a galvanized line would 
trigger physical validation and removal. 

2-24 
 
the form of lead connectors.94 In such places, EPA should require systems treat shorter lead and 
unknown connectors the same way other systems treat LSLs and GRR; systems should 
systematically identify connector material and create inventories and plans for replacement, to 
take place within 10 years. Similarly, the same public health education and protections should be 
in place, including providing filters during lead connector removal. These protections should be 
in place for all lead connectors and not just those attached to galvanized lines, as lead connectors 
attached to copper service lines have also been found to result in lead spikes post-removal.95 
There are also several problems with the inventory and validation of lead connectors. This is 
discussed in section 5. 
 
d. Galvanized Lines and Lead Materials  
 
The LCRI correctly identifies galvanized service lines that are or were downstream of 
lead pipes or connectors as a substantial risk to human health. The collection and then release of 
lead by downstream galvanized plumbing is well-established and long-lasting.96 The final rule 
must require the removal of all galvanized pipes that currently are or ever were downstream of 
lead pipes or lead connectors. Omitting such service lines would be completely unjustifiable 
because of our current understanding of the release of lead from downstream galvanized 
plumbing. 
 
e. Responses to EPA’s Specific Requests for Comment 
 
EPA has specifically requested comment on the defined length of a connector. EPA 
should require the identification and removal of all lead connectors, regardless of length. This is 
addressed further in section 2(D)(i)(a), paragraph one, and section 2(D)(i)(b).  
 
EPA has specifically requested comment on whether the Agency should include lead 
connectors or galvanized service lines that are or were downstream of a lead connector as part of 
mandatory replacement. Lead connectors and galvanized lines that are or were downstream of a 
lead connector should be part of the LCRI’s mandatory replacement requirement. This is 
addressed further in section 2(D)(i)(c)-(d). 
 
 
94 Simoni Triantafyllidou, US EPA Office of Research and Development, EPA Tools & Resources Webinar: 
Identifying Lead Service Lines in the Community 9 (Oct. 26, 2022), available at 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-11/508%20Compliant%20-
%20Identifying%20Lead%20Service%20Lines_Oct%202022.pdf. 
95 SFPUC, supra n. 82 at 6.  
96 See Clark, B N., et al., Lead Release to Drinking Water from Galvanized Steel Pipe Coatings, 32 Environmental 
Engineering Science 713, (Aug. 13, 2015), available at 
https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/abs/10.1089/ees.2015.0073?journalCode=ees; HDR Engineering, Inc., An Analysis 
of the Correlation between Lead Released from Galvanized Iron Piping and the Contents of Lead in Drinking Water 
22 (Sept. 1 2009), available at: 
https://archive.epa.gov/region03/dclead/web/pdf/galvanized%20project%20report.pdf; and 
McFadden, M, et al., Contributions to drinking water lead from galvanized iron corrosion scales, 103 American 
Water Works Association Journal 76, (Apr. 1, 2011), available at 
https://awwa.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.1551-8833.2011.tb11437.x. 

2-25 
 
ii. 
Partial Lead Service Line Replacement 
 
We applaud EPA for allowing only replacement of the full lead service line to count 
towards the LCRI’s lead service line replacement mandate.97 Replacing only part of a lead 
service line can cause high lead levels shortly after the partial replacement and does not 
sufficiently reduce lead exposure.98 Replacement of the entire service line is both the most 
health-protective and cost-efficient option. As discussed extensively in the “control” discussion 
of this section below, we strongly recommend that EPA promulgate a definition of “control” that 
requires water systems to replace and pay for full replacement of all of the LSLs in their service 
territories. If EPA follows these recommendations, it would obviate the need for a water system 
to ever do partial replacement. We agree, however, that if EPA maintains the “control” and 
“access” loopholes over our strong legal and practical objections, the agency must maintain the 
requirement that if a water system cannot replace a portion of a lead service line due to issues 
around access or control, then the water system cannot do a partial replacement. Under the 
proposal, water systems are required to try to obtain consent to replace the entire service line.99 
Putting aside any concerns about EPA’s definition of control, the prevention of partial 
replacements under this provision is also a good thing. Because water systems are prohibited 
from doing partial replacements except in specific circumstances, and even in those 
circumstances the water systems must offer to replace the entire line and provide filters if it does 
the partial replacement, the rule encourages the water system to expend effort to replace the 
entire line rather than simply taking the path of least resistance and replacing only a portion of 
the service line. 
 
Exceptions to replacing the full LSL should be narrow and limited. We accept that in 
emergencies, there are cases where doing a partial replacement may be unavoidable. The LCRI, 
however does allow for partial lead service line replacements under two circumstances: as part of 
emergency repair or in coordination with planned infrastructure work that is not lead service line 
replacement.100 These replacements do not count towards the number of lead service lines a 
water system is required to replace annually under the LCRI. When doing a partial replacement, 
the water system must notify the owner of a property and any non-owner occupants that the 
water system plans to do a partial lead service line replacement and the water system must offer 
to replace the entire service line instead.101 In emergencies, it may be necessary for the water 
system to do a partial replacement and then later offer to replace the portion of the LSL it left in 
 
97 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,054, 85,066 (§ 141.2, 141.84(d)(6)(iii)(D)). 
98 See LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,917 ("Research has found that partial LSLR has not been shown to reliably reduce 
lead levels in the short term and may temporarily increase lead levels due to disruptions of established scales or 
galvanic corrosion (USEPA, 2011;...) while service lines that have been sampled and have tested-out may contribute 
to lead at a later date (Del Toral et al., 2013)”); see also, id, at 84,928 ("Partial replacements are often associated 
with elevated drinking water lead levels in the short-term, from days to months and potentially longer, and have not 
been shown to reliably reduce lead levels in the long-term”) (internal citations omitted). See also Letter from Dr. Dr. 
Deborah L. Swackhamer, EPA Science Advisory Board Chair, and Dr. Jeffrey K. Griffiths, SAB Drinking Water 
Committee Chair, to Lisa P. Jackson, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Administrator (Sept. 28, 2011), 
available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-
09/documents/sab_evaluation_partial_lead_service_lines_epa-sab-11-015.pdf.  
99 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064 (§ 141.84(d)). 
100 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,067 (§ 141.84(g), (h)). 
101 Id. 

2-26 
 
the ground. In those situations, we support the LCRI’s requirements to require 1) that the water 
system offer to replace the rest of the LSL within 45 days and 2) that the water system provide 
filters/POU devices and six months of cartridges to affected residents if the offer to replace the 
rest of the LSL is refused. Additionally, as discussed below in the “cost sharing” portion of this 
section of our comments, we strongly urge that EPA require utilities to cover the cost of full 
replacement, which would minimize the likelihood of any partial replacements, even in many 
cases of emergency repairs. 
However, EPA should not allow partial lead service line replacements when the water 
system is doing other planned infrastructure work. In those situations, EPA should require water 
systems to either replace the entire LSL or to leave the LSL in place and in the pool of LSLs 
requiring replacement so that it can be replaced at a later time. It should be noted in the final 
LCRI that EPA has clearly stated that if State Revolving Fund money is spent on planned 
infrastructure work such as water main replacement, lead service lines that are encountered must 
be fully replaced. EPA explains that “If the customer... refuse[s] access, then the water system 
should leave the publicly-owned portion of the lead service line in place (so as to not create a 
partial replacement) and document this action. To be clear, partial service line replacements are 
not eligible for DWSRF funding (from any DWSRF funding source).”102 
As currently written, the planned infrastructure work exception for partials creates a 
loophole for water systems to get out of fully replacing all of their LSLs. Although partial 
replacements cannot count towards fulfilling a water system’s LSL replacement mandate, if 
water systems claim they don’t have control over the portion of the LSL on private property, 
doing a partial replacement reduces the number of LSLs in the “to be replaced” pool, leaving 
fewer LSLs for the water system to replace. While we recommend in the control section of these 
comments below that EPA change the definition of control in the LCRI in order to close 
loopholes to the LSL replacement mandate, even if EPA doesn’t change the definition, the 
planned infrastructure work exception for partials should still be eliminated to prevent water 
systems from using it as an end run around full LSL replacement. 
 
Additionally, the provision on partial replacements lacks clarity on 1) who can accept the 
water system’s offer to replace the portion of the lead service line left in the ground after a partial 
replacement and 2) who must bear the cost of the replacement if that offer is accepted. EPA 
should allow non-owner occupants to accept the offer and require the water system to bear the 
cost. As we state elsewhere, if property owners are asked to bear the costs of lead service line 
replacement, many lines won’t be replaced.103 By allowing non-owner occupants to accept the 
water system’s offer, water systems can get that acceptance quickly and partial LSLs will not 
remain in place. EPA should require that when the water utility offers to replace a full lead 
service line when emergency work necessitates partial replacement, the water utility must cover 
the cost of the full replacement and allow any adult occupant to approve the replacement. Doing 
so will facilitate acceptance of the water system’s offer and will lead to more full LSL 
replacement. 
 
102 EPA, Frequent Questions about Bipartisan Infrastructure Law State Revolving Funds: LSL (Question 4) 
https://www.epa.gov/dwsrf/frequent-questions-about-bipartisan-infrastructure-law-state-revolving-funds .  
103 For more details, see cost-sharing subsection of our comments. 

2-27 
 
iii. 
Filters 
 
 
EPA must clarify that the language “[t]he water system must provide the consumer with a 
pitcher filter or point-of-use device . . ., six months of replacement cartridges, and instructions 
for use”104 when doing a partial replacement means that the water system must pay for the filter 
or point of use device and the cartridges. While it is the apparent intent of the LCRI is to require 
water systems to provide these filters at no cost to individual consumers, this should be made 
unambiguous in the regulatory language of section 141.84(h). The requirement to provide a free 
filter after any disturbance to these service lines is a clear improvement over the LCRR. 
Providing filters after a partial replacement is health-protective because filters mitigate the high 
lead concentrations that are likely after a partial replacement. Requiring the water system to 
provide the consumer with the filter and replacement cartridges also protects public health 
because it makes it easy for the consumer to use the filter. Consumers don’t have to pay for the 
filter and cartridges and don’t have to figure out what filter to use or where to get one—the 
utility will provide it. EPA must also affirmatively state that “must provide” means that the water 
system must mail or deliver the filter/POU device and cartridges to the resident(s). 
 
Assuming that EPA does clarify that water systems must pay for filters after doing a 
partial replacement, by not also requiring the water system to pay to replace the entire LSL, the 
LCRI creates perverse incentives. Many landlords, particularly those owning property in low-
wealth communities of color, will often feel that they have no reason to accept the water system’s 
offer of full lead service line replacement and every reason to decline it if they are required to 
contribute a substantial sum towards the endeavor. If paying to replace the lead service line is 
perceived by landlords as being too expensive and is too expensive for low-wealth homeowners, 
the lead service lines will remain in use, creating a serious environmental injustice for these 
homeowners and tenants. In addition, if the water system simply provides an inexpensive water 
filter that somewhat mitigates the adverse health effects of the lead service line, many landlords 
or low-wealth homeowners are likely to decline to contribute a large sum to remove the LSL 
located on their property. Low-wealth homeowners may feel that the filters are protective enough 
not to spend money they don’t have, and landlords will know that their tenants get something to 
protect them—which may mitigate complaints or rent withholding—without the landlord having 
to pay upfront costs they may not be able to recoup. The best solution is for EPA to require water 
systems to pay for replacing the entire LSL in all circumstances. Doing so will lead to very few 
dangerous partial service line replacements and will hasten full service line replacement, both of 
which are aligned with EPA’s goals in promulgating this rule. If EPA fails to follow our strong 
recommendation that the LCRI require utilities to pay for full LSLR, at a minimum, the LCRI 
should require the distinctly less protective approach of requiring free water filters and cartridges 
(and education on their installation, use, and maintenance) after a partial replacement, provided 
by the water system at no cost. 
iv. 
The proposed LCRI greatly undermines the promise of replacing all lead 
service lines by incorrectly and narrowly defining “control” 
 
EPA serves a devastating blow to its proposed ten-year LSL replacement mandate by 
proposing, unnecessarily, to limit which LSLs are subject to the mandate. The proposed LCRI 
 
104 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,067 (§ 141.84(h)(iii)). 

2-28 
 
states that “[a]ll water systems must replace all lead and galvanized requiring replacement 
service lines under the control of the water system unless the replacement would leave in place 
a partial lead service line.”105 The LCRI then explains that “[w]here a water system has access 
(e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full service line replacement, the service line is 
under its control, and the water system must replace the service line.”106 EPA, however, chooses 
not to define access because “of the wide variation of relevant State and local laws and water 
tariff agreements as well as the potential for these to change over time.”107 Rather, EPA requires 
each individual water system to identify and cite “any specific laws, regulations, and/or water 
tariff agreements that affect the water system’s ability to gain access,” for full LSLR, including 
those that require customer consent and/or require or authorize customer cost-sharing, in its 
replacement plans and notices provided to people with LSLs.108   
These decisions are perplexing because, as discussed further below, they: 1) abandon 
EPA’s original and fact-based understanding of control; 2) do not comport with other sections of 
the proposed rule that show that utilities often have, or can fairly easily obtain, access; and, 3) 
create an easy way for water systems resistant to LSL replacement to avoid replacing LSLs—
including all LSLs in their system—by claiming a lack of control over/access to, in particular, 
the portion of LSLs on private property. These provisions would allow a water system to comply 
with the LCRI, claim to have replaced “all” their LSLs (because they complied with the 
mandate), and yet still leave large numbers—potentially thousands of LSLs—in the ground and 
in use, continuously and knowingly exposing people to lead. Assuming EPA is serious about 
trying to eliminate lead exposure from lead service lines, it must change these provisions in the 
final LCRI. As also discussed further below, the LCRI should either: 1) require state primacy 
agencies to adopt rules that presume water systems’ authority to replace LSLs as a condition of 
primacy; or, 2) presume water systems’ ability to replace LSL, require all systems to replace all 
lead service lines, and allow systems to avoid LSLR replacement as a matter of law only through 
strict mechanisms for showing they do not have and cannot obtain that ability.  
a. 
EPA should require that water systems replace all lead service lines and 
that water systems, localities, and states overcome any barriers or EPA 
will retain primacy for the LCRI  
As outlined below, EPA should include in the LCRI mechanisms to ensure that water 
systems do not and cannot inappropriately avoid full lead service line replacement (as set forth 
above) and gut the promise of the LCRI.    
1. EPA should presume water systems have control over full service lines 
For all the reasons stated in subsection B of this section, EPA should include in the final 
LCRI a presumption that water systems have control over the full service line. 
 
105 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064 (§ 141.84(d)(1)) (emphasis added). 
106 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064 (§ 141.84(d)(2)). 
107 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920. 
108 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064 (§ 141.84((c)(1)(viii); § 141.84(d)(2)(i));  

2-29 
 
2. EPA should require primacy states to adopt rules stating water 
systems are presumed to have control over full lead service lines and 
to have authority to fully replace them, as a condition of primacy 
Under the SDWA, states have primary enforcement responsibility (primacy) for water 
systems when EPA has determined that they meet certain criteria, including that the state’s rules 
are at least as stringent as any new or revised EPA standards.109 If the state fails to adopt 
regulations as stringent as EPA’s new or revised National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
(such as the LCRI), EPA will not approve primary enforcement authority for that new or revised 
rule and the agency will retain primacy for that regulation.110  
If the LCRI required water systems to replace all LSLs in their service territory and that 
systems be required to have control to enable such LSLRs, that would be a condition for states to 
retain primacy. Thus, EPA would not approve continued primacy for implementing the newly 
revised LCR under 40 C.F.R § 142.12 and would directly implement the LCRI in that state. In 
such a case, EPA’s rules would supplant state laws if the state has not adopted procedures to 
adequately implement the LCRI—in this case, permitting water systems to replace LSLs in all 
circumstances.111 
 
To implement this provision, EPA should require states to require water systems to 
replace all LSLs and GRRs in their service territory. And to ensure that mandatory replacement is 
adequately implemented, EPA should require primacy states to have laws or rules in place stating 
that utilities are presumed to have control of the full lead service line and are authorized to pay 
for the full lead service line under state law.112 Water systems may need to ensure that they have 
authority (e.g. to change their service contracts or tariffs, work with local legislators to amend 
local ordinances, etc.) to allow the systems to access all portions of the LSLs in their service 
territories. If a state does not adopt or have in place such rules and statutes, as confirmed by the 
state Attorney General or counsel as provided by EPA’s regulations, then EPA should retain 
primacy for implementing the LCRI.113 And once EPA retains primacy, it should state that water 
systems are presumed to have control. When it retains primacy, EPA’s rules take precedence over 
less stringent or conflicting state and local law under the explicit terms of the SDWA, and 
pursuant to the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution114 and will force the water systems to 
replace all LSLs in their service territories.  
 
109 SDWA § 1413, 42 U.S.C. §300g-2; 40 C.F.R. §142.11. 
110 40 C.F.R. §142.12. 
111 Id.; see also 42 U.S.C. § 300g-2(a)(2). 
112 42 U.S.C.A. § 300g-2(a)(2). 
113 See 40 C.F.R. § 142.12. 
114 Congress has explicitly provided in the SDWA that state rules may not relieve water systems from any 
requirement under federal rules. See SDWA §1414(e), 42 U.S.C. §300g-3(e)(“Nothing in this subchapter shall 
diminish any authority of a State or political subdivision to adopt or enforce any law or regulation respecting 
drinking water regulations or public water systems, but no such law or regulation shall relieve any person of any 
requirement otherwise applicable under this subchapter.”). Congress’ and EPA’s authority to adopt and enforce such 
rules is established by Article VI of the United States Constitution, which states that the Constitution and the laws of 
the United States “shall be the supreme Law of the Land.” U.S. Const. art. VI, cl. 2. The Supreme Court has found 
that this clause “unambiguously provides that if there is any conflict between federal and state law, federal law shall 
 

2-30 
 
Courts have held that the SDWA preempts local regulations conflicting with federal law 
in other situations. For example, in analyzing a provision of the SDWA, the Western District of 
Pennsylvania held that a local ordinance regulating the deposit of oil and gas extraction waste 
created “a direct obstacle to Congress’ intentions to create a cooperative system . . . to regulate 
and protect drinking water and any underground processes which might endanger that resource” 
and was therefore preempted by federal law.115 If there is a direct conflict with state or local law, 
federal regulations must prevail. 
3. EPA can institute different conditions for primacy as an alternative 
While we strongly encourage EPA to condition primacy on state laws providing that 
utilities have control over full service lines and will pay for full LSLR, if EPA does not do that, it 
can and should at a minimum require states to have laws stating: a) there is a rebuttable 
presumption that water systems have control over full lead service lines; and b) utilities are 
authorized to pay for LSLR, as a condition for primacy.   
The details regarding such a rebuttable presumption are discussed in subsection B of this 
section. In summary, EPA should provide that a water system can rebut the presumption of 
control only if it can document legally to the satisfaction of the primacy agency and its legal 
counsel, and the system’s CEO certifies to the primacy agency and EPA, subject to penalties for 
false statements, that it does not at the present and never did have any of the following indicia of 
control: 
a. 
It or its agents installed the LSLs;  
b. 
It required the installation of LSLs;  
c. 
It approved the use of LSLs by property owners or plumbers or required that the 
materials used in a service line had to be approved by the system; 
d. 
It retained access to service lines on property serviced by the system;  
e. 
It reserved the right to perform work on privately owned service lines; 
f. 
It required property owners to meet certain specifications relating to service line 
location, size, or material composition;  
g. 
It has or can adopt a new contract of service or tariff that would allow full LSL 
replacement; 
h. 
It can itself or with the assistance of local government establish the authority to 
replace full LSLs at utility expense, such as through the shut off of water if a 
customer or occupant refuses to allow access to conduct LSL replacement.   
If any of the above indica of control exist, the water system should be deemed to have control 
under the LCRI and be required to fully replace all LSLs without charging individual owners for 
the replacement. 
 
prevail.” Gonzales v. Raich, 545 U.S. 1, 29 (2005). This rule holds true “even absent an express statement by 
Congress.” PLIVA, Inc. v. Mensing, 564 U.S. 604, 621 (2011). Here, of course, Congress has explicitly included that 
statement in SDWA § 1414(e). 
115 Seneca Res. Corp. v. Highland Twp., 2017 WL 4354710, at *5 (W.D. Pa. Sept. 29, 2017). 

2-31 
 
4. EPA should institute accountability for claims of barriers to access 
At the very least, if the agency does not adopt provisions recommended above, the final 
LCRI should: a) require water systems asserting they lack control over/access to a service line to 
demonstrate that they cannot obtain express or implied access under any legal principle including 
threatening to shut off the supply of water to a residence in order to further public safety; b) 
require the agency and primacy states to carefully review replacement plans (and EPA should 
carefully review state primacy applications) to ensure that any barriers to access are actual 
barriers and that water systems have considered whether actions such as shutoff authority and 
express and implied access options do or can give them legal access to the portion of a LSL 
under private property. 
For example, a water system could claim that it lacks access to replace lead service lines, 
but its primacy state could confirm that current state law authorizes access or adopt a rule 
requiring all customers to provide access to fully replace LSLs. Or primacy states could require 
localities to: confirm that current law allows access; pass an ordinance to authorize access; or 
require utilities to adopt water tariffs or contracts for service that require access.  
b. EPA previously presumed that water systems had control over the full 
lead service lines and should revert to that position 
1. Using the definition of control in the 1991 LCR is logical and would 
help achieve true lead service line replacement, rather than in name 
only 
As noted above, we recommend that the LCRI specifically establish as a condition of 
primacy that primacy states adopt rules that establish water systems must have access to replace 
LSLs and to do so at utility expense. EPA’s authority to impose such a requirement is discussed 
above.   
If the agency determines it will not establish such a requirement for primacy, at a 
minimum the agency should revert to the definition of control from the 1991 LCR, establishing a 
rebuttable presumption that water systems control the entire service line and requiring the system 
to demonstrate that it does not control the entire service line and cannot obtain permission to 
replace it from the property owner to be relieved from the requirement to replace it.116  Thus, as 
explained by the agency in the original LCR, 
Control is defined in § 141.84(e) of the final rule as being indicated by one of the 
following forms of authority: authority to set standards for construction, repair, or 
maintenance of the line, authority of the system to replace, repair, or maintain the service 
line, or ownership of the line. The final rule includes essentially the same substantive 
criteria for determining control as was discussed at proposal, including the “rebuttable 
presumption” procedure.117  
 
116 See 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,504, 26,553. 
117 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,504. 

2-32 
 
 At the time, EPA determined that water systems generally control their service lines, and 
were responsible for replacing any LSLs they had control over, similar to the position it has 
taken in the proposed LCRI.118 The SDWA defines a public water system as including 
“distribution facilities under the control of the operator,”119 so EPA wanted to mirror that 
language of control in the LCR. As part of designating which LSLs were under the water 
systems’ control, the LCR established a presumption that water systems controlled the entire 
service line, unless they could determine that they didn’t have one of the forms of authority in § 
141.84(e).120 Put simply, the LCR in many cases gave utilities responsibilities for replacing the 
portion of the service line on private property regardless of whether they owned it.   
Presuming that water systems control the entire service line unless proven otherwise is a 
standard with a basis in law, utility practice, and common sense.121 In the late nineteenth and 
early twentieth century, when most LSLs were installed, most water systems where large 
numbers of lead service lines were installed either installed lead pipes or required the service line 
to be made of lead—including the portion installed on private property. For example, Werner 
Troesken’s extensive analysis in his book reviewing the history of the use of lead service lines 
found that by the turn of the 20th Century, “85 percent of all large American cities used lead” 
service lines, and “[o]f the twenty-five largest cities, all but two (Baltimore and Kansas City) 
used lead.”122 Troesken explained that utilities used lead service lines because of their flexibility, 
durability, and longevity.123 In addition, the lead industry ran an effective national campaign 
dating back over a century to persuade water systems and municipalities to use lead for their 
service lines.124   
 
118 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(d) (1991). 
119 42 U.S.C. § 300f(4)(A) (emphasis added). 
120 1991 Lead and Copper Rule previously codified at 40 C.F.R. §§ 141.84(d), 141.84(e) (1991) (“(d) A water 
system shall replace the entire service line (up to the building inlet) unless it demonstrates to the satisfaction of the 
State under paragraph (e) of this section that it controls less than the entire service line… (e) A water system is 
presumed to control the entire lead service line (up to the building inlet) unless the system demonstrates . . . 
that it does not have any of the following forms of control over the entire line[]: authority to set standards for 
construction, repair, or maintenance of the line, authority to replace, repair, or maintain the service line, or 
ownership of the service line.”); 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,504 (“to the extent public water systems prescribe standards for 
construction, repair, and maintenance of service lines and reserve the right of entry onto private property to perform 
necessary work, it could be argued that the entire service line is under the system’s control.”).  
121 In the proposed rule, EPA states that it “is not aware of a factual basis to support the stakeholders’ assertion that 
PWSs control all portions of all service lines. To the contrary, EPA is aware that in some cases, public water 
systems do not control all portions of all service lines,” (citing LSLR Collaborative, n.d.a). 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,923.  
The references section of the proposed rule provides the following more complete cite: LSLR Collaborative. (n.d.a). 
Requiring LSL Replacement When Opportunities Arise. Retrieved July 17, 2023, from https://www.lslr-
collaborative.org/requiring-lslreplacement.html. 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,048. It is not clear what aspect of that website 
EPA believes supports its statement that public water systems do not control all portions of all service lines. But 
regardless, EPA need not believe that all public water systems control all portions of all service lines to condition 
primacy on control or revert back to the version of control the LCR contained in 1991. As discussed above, that 
version presumes water systems control full lead service lines, but also provides a mechanism to rebut that 
presumption. 
122 Werner Troesken, The Great Lead Water Pipe Disaster, MIT Press, at 10 (2006). 
123 See id.  
124 Richard Rabin, The lead industry and lead water pipes "A Modest Campaign," 98 Am J Public Health 1584, 
1584-92 (Sep. 2008), available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2509614/pdf/0981584.pdf . 

2-33 
 
Including in the final LCRI a presumption that water systems control the entire lead 
service line and carry a burden of proving otherwise using the factors from the 1991 LCR would 
make it more likely that complete LSL replacement would occur. Requiring water systems to 
prove a lack of control to avoid fully replacing LSLs would be more difficult for water systems 
to remove LSLs from their replacement pools and thus diminish the easily gamed provision in 
the proposed rule, discussed further below. 
There is no impediment to EPA adopting the definition of and presumption regarding 
control that it did in 1991. EPA later abandoned this standard after a legal challenge from AWWA 
alleging that the agency provided insufficient opportunity to comment on the definition. While 
the D.C. Circuit struck down this portion of the LCR, it did so only on the grounds that EPA had 
violated the Administrative Procedure Act’s notice and comment requirement, holding that 
because EPA had not defined control in the proposed LCR, putting this definition in the final 
LCR was not a “logical outgrowth” of the proposal.125 Notably, the court did not rule on the 
substance of the definition, so there is no reason to think that returning to the 1991 definition is 
unlawful or beyond EPA’s authority. Indeed, after that D.C. Circuit decision, Congress enacted 
measures explicitly requiring that lead service lines be fully replaced, expressly including the 
portion under private property, for a water system to receive funding under the Reducing Lead in 
Drinking Water Program enacted in 2016126 and strengthened by the Bipartisan Infrastructure 
Law (BIL) in 2021.127 Because EPA does define control in the LCRI, conditions LSL 
replacement on a water system’s control, and specifically requests comment on its interpretation 
of control for that purpose,128 inserting  a different definition of control in the final LCRI, 
including reverting to EPA’s prior presumption that water systems have control, is a logical 
outgrowth of the proposed LCRI and would not be vulnerable to the same challenge as it was in 
1991.129 
2. EPA’s focus on access in the proposed LCRI supports reverting to the 
definition of and presumption regarding control from the 1991 rule 
The proposed LCRI largely ignores many of the factors it previously found indicated 
control and focuses on legal access and physical access as the main factors to determine 
control.130 But even a focus on those factors supports assuming a presumption of control in the 
final rule. EPA, however, perplexingly chooses not to adopt such a presumption because “of the 
wide variation of relevant State and local laws and water tariff agreements as well as the 
 
125 Am. Water Works Ass’n v. EPA, 40 F.3d 1266, 1274-75 (D.C. Cir. 1994). 
126 Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 300j-19B(a)(2)(B)(a “’lead 
reduction project’ does not include a partial lead service line replacement if, at the conclusion of the service line 
replacement, drinking water is delivered to a household through a publicly or privately owned portion of a lead 
service line.”). 
127 BIL, 135 Stat. at 1140-42, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 300j-19B. 
128 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,033-35. 
129 A final rule is a logical outgrowth if “affected parties should have anticipated that the relevant modification was 
possible.” Allina Health Services v. Sebelius, 746 F.3d 1102, 1107 (D.C. Cir. 2014) (quoting CSX Transp., Inc. v. 
Surface Transp. Bd., 584 F.3d 1076, 1080 (D.C. Cir. 2009)). If the final rule is “reasonably foreseeable,” it is 
considered a logical outgrowth. Owner-Operator Indep. Drivers Ass’n, Inc. v. Federal Motor Carrier Safety Admin., 
494 F.3d 188, 210 (D.C. Cir. 2007) (quoting Long Island Care at Home, Ltd. v. Coke, 551 U.S. 158, 161 (2007)).  
130 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920. 

2-34 
 
potential for these to change over time.”131 The relevant consideration, however, should not be 
which legal authority gives water systems access to remove lead pipes known to present 
significant health risks, but whether water systems generally have that authority. The answer to 
that question is that they do, which supports EPA including a presumption of control in the final 
rule.   
In the final 1991 LCR, EPA referenced a study that evaluated service connections in 10 
major U.S. cities and other investor-owned utilities in various states and found that in the 
majority of cases, “the water system was found to retain access to virtually all property serviced 
by the system and to reserve the right to perform work on privately owned service lines.”132 EPA 
provides no reason to believe differently in the proposed LCRI, and there is no reason for it to do 
so now. 
To this day, utilities generally retain, either implicitly or explicitly, the right to enter 
private property to do maintenance or make repairs on equipment, including the replacement of 
water service lines. They obtain this authority in a myriad of ways. For example, some states 
have laws that require consumers to allow utilities access to their property to replace service 
lines.133 Utilities also regularly contractually obtain access to property as a condition for 
providing service such as in tariffs, sometimes even explicitly for health and safety reasons.134 
Some utilities include such provisions in their customer agreements.135 Utilities may also have 
express or implied easements on the basis of intent or public policy, or prescriptive servitude, 
 
131 Id.  
132 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,504.   
133 See, e.g., Wis. Stat. Ann. § 196.171(1) (“Any officer or agent of any public utility furnishing or transmitting 
water . . . to the public . . . may enter, at any reasonable time, any place supplied with . . . water by the public utility, 
for the purpose of inspecting, examining, repairing, installing or removing the . . . pipes . . . for supplying . . .  water 
and for the purpose of ascertaining the quantity of . . . water supplied.”); Va. Code Ann. § 55.1-306.1(A), (E) 
(defining prescriptive easement and stating a “utility . . . may use an easement to install, construct, provide, 
maintain, modify, lease, operate, repair, replace, or remove its communications equipment, system, or facilities”); 
see also N.J. Stat. Ann. § 55:19-106. 
134 See, e.g., Pittsburgh Water And Sewer Authority, ”Rates, Rules and Regulations Governing the Provision of 
Water Service to the Public in the Territory Described Herein,“ (Nov. 15, 2022) at 35 (“Should the condition of a 
customer service line be such that there is a risk to public health or safety or of damage to public property . . . the 
Authority shall have the right, but not the duty, to make the necessary repair or replacement.”), available at 
https://www.pgh2o.com/sites/default/files/2023-01/CURRENT%20PWSA%20Tariff%20Water%20-
%20with%20Supp.%20No.%2010%20%28effective%201.14.23%29%28108742110%29.pdf; Consolidated Edison 
Company of New York, Inc., ”Schedule For Electricity Service,“ (Apr. 1, 2012) at 107 (“The Company's duly 
authorized representatives shall have the right of access to the premises of the Customer and to all of the Company's 
property thereon at all reasonable times for the purpose of reading and testing meters, inspecting equipment used in 
connection with its service, metering the demand, ascertaining and counting the connected load of the Customer's 
installation, installing, inspecting, maintaining and replacing, where necessary, its load testing equipment, removing 
its property, or any other proper purpose except as provided below.”), available at  
https://lite.coned.com/_external/cerates/documents/elecPSC10/electric-tariff.pdf, see also conEdison, Information 
for Property Owners, (last accessed Feb. 5, 2024), available at https://www.coned.com/en/our-energy-future/our-
energy-vision/where-we-are-going/smart-meters/when-will-i-get-my-smart-
meter#:~:text=See%20an%20excerpt%20from%20the,meters%2C%20inspecting%20equipment%20used%20in.  
135 See, e.g., SUEZ Water Purification Systems, Ltd, ”Standard Terms and Conditions“ at 4.10 (“The Customer shall 
permit the company, its employees, sub-contractors, agents and other appointed representatives access to the Site at 
all reasonable times for the purposes of providing the Services.”), available at 
https://www.watertechnologies.com/sites/default/files/documents/SUEZ-WPS-SALES-
Standard_Terms_and_Conditions.pdf. 

2-35 
 
permitting them to access private property.136 And because removal of lead service lines is a 
public health issue, public utilities otherwise may be able to validly exercise police powers to 
protect public health and safety or respond to emergency circumstances to remove a lead service 
line—a known lead emitter—from a household.137   
 And if circumstances arise where one of the mechanisms for access listed above do not 
currently apply, it is not difficult, as EPA acknowledges, to change that. As EPA states in the 
proposed rule, it is “aware of data and anecdotes from water systems demonstrating the ability to 
increase access for full service line replacement, such as where customer consent or payment is 
required for access.”138 It also discusses multiple examples of water systems, states, and 
localities that have amended service agreements or laws to facilitate full lead service line 
replacement in the proposed rule and partially in its guidance document entitled “Strategies to 
Achieve Full Lead Service Line Replacement.’’139 EPA notably states that it “expects that many 
water systems could similarly consider, depending on the exact language of the agreement and 
the process to change it, temporarily or permanently revising service agreements to overcome 
access barriers to facilitate full service line replacement.”140 We agree. It seems obvious that if a 
water system conditioned the provision of water on customer agreement for access to their 
property to replace equipment, access (and thus control) would not be an issue. Based on all of 
this evidence and reasoning, EPA should presume that water systems have access, and therefore 
necessary control, over service lines under private property to conduct full lead service line 
replacement.   
It should also be noted that access and control issues would likely be nonexistent if EPA 
prohibited water systems from charging individual homeowners for service line replacement, as 
we strongly advocate for in the discussion of banning charging customers for LSLR that follows 
in section 2.D.v. There are a few ways the LCRI can mitigate this problem. First, EPA can 
require that water systems bear the entire cost of LSL replacement. As we have repeatedly seen 
in cases such as Newark, Benton Harbor, Washington, D.C., Denver, and elsewhere, property 
owners are much more likely to consent to LSL replacement on their properties if they will not 
be directly billed for it and do not have to individually bear the replacement costs. EPA has the 
 
136 See, e.g., Motes v. PacifiCorp, 217 P.3d 1072, 1076 (Or. Ct. App. 2009) (holding electric utility had established 
prescriptive easement for maintenance of electric lines on private property); Riddock v. City of Helena, 687 P.2d 
1386, 1390 (Mont. 1984) (construction and subsequent use of water pipeline was open and notorious and sufficient 
to establish adverse use necessary for easement). See also Restatement (Third) of Prop. (Servitudes) § 2.11 (2000) 
(explaining that easements can be implied on basis of public policy to avoid economic waste and to provide access 
to resources that would otherwise be inaccessible); Restatement (Third) of Prop. (Servitudes) § 2.17 (2000) 
(explaining that prescriptive easement, which can form when use is “open and notorious” and “continued without 
effective interruption,” can apply to underground utilities as long as installation was open and location known to the 
owner). 
137 See, e.g. 104 N.Y. Jur. 2d Trespass § 53 (trespassory conduct may be legalized or justified by lawful authority 
when reasonably necessary for emergency services personnel to protect public health and safety and/or respond to 
emergency); JWC Fitness, LLC v. Murphy, 265 A.3d 164, 173-74 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2021) (statute 
authorizes government to take possession of private property akin to a physical taking for the governmental purpose 
of avoiding or protecting against an emergency, and to temporarily use personal property for purpose of protecting 
or promoting public health, safety or welfare). 
138 88 Fed. Reg. 84,920. 
139 See 88 Fed. Reg. 84,920-21, 84,926-27.  
140 88 Fed. Reg. 84,926. 

2-36 
 
authority to do this and it would not only overcome many barriers to consent, but also remedy 
environmental injustice as well.141  
Second, the final LCRI could explicitly allow occupants of a property, rather than solely 
owners, to consent to LSL replacement. As Newark Water and Sewer Utilities Director Kareem 
Adeem has emphasized,142 it is logistically much easier to get consent from tenants at rental 
properties than it is from landlords (who may be absentee), and it puts the decision in the hands 
of the people who will most benefit from it. This works best in combination with prohibiting 
cost-sharing, as it then does not put the tenant in the position of agreeing to spend the landlord’s 
money. This combination was highly effective in Newark, New Jersey, where a local ordinance 
was passed that both set up a program where the water system replaced all the city’s LSLs at no 
cost to the individual homeowner and gave occupants the power to participate in the program, 
rather than just property owners. Because Newark has a large renter population, this was the 
most effective way for the water system to get consent to safely go onto the property.143 Third, 
coupled with requiring that systems pay for full LSLRs, the LCRI should prohibit water systems 
from providing water service to LSLs and GRRs after the conclusion of the mandatory LSLR 
program. Property owners (or occupants acting in their stead) should have a binary choice: 
accept a free, full LSLR or have the water service shut off. If water systems are not required to 
pay the full cost of LSL replacement, then this option should not be considered.  
EPA should consider an approach in the final LCRI tracking the Newark and Benton 
Harbor ordinances, which required full LSL replacement, offering property owners the option of 
replacing the line at their own expense within a short period of time, or allowing the utility to 
access and replace the LSL at the water system’s expense and with the permission of any adult 
occupant of the property. This avoids both the potential problem of lack of access and the 
environmental justice problem of requiring property owners and landlords to pay for LSLR. 
By removing the biggest barriers to consent, more systems would complete full LSL 
replacement within the mandated time period and would not have to spend as much time and 
energy trying to obtain consent. Currently in the LCRI, if a property with a LSL changes owners, 
the water system has to go through the process of trying to get consent within a year of the 
transfer, even if the mandatory LSL replacement deadline has passed. If water systems can get 
consent earlier and complete full LSL replacement by the deadline, then they can concentrate on 
issues other than lead service line replacement after the deadline.  
c. 
The proposed LCRI permits water systems to easily avoid replacement of 
some or all LSLs in their system with no effective mechanism to change such 
actions 
Despite all the evidence EPA has that warrants a presumption of control and facilitate full 
LSLR, it instead proposes a mechanism that will allow water systems to easily avoid replacing 
LSLs—sometimes every LSL in their system—and therefore destroy the great promise that 
mandatory lead service line replacement holds. There are no repercussions for a water system 
failing to replace LSLs as long as it identifies and cites, in both its replacement plans and notices 
 
141 See subsection 2.D.v., on prohibiting water systems for charging customers for LSLR, below. 
142 Testimony of Kareem Adeem, section 2.A, Full LSLR Paid For By Water Systems, supra, fn. 49. 
143 Testimony of Kareem Adeem, section 2, Full LSLR Paid For By Water Systems, supra, fn. 49. 

2-37 
 
it provides to people with LSLs, “any laws, regulations, and/or water tariff agreements that affect 
the water system’s ability to gain access,” for full LSLR, including those that require customer 
consent and/or require or authorize customer cost-sharing.144 This allows water systems to easily 
avoid LSLR by asserting they don’t have access and/or any other form of control.  
Indeed, assertions of barriers are already happening. For example, many water systems 
claim they do not have access to or otherwise have control over the portions of LSLs located on 
private property, even though, as described above, they most likely have access and/or can 
readily obtain access and have asserted control in other ways in the past.145 Many water systems 
also incorrectly claim that state law prevents them from using ratepayer funds to do LSL 
replacement on private property because it is allegedly for the benefit of a single property owner 
(and that could prevent access because a property owner may not consent to LSL 
replacement).146 Yet in at least the 13 states with the most lead service lines, a study of state laws 
by Harvard Law School and Environmental Defense Fund investigators determined that those 
kinds of laws are not barriers to LSL replacement because, for example, LSL replacement is for 
the benefit of public health rather than a single property owner.147  
As written, the proposed LCRI provides no incentive for water systems and states to 
interpret their laws to allow for LSL replacement, nor consequences if they do not. This could 
lead to a patchwork of LSL replacements across the country and many LSLs left in the ground.  
Even worse, as drafted, the LCRI also creates a perverse incentive for municipalities and water 
systems to avoid the costs and burdens of conducting full LSLRs by passing new ordinances, 
instituting new water service contracts or tariff provisions, or creating other legal restrictions that 
prohibit a water system from conducting any work on private property, even with property owner 
consent. As drafted, if such a legal impediment is in place, a water system would conclude that it 
“does not have access to conduct full service line replacement, [and then] the water system 
[would not be] required by this rule to replace the line” and need only “document the reasons 
that the water system does not have access.”148 The LCRI would not even require the water 
system to attempt to obtain access under proposed section 141.84(d)(3), since the water system 
would not have access under the LCRI’s provisions, even with property owner consent. And of 
 
144 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064 (§ 141.84((c)(1)(viii); § 141.84(d)(2)(i)). 
145 For example, the City of Chicago required LSLs to be used until they were federally banned in 1986. See 
Municipal Code of Chicago, § 83-23, August 30, 1939 with amendments to and including January 1, 1984 (“Service 
pipes of one inch internal diameter, one and one-half, and two inch internal diameter shall be lead pipe….”). Yet 
now the city claims that it does not own the service lines under private property, so any full replacement is the 
responsibility of the homeowner (unless the city’s extremely cumbersome Equity Lead Service Line Replacement 
program is available to a homeowner. See Gina Ramirez, Years Later, Lead Pipes Remain in Chicago, NRDC (Sep. 
22, 2022), available at https://www.nrdc.org/bio/gina-ramirez/years-later-lead-pipes-remain-chicago). It is ironic 
indeed that under the LCRI, in so many cases where water systems were installing or mandating LSLs (as noted 
above, according to Troesken, that was 85 percent of cities at the turn of the 20th Century), the water systems can 
now claim they do not control the LSLs and can offload the costs to replace the very LSLs that they installed or 
required. 
146 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,927. 
147 See, e.g., Shaun A. Goho, Marcello Saenz & Tom Neltner, “Rates could fund lead pipe replacement in critical 
states: Laws in states with the most lead service lines support the practice,” Harv. L. Sch. & Environmental Defense 
Fund (Apr. 2019), available at https://clinics.law.harvard.edu/environment/files/2019/04/Rates-Fund-LSL-
Replacement-States_Harvard_EDF_2019.pdf.  
148 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064 (§ 141.84(d)(2)).  

2-38 
 
course, the proposal provides no incentive for water systems or localities to change existing 
barriers to access. 
 
The rule should clarify that any claimed impediment to water system control of a LSL 
must be preexisting prior to the LCRI’s proposal (so utilities and states cannot adopt new 
impediments to avoid the LSL replacement requirements), and the primacy state and 
municipality must show that it is beyond their control to eliminate the impediment. As discussed 
in subsection 2.D.iv.a, primacy states that are unable to eliminate impediments under state law to 
utilities having control or adequate access to fully replace LSLs should not have their primacy 
application for implementing the LCRI approved, and EPA should exercise primacy for the LCRI 
in that state.  
EPA claims that the proposal’s required identification and reporting provisions will 
protect against such behavior.149 The identification provisions for water systems are described 
above. Under the proposed rule, “[s]tates would also be required to identify potential barriers to 
full service line replacement in State laws, including statutes and constitutional provisions, in 
their application for primacy for the LCRI” and to “notify water systems in writing whether any 
such laws exist or not.”150 EPA’s claims are far from guaranteed. While it’s certainly optimistic 
of EPA to think that transparency and knowledge will overcome long-standing opposition or 
indifference to full LSL replacement, it is unlikely that will be the case in every jurisdiction for a 
variety of reasons.  
First, in states and localities where there are confirmed barriers to access to LSLs (such as 
legal or physical), there is no information gap. Thus, the reporting provisions are unlikely to have 
any effect.  
Second, by requiring citations to the access barriers and identification by water systems 
and the state, EPA seems to believe that no disingenuous claims that such impediments exist will 
occur. We do not agree.   
Third, EPA states that identifying these barriers to access will “alleviate 
misunderstandings” of where those barriers do and do not exist.151 But the LCRI requires that 
barriers to access only be identified, not eliminated. The proposed LCRI contains no provisions 
to incentivize water systems to accurately identify and eliminate barriers, if any, or incentivize 
states to ensure that water systems are not inaccurately claiming barriers to access.152 The 
proposed LCRI does not even require primacy agencies to review a water system’s claims that 
local laws create barriers to access and to determine whether those claims are legitimate, much 
less require water systems act to remove or seek removal of those legal barriers. The proposal 
similarly does not require EPA, in reviewing primacy applications, to verify and determine 
whether state laws that purportedly create impediments to LSL replacement do indeed create 
such impediments, nor does it require states to eliminate those impediments if they truly exist. 
 
149 88 Fed. Reg. 84,920-21, 84,927. 
150 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,928, 84,920. 
151 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,927. 
152 We have recommended many improvements to the LCRI’s compliance mechanisms above in subsections a & b 
of this section. 

2-39 
 
Fourth, EPA also claims that by making these barriers part of the publicly available 
replacement plan, the public can encourage their state or locality to remove barriers to full LSL 
replacement.153 But without a requirement to overcome them, states, localities, and water 
systems that are already reluctant to prioritize full LSL replacement will be under no obligation 
to address or eliminate these impediments. EPA’s wishful thinking regarding sunshine and a 
perfect democracy is a far cry from a mandatory requirement to replace all lead service lines in 
ten years that EPA claims the proposed rule contains.  
 
Finally, EPA is well aware that compliance with the LCR is anemic, with water systems 
regularly taking inappropriate and often illegal measures to avoid taking action to reduce lead 
exposure, including LSL replacement.154 Thus there is ample reason to believe that states and 
water systems would freely take steps to create and/or “identify” barriers to access to avoid LSL 
replacement. Oversight will be needed to make sure states’ lists of barriers are accurate. Without 
that oversight, water systems will have no responsibility to replace service lines in their control 
for which they claim otherwise, and the LCRI’s goals will be undermined. But EPA has admitted 
that it is unable to conduct effective oversight of the LCR.155 And the proposed LCRI does 
nothing to fix the compliance and oversight issues.156  
d. Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comment about Control, Access, and Consent 
1. Whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent should be more than four times 
(e.g., five, six, or seven times). 
The LCRI requires PWSs to try and get consent by making at least 4 attempts using at 
least 2 different methods before the deadline for LSL replacement. However, if the water system 
cannot get consent, then “the water system is not required…to replace any portion of the 
service line at that address.”157 Given this provision, EPA must require water systems to do 
much more to gain consent before giving up and removing the line from the replacement pool. 
We recommend that water systems attempt to gain consent at least six times using at least two 
different methods and 1) that at least two of the attempted contacts must be by means of live 
interaction (e.g. phone call or in-person door knock) and must be conducted at different times of 
day, including at least once outside of normal working hours (i.e., not between 9am and 5pm); 2) 
water systems must work with either a city community engagement team or relevant community 
groups, particularly in environmental justice communities, to create an outreach plan and 
conduct outreach; 3) if the system requires customers to pay directly for any portion of the LSL 
replacement, the number of attempts must be doubled; and 4) if a property owner is non-
responsive, systems must have an ongoing obligation to attempt to get consent at least annually 
unless the property owner affirmatively denies access. 
 
153 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,928. 
154 See section 14: Compliance and Transparency. 
155 See section 14: Compliance and Transparency.  
156 See section 14: Compliance and Transparency. 
157 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064 (§ 141.84(d)(3) (emphasis added)). 

2-40 
 
2. Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets ‘‘control’’ for the purposes of the 
mandatory replacement provision (i.e., require systems to conduct full service line 
replacement in situations where the system has access to conduct the full replacement). 
As explained above, EPA’s interpretation of “control” for the purposes of the mandatory 
replacement provision should be revised. 
3. The extent to which property owner consent, if required by State or local law or water tariff 
agreement, might complicate full service line replacement and whether there are additional 
measures EPA can take to facilitate access through the LCRI. 
Water systems will likely try to take advantage of the LCRI’s emphasis on access, 
particularly by stating that they have physical access to LSLs located on private property only 
with the property owner’s consent. While enhanced requirements to attempt to gain consent, as 
described above, will make some small strides towards closing this loophole, it does not solve 
the problem. While EPA claims in the preamble that increased and more robust public education 
will convince property owners to consent, this is wishful thinking in the context of both rental 
properties and low-wealth homeowners. This is particularly a problem when combined with the 
lack of a requirement that the utility pay for the full cost of LSL replacement; it has repeatedly 
been shown that if the utility demands that the property owner pay for a portion of the LSLR, 
many or most low income property owners and landlords will not pay and thus will not grant 
access for full LSLR. Furthermore, while water systems are required to certify to the State the 
number of service lines not replaced due to customer refusals for access to conduct service line 
replacement, they are not required to do anything to reduce that number and therefore have no 
incentive to do anything more than the bare minimum required to gain consent.  
As noted earlier in this section, but repeated here in answer to this request for comment, 
there are a few ways the LCRI can mitigate this problem discussed above. To recapitulate: First, 
EPA can require that water systems bear the entire cost of LSL replacement. As we have 
repeatedly seen in cases such as Newark, Benton Harbor, Washington, D.C., Denver, and 
elsewhere, property owners are much more likely to consent to LSL replacement on their 
properties if they won’t be directly billed for it and don’t have to individually bear the 
replacement costs. EPA has the authority to do this and not only would it overcome many 
barriers to consent, it would remedy environmental injustice as well.158 Second, the final LCRI 
could explicitly allow occupants of a property, rather than solely owners, to consent to LSL 
replacement. As Newark Water and Sewer Utilities Director Kareem Adeem has emphasized,159 
it is logistically much easier to get consent from tenants at rental properties than it is from 
landlords (who may be absentee), and it puts the decision in the hands of the people who will 
most benefit from it. This works best in combination with prohibiting cost-sharing, as it then 
does not put the tenant in the position of agreeing to spend the landlord’s money. This 
combination was highly effective in Newark, New Jersey, where a local ordinance was passed 
that both set up a program where the water system replaced all the city’s LSLs at no cost to the 
individual homeowner and gave occupants the power to participate in the program, rather than 
just property owners. Because Newark has a large renter population, this was the most effective 
 
158 See section 2.D.v.a-b. 
159 Testimony of Kareem Adeem, supra, section 2, Full LSLR Paid For By Water Systems, fn. 49,  

2-41 
 
way for the water system to get consent to safely go onto the property. Third, coupled with 
requiring that systems pay for full LSLRs, the LCRI should prohibit water systems from 
providing water service to LSLs and GRRs after the conclusion of the mandatory LSLR program 
Harbor. Property owners (or occupants acting in their stead) should have a binary choice: accept 
a free, full LSLR or have the water service shut off. If water systems are not required to pay the 
full cost of LSL replacement, then this option should not be considered.  
EPA should consider an approach in the final LCRI tracking the Newark and Benton 
Harbor ordinances, which required full LSL replacement, offering property owners the option of 
replacing the line at their own expense within a short period of time, or allowing the utility to 
access and replace the LSL at the water system’s expense and with the permission of any adult 
occupant of the property.  This avoids both the potential problem of lack of access and the 
environmental justice problem of requiring property owners and landlords to pay for LSLR. 
By removing the biggest barriers to consent, more systems would complete full LSL 
replacement within the mandated time period and wouldn’t have to spend as much time and 
energy trying to obtain consent. Currently in the LCRI, if a property with a LSL changes owners, 
the water system has to go through the process of trying to get consent within a year of the 
transfer, even if the mandatory LSL replacement deadline has passed. If water systems can get 
consent earlier and complete full LSL replacement by the deadline, then they can concentrate on 
issues other than lead service line replacement after the deadline.  
* * * * * 
 
The LCRI’s limitation of LSL replacement to only LSLs over which water systems have 
control, given the LCRI’s unduly narrow definition of control, creates potentially major 
loopholes in the LSL replacement mandate and perhaps a perverse incentive for utilities to make 
blanket claims about lack of control (or even to adopt local ordinances, tariffs or policies 
impeding access and control). These loopholes will be compounded in low-wealth communities 
and communities of color. EPA can and should require water systems to replace all LSLs in their 
service territory, full stop, and EPA should refuse to grant primacy for the LCRI in states if there 
are barriers to state primacy agencies enforcing that requirement. at a minimum EPA should 
revert back to the definition of control in the 1991 LCR, which has a presumption that water 
systems control all the LSLs in their service territories, and place the onus on water systems and 
states to certify that this presumption is incorrect and cannot be remedied. If EPA doesn’t take 
either of these approaches, then at a bare minimum, it must prohibit cost-sharing and allow for 
occupant consent so that consent is not the barrier holding up LSL replacement, and EPA should 
consider a prohibition on providing water service to LSLs and GRRs after the conclusion of the 
mandatory (and free to individual property owners) LSLR program to create a strong incentive 
for property owners to accept a full LSLR at no direct cost to the consumer. 
v. 
The LCRI must prohibit water systems from charging customers for full 
service line replacements 
 
The LCRI’s failure prohibit water systems from charging individual customers for the 
removal of the lead service lines under their property exacerbates existing disparities, is contrary 
to law, and frustrates the effort to replace all LSLs nationwide. While the LCRI allows only full 

2-42 
 
service line replacements to count towards water systems’ fulfillment of the replacement 
mandate, as discussed previously, by not requiring water systems to cover the costs of the full 
replacement, it is highly unlikely that a water system will replace all or possibly even most of the 
LSLs in their system.  
 
The LCRI requires that in its service line replacement plan, each water system must 
include “[a] funding strategy for conducting service line replacement. Where the water system 
intends to charge customers for the cost to replace all or a portion of the service line because it is 
authorized or required to do so . . .the funding strategy must include a description of whether and 
how the water system intends to assist customers who are unable to pay to replace the portion of 
the service line they own.”160 However, this funding strategy does not place any requirements on 
water systems that would restrict them from mandating that individual consumers—even low-
wealth consumers—pay for LSLR. The answer to whether the water system intends to assist 
customers in paying for LSLR may be no, and even if it is yes, that yes could be contingent on 
any number of factors, including how much federal grant money a municipality receives. 
Furthermore, this provision doesn’t address funding for lead service line replacement at rental 
properties where the landlord simply refuses to pay for the replacement of service lines under 
their property, regardless of their financial ability to do so. EPA also doesn’t impose any 
consequence if water systems choose not to assist low-wealth customers or if they allow 
landlords to refuse to pay to replace their LSLs, so there is little incentive for water systems to do 
so, especially if they can eliminate those service lines from the pool of LSLs they are required to 
replace.161 
 
a. Environmental Justice Concerns 
 
When the burden of funding full LSLRs is borne by individual homeowners, the result is 
that full LSLRs do not take place consistently or equitably, contrary to numerous federal 
mandates. The inequitable use of the full LSLR treatment technology closely tracks both income 
and race; lower income consumers and consumer of color disproportionately miss out on full 
lead service line replacements and bear the health burden of partial lead service line 
replacements or complete lack of replacements.162 EPA is already aware of the unequal impacts 
of LSLR when individual homeowners are required to pay for replacement, which can result in 
dangerous partial LSL replacements that pose health risks.163 A 2019 EPA environmental justice 
 
160 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064 (§ 141.84(c)(1)(vi))). 
161 See discussion of control in section 4.iv.—if water systems don’t control/have access to a LSL, they can remove 
that LSL from the pool they are required to replace. This includes if property owner consent is required and the 
water system doesn’t obtain it. 
162 See Karen J. Baehler, Marquise McGraw, Michele J. Aquino, Ryan Heslin, Lindsay McCormick, & Tom Neltner, 
Full Lead Service Line Replacement: A Case Study of Equity in Environmental Remediation, Sustainability 14, 352 
(2022), https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010352. See also, Jennifer Ortega, Civil rights complaint draws attention to the 
discriminatory impacts of common lead pipe replacement practice,  January 7, 2022, available at: 
https://blogs.edf.org/health/2022/01/07/civil-rights-complaint-draws-attention-to-the-discriminatory-impacts-of-
common-lead-pipe-replacement-practice/; Childhood Lead Action Project et al., Complaint Under Title VI of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 41 U.S.C. § 2000d, 40 C.F.R. Part 7 against Providence Water, Jan. 5, 2022, available at 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-06/01RNO-22-R1%20Complaint_Redacted.pdf.  
163 See generally, Complaint Under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 41 U.S.C. § 2000d, 40 C.F.R. Part 7 
against Providence Water, Jan. 5, 2022, available at https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-06/01RNO-
 

2-43 
 
analysis of LCR revisions found that “household-level changes that depend on ability-to-pay will 
leave low-income households with disproportionately higher health risks.”164 Being a person of 
color and being low-wealth are risk factors for lead exposure and elevated blood lead levels, and 
GAO and other reports have found that in many places, people of color, renters, and families in 
poverty are more likely to live in homes with LSLs.165 Studies show that low-wealth residents 
are less likely than their wealthier counterparts to opt to replace the portions of LSLs on private 
property, presumably because they can’t afford to pay for the replacement.166 Renters make up 
36 percent of the U.S. population, and are disproportionately people of color.167 And as has 
repeatedly been observed such as in the peer-reviewed Washington D.C. study and as testified to 
by the director of the Newark Water Department, in areas where rental properties are prevalent, 
landlords rarely pay for LSLR, meaning that people of color who are renters will 
disproportionately be drinking lead-contaminated water when cost-sharing is required.168 Thus, 
in many communities, possibly the majority, those bearing these higher health risks due to their 
inability to pay will disproportionately be people of color. 
 
22-R1%20Complaint_Redacted.pdf; Lillian Dorka, EPA, Acceptance of Administrative Complaint, Feb. 10, 2022, 
https://blogs.edf.org/health/wp-content/blogs.dir/11/files/2022/03/2022.02.10-FINAL-Acceptance-Letter-
Complainants-Providence-Water-EPA-Complaint-No.-01RNO-22-R1-NOTES.pdf (showing EPA received 
administrative complaint); Letter from Dr. Deborah L. Swackhamer, Chair, EPA Science Advisory Board, and Dr. 
Jeffrey K. Griffiths, Chair, SAB Drinking Water Committee, to Lisa P. Jackson, Administrator, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, available at: https://perma.cc/DQ7N-SPCC (partial LSL replacements pose health risks); GAO, 
Drinking Water: EPA Could Use Available Data to Better Identify Neighborhoods at Risk of Lead Exposure, 
December 2020.( areas with older housing and vulnerable populations (e.g., families in poverty) have higher 
concentrations of lead service lines). https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-21-
78#:~:text=By%20developing%20guidance%20for%20water,vulnerable%20populations%20to%20focus%20lead;  
164 Abt Associates, Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, Docket No. 
EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-0008, 8–12 (2019), pg.iv, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-
0300-0008 
165 Abt Associates, Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, Docket No. 
EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-0008, 8–12 (2019), pg. iv, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-
0300-0008; United States Government Accountability Office, EPA Could Use Available Data to Better Identify 
Neighborhoods at Risk of Lead Exposure, GAO-21-78, 12–18; Justin Williams, Data Points: the environmental 
injustice of lead lines in Illinois, Metropolitan Planning Council, 2020, 
https://www.metroplanning.org/news/9960/Data-Points-the-environmental-injustice-of-lead-lines-in-Illinois. 
166 Karen J. Baehler, Marquise McGraw, Michele J. Aquino, Ryan Heslin, Lindsay McCormick, & Tom Neltner, 
Full 
Lead Service Line Replacement: A Case Study of Equity in Environmental Remediation, Sustainability 14, 352 
(2022), https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010352.  
167 Drew Desilver, Pew Research Center, As national eviction ban expires, a look at who rents and who owns in the 
U.S., August 2, 2021, https://bit.ly/3oPZs4S (“[A]bout 58% of households headed by Black or African American 
adults rent their homes, as do nearly 52% of Hispanic- or Latino-led households,”); Joint Center for Housing Studies 
of Harvard University, Renter Demographics, https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/ahr2011-3-
demographics.pdf (“[T]he minority share of renters rose to about 45 percent in 2010—more than twice the minority 
share of owners.”) 
168 See, Baehler et al., supra n.3 (finding that there were low LSLR rates in lower-income portions of Washington, 
DC that are predominantly communities of color). The wards in DC in which this study found disproportionately 
low LSLR are heavily rental properties. See ACS Housing Characteristics DC Ward, 
https://opendata.dc.gov/datasets/DCGIS::acs-housing-characteristics-dc-ward/explore?location=38.893677%2C-
77.014562%2C12.81&showTable=true; Testimony of Kareem Adeem, Director, Newark Water Department, before 
the House of Representatives, Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change, Committee on Energy and 
Commerce, Trusting the Tap: Upgrading America’s Drinking Water Infrastructure, March 29, 2022, preliminary 
transcript at 99-106, https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF18/20220329/114537/HHRG-117-IF18-Transcript- 
20220329.pdf.  

2-44 
 
 
This results in what is essentially two different water systems within the same service 
territory: one system that exposes consumers to lead that could readily be removed by applying 
best available technology or techniques (see section 2.B, supra), and one that does not. This is 
well-documented in Providence, Rhode Island, which has a loan program property owners can 
enter into to pay for lead service line replacement on their property. According to a Title VI of 
the Civil Rights Act complaint that EPA has accepted for investigation, Providence Water has 
noted that this loan program doesn’t make replacements financially feasible for many of their 
customers, even those who were initially interested in replacing the service line.169 Renters—
who comprise 60 percent of the population—also cannot access the loan program, and are then 
dependent on landlords to do so on their behalf.170 These inequalities are seen in other LSL 
replacement programs that require property owners to pay for LSL replacement on their 
properties.171 
 
EPA notably did not disagree with the likelihood that allowing cost-sharing would lead to 
environmental injustice.  Rather, it stated that it “considered this perspective, but ultimately 
chose not to ban cost sharing.”172  But that choice is at odds with Executive Order 13,990 from 
the Biden Administration, which calls upon federal agencies to “advance environmental justice” 
where the federal government has historically failed to meet its commitment to public health.173 
Given EPA’s authority to prohibit cost-sharing, discussed below, EPA must ban it to fulfill 
Executive Order 13,900.  To do otherwise would exacerbate, rather than advance, environmental 
justice. 
 
b. EPA has authority and responsibility to prohibit charging customers for 
LSLRs 
 
In the proposed LCRI, EPA sets forth several arguments that stakeholders, like the 
submitters of these comments, have made to support their contention that EPA has the authority 
and responsibility to prohibit cost-sharing.  EPA responds to only one of those arguments, 
asserting that it does not believe that PWS “control all portions of all service lines.”174  But as set 
forth in Section 2.D.iv, PWSs do control service lines, as EPA previously concluded.  In any 
event, as set forth below, there are other provisions in the SDWA and other statutes that provide 
independent authority to EPA to prohibit cost-sharing.   
 
EPA does not directly address that other authority, but rather says that it considered those 
perspectives, but chose not to ban the practice.175 It further says that it is concerned that “such a 
prohibition would result in the further delay of full service line replacement” because it “would 
 
169 LeadSafeKids, Complaint Under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 41 U.S.C. § 2000d, 40 C.F.R. Part 7 
against Providence Water, pg 16, 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1aWpYMiHYFnpVi2SuFAeUvwZ5S2s6og41/view.  
170 Id. at 17. 
171 Baehler et. al., Full Lead Service Line Replacement: A Case Study of Equity in Environmental Remediation, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010352, at 3 
172 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,923. 
173 Exec. Order No. 13,990, 86 Fed. Reg. 7,037, 7,037 (Jan. 20, 2021). 
174 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,923. 
175 Id. 

2-45 
 
be met with a protracted legal challenge that would delay implementation of the rule.”176 Those 
concerns do not hold water. First, EPA’s litigation concerns are based on the straw men that 
prohibiting cost-sharing would be “direct[ing] how a water system covers the costs of 
compliance” and “attempt[ing] to assert Federal authority over how water systems charge for 
their services,”177 neither of which would result from such a prohibition, as discussed below in 
subsection 2.d.iv. Second, concern about potential litigation is not a justifiable basis for avoiding 
legal and moral requirements. In any event, EPA’s concern about potential litigation should arise 
more from a failure to follow the law; there are strong arguments that, as discussed immediately 
below, if EPA does not prohibit cost sharing, it would fail to fulfill its responsibilities under the 
SDWA, Fair Housing, Act, and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.178  Finally, while 
litigation might delay full service line replacement, a failure to ban cost-sharing will likely 
ensure that full service line replacement does not happen at all, for the reasons stated above in 
subsection 2.d.i.  
 
1. SDWA 
 
Multiple SDWA provisions give EPA the authority to require water utilities to pay to fully 
replace lead service lines. First, a treatment technique must “prevent known or anticipated 
adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible.”179 Not requiring systems to fully 
replace all LSLs does not achieve this requirement, and if individual customers are forced to 
cover the costs, then full LSL replacement won’t happen. Second, EPA must consider “[t]he 
effects of the contaminant on the general population and on groups within the general population 
such as infants, children, pregnant women, the elderly, individuals with a history of serious 
illness, or other subpopulations that are identified as likely to be at greater risk of adverse health 
effects due to exposure to contaminants in drinking water than the general population.”180 The 
subpopulation here that are at greater risk is low-income people and minority populations 
(especially Black children) who are demonstrated to have higher risk of exposure to lead from 
multiple sources including from LSLs,181 and not requiring utilities to fully replace all LSLs will 
result in them having higher continuing exposure.182  
 
In enacting the SDWA, Congress declared that “safe drinking water is essential to the 
protection of public health.”183 The SDWA seeks to limit exposure to lead via drinking water and 
to provide support to “populations affected by the concentration of lead in a public water 
system” in particular.184 Sections 1459A and 1459B of the SDWA similarly focus efforts on 
protecting underserved and disadvantaged communities, demonstrating Congress’s intent that 
 
176 Id. 
177 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,923. 
178 For further detail on these arguments, see Letter from Earthjustice and NRDC to Radhika Fox regarding 
authority, EPA (Apr. 28, 2023) (attached as exhibit to Section 14).  
179 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A) 
180 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(3)(c)(i)(V) (requirement made application to treatment techniques under 42 U.S.C. § 
300g-1(b)(3)(c)(ii)), 
181 See subsection 2.D.v. 
182 Id. 
183 Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-182, § 3(1), 110 Stat 1613 (1996). 
184 42 U.S.C. § 300g-3(c)(5)(A). 

2-46 
 
these communities benefit from essential lead remediation measures such as full LSLR.185 
Congress’ strong emphasis on the importance of addressing lead-contaminated drinking water 
and fully removing lead service lines for the protection of vulnerable people and disadvantaged 
communities and households is reflected in section 1459B of the Safe Drinking Water Act,186 
and in the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, which explicitly reserves 49 percent of the $15 
billion in funding provided for lead service line replacement for disadvantaged communities.187 
 
The LCRR also seeks to prioritize disadvantaged communities for full LSLR. The LCRR 
requires water systems to create: 
 
[a] lead service line replacement prioritization strategy based on factors 
including but not limited to . . . lead service line replacement for 
disadvantaged consumers and populations most sensitive to the effects of 
lead; and 
A funding strategy for conducting lead service line replacements which 
considers ways to accommodate customers that are unable to pay to replace 
the portion they own.188 
 
As noted above, non-white communities are more likely to have LSLs and to be more 
vulnerable to the effects of additional lead exposure because of existing elevated blood lead 
levels. And white, wealthier individuals are more likely to benefit from full LSLRs when cost-
sharing is used. Such a pattern explains why the LCR requires the Agency to prioritize 
disadvantaged communities. Prohibiting cost-sharing is a critical step towards meeting these 
requirements. 
 
2. Fair Housing Act 
 
The Fair Housing Act also supports a prohibition of cost-sharing for LSLRs. The FHA 
requires agencies to “administer their programs and activities relating to housing and urban 
development . . . in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this subchapter . . . .”189 
The purpose of the FHA is to provide “fair housing throughout the United States.”190 The LCR 
and SDWA may be considered to “relate to housing” as LSLRs directly affect the safety, 
habitability and market value of homes and apartments. Lead pipes and plumbing impact where 
people may decide to live and negatively affect home and apartment values. 191 Indeed, Congress 
has expressly weighed in on the link between housing habitability and lead pipes, as the SDWA 
provides that “The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the Administrator of the 
Veterans’ Administration may not insure or guarantee a mortgage or furnish assistance with 
 
185 Id. at §§ 300j-19a, 19b. 
186 Id. at § 300j-19b. 
187 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, Pub. L. 117-58, § 50104, 135 Stat. 429, 1400 (Nov. 15, 2021). 
188 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(b)(6)-(7) (2021). 
189 42 U.S.C. § 3608(d). 
190 Id. § 3601. 
191 See Mike Blackhurst, Do lead water laterals affect property values? A Case Study of Pittsburgh, PA, (April 14, 
2019), https://ucsur.pitt.edu/files/center/Lead_and_Property_Sales_2018-04.pdf; Adam Theising, Lead Pipes, 
Prescriptive Policy and Property Values, 74 Env’t and Res. Econ. 2 (Sept. 2019), .  

2-47 
 
respect to newly constructed residential property which contains a potable water system unless 
such system uses only lead free pipe, solder, and flux.”192  
 
Unequal full LSLR (due to cost-sharing) also results in unequal, unfair housing as some 
will continue to be exposed to lead in drinking water, primarily renters and other residents in 
low-income and non-white neighborhoods. For this reason, the FHA supports EPA adopting a 
prohibition on cost-sharing. 
 
Under the FHA, it is also unlawful to “discriminate against any person in . . . the 
provision of services or facilities . . . because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or 
national origin.”193 This includes equal access to utility services such as water;194 and likely 
extends to equal access to lead-safe drinking water. At the very least, the FHA calls for the 
protections of consumers from increases in lead exposure.195 Because data shows us that cost-
sharing effectively results in increased or continued lead exposure to low-income and non-white 
users through partial or no LSLR, cost-sharing itself runs counter to the non-discrimination goals 
and intent of the FHA and may violate the FHA. 
 
3. Title VI 
 
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits programs or activities that receive 
federal funding from discriminating on the basis of race, color, or national origin. A state or 
public water systems’ use of funds received from EPA196 must comply with both Title VI and 
EPA’s implementing regulations.  A recipient of EPA assistance may not, on the basis of race or 
other protected ground, “[d]eny a person any service, aid or other benefit of the program or 
activity,” “[p]rovide a person any service, aid or other benefit that is different, or is provided 
differently from that provided to others under the program,” or “[r]estrict a person in any way in 
the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege enjoyed by others receiving any service, aid, or 
benefit provided by the program.”197 
 
Based on the facts described in the Environmental Justice concerns subsection 2.D.v., it 
is evident that EPA’s failure to prohibit cost-sharing in the proposed LCRI could have significant 
implications for the distribution of benefits from the rule, and for the distribution of exposure to 
 
192 42 U.S.C. 300g-6, note, entitled “Ban on Lead Water Pipes, Solder, and Flux in VA and HUD Insured or 
Assisted Property,” added by section 1417(c) of Pub. L. 99–339. 
193 42 U.S.C. § 3604(b). 
194 See Kennedy v. City of Zanesville, 505 F. Supp. 2d 456, 499 (S.D. Ohio 2007) (“The Civil Rights Acts and the 
Fair Housing Act, along with the other federal statutes which form the basis of Plaintiffs' complaint, clearly establish 
Plaintiffs' right not to be discriminated against on the basis of race in their procurement of water, a vital resource.” 
(internal citations omitted)); Cooke v. Town of Colo. City, 934 F. Supp. 2d 1097, 1113-15 (D. Ariz. 2013) (finding 
that plaintiffs established a prima facie case for Fair Housing Act discrimination based on the denial of water 
service). 
195 The FHA requires “some direct relation between the injury asserted and the injurious conduct alleged.” Bank of 
America Corp. v. City of Miami, Fla., 581 U.S. 189, 202-203 (2017) (internal citations omitted). There is a direct 
link between cost-sharing and unequal removal of full LSLs, resulting in increased or continued lead exposure. 
196 States and PWSs receive assistance related to LSLRs through various EPA programs including the Drinking 
Water State Revolving Funds, Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation (WIIN) Grants, and Public Water 
System Supervision (PWSS) State and Tribal Support Program Grants. 
197 40 C.F.R. § 7.35(a)(1)-(3). 

2-48 
 
lead-contaminated drinking water. In particular, permitting LSLR under a cost-sharing model 
will likely result in widespread denial of benefits to members of low-income communities, with 
a disproportionately heavy toll on communities of color.  EPA should consider these 
distributional impacts when finalizing the LCRI and select the path that most effectively avoids 
creating or perpetuating disproportionate burdens on classes of persons who are protected by the 
Civil Rights Act—prohibiting cost-sharing.   
 
c. Madison, Wisconsin’s LSLR program is not comparable to the LCRI 
 
EPA points to Madison, Wisconsin as an example that demonstrates that charging 
property owners is not a barrier to full LSL replacement198 but that example is inapt here.  
Madison replaced all of its lead service lines while allowing the water system to charge property 
owners for replacing the portion of the LSL on their property.  However, Madison’s program 
isn’t identical to the LCRI’s replacement program and has some important differences that make 
them incomparable. First, Madison passed an ordinance requiring property owners to replace any 
and all LSLs on their properties.199 Because the requirement was on property owners, not water 
systems, there was no discussion of control or access. By contrast, the proposed LCRI tells water 
systems that they aren’t required to replace LSLs that they don’t control. This incentivizes water 
systems to claim not having control over as many LSLs as possible so that they don’t have to 
count them in the pool for mandated replacement.200 Madison didn’t allow for this option. 
 
Second, Madison imposed a penalty for non-compliance by property owners of $50-
$1000 per day. Since the average cost of replacing the private side of the LSL was $1340 without 
reimbursement, and an average of $670 with reimbursement, the penalty amount could quickly 
overtake the cost of replacing the LSL, incentivizing replacement.201 No such provision exists in 
the LCRI, so there is no “stick” for property owners (such as landlords) who choose not to pay 
for the replacement of LSLs on their property.  
 
Third, Madison’s program allowed customers to receive reimbursement from the water 
system of half the cost of LSL replacement up to either $1000 or $1500, depending on when they 
applied.202 If they still couldn’t afford the rest of the cost, they could apply for financing through 
the city.203 Madison estimated that the average cost to property owners through their program 
was $670.204 The LCRI doesn’t mandate any reimbursement by water systems, nor financing 
options from municipalities. Again, the exclusion of these crucial parts of Madison’s program 
from the proposed rule sharply cuts against the likelihood that the LCRI will achieve the same 
results as Madison. 
 
 
198 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,912, 84,923. 
199 https://www.cityofmadison.com/water/water-quality/lead-copper-in-water/information-for-utilities-on-lead-
service-replacement. 
200 See supra Section 2.D.iv (control section) 
201 See https://www.cityofmadison.com/water/water-quality/lead-copper-in-water/information-for-utilities-on-lead-
service-replacement. 
202 Id.  
203 Id. 
204 Id. 

2-49 
 
Fourth, Madison was a higher-than-average income area during the period it was 
completing its LSL replacements. From 2000 to 2012, the per capita personal income in Madison 
increased from $33,692 to $47,560.205 By contrast, the national per capita personal income 
increased only from $29,891 to $43,721 over the same period—starting from a lower income and 
not rising as high as Madison’s.206 Likewise, the median household income in Dane County, WI, 
which contains Madison, grew from $51,150 to $60,119 from 2000 to 2012,207 while nationally 
the median household income over the same period stayed below Dane County’s median income 
from 2000.208 This is another reason why it is unlikely that replicating Madison’s program in a 
lower-wealth area would produce the same results, and as stated above, the LCRI doesn’t contain 
any of the penalties or incentives that led to Madison’s success. 
 
Finally, the cost borne by Madison property owners was far less than the present-day cost 
of replacing the portion of an LSL under private property. Madison implemented its program in 
2000 and removed all of its LSLs by 2012. The city required a cost-share from property owners, 
although it reimbursed half of the replacement costs up to a certain amount, resulting in an 
average cost to the property owner of $670.209 EPA’s current cost estimate for a “customer side” 
LSL replacement is several times greater than Madison’s reported average cost to the property 
owner, even when accounting for inflation.210 If property owners had to shoulder the full cost of 
replacing the portion of the line under private property, at current costs, full lead service line 
replacement would be completely out of reach for many low-wealth homeowners and likely 
would be viewed by many landlords as not worth paying for. The only foolproof way to ensure 
that all lead service lines are completely replaced—and that current disparities in replacement are 
not exacerbated—is for the final LCRI to mandate that water systems pay for complete LSL 
replacement. 
 
 
205 https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MADI555PCPI 
206 https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/A792RC0Q052SBEA 
207 https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MHIWI55025A052NCEN 
208 Median Household income in the United States was $41,990 in 2000 and $51,020 in 2012. 
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MEHOINUSA646N. 
209 https://www.cityofmadison.com/water/water-quality/lead-copper-in-water/information-for-utilities-on-lead-
service-replacement. 
210 In the Economic Analysis (EA) supporting the proposed LCRI, EPA estimates a $4,399 mean cost (in 2020 
dollars) for replacement of the portion of a lead service line under private property, which the EA refers to as a 
“customer-side replacement.” See Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, 
Appendix A, Exhibit A-2, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0712. In the EA, EPA 
used the “ENR Construction Cost Index” to adjust cities’ reported LSLR costs for inflation. (The index is 
reproduced in the LCRI docket in a spreadsheet titled “LSLR Unit Cost Analysis,” 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0521.) For purposes of comparison to EPA’s cost 
estimates, Madison’s stated costs can be converted to 2020 dollars using the same index. Although Madison 
provided a $670 average cost to the property owner for replacement of the portion of the LSL under private 
property, the city did not specify which year’s dollars it used to calculate those costs. Since Madison’s program 
spanned from 2000 to 2012, it would be reasonable (and likely a conservative assumption) to treat the costs as being 
expressed in 2006 dollars, the mid-point of the program. Applying the ENR Construction Cost Index, $670 in 2006 
dollars is equivalent to $991 in 2020 dollars—far less than the EA’s average customer-side replacement cost of 
$4,399. The inflation-adjusted cost in Madison is also far less than the average customer side replacement costs 
estimated in an independent report by Safe Water Engineering (Jan. 2024), which is attached to this comment letter. 
See infra section 12. 

2-50 
 
d. EPA’s concerns that prohibiting cost-sharing would impermissibly 
encroach on state and local authority are unfounded   
 
EPA expresses concern over prohibiting cost-sharing because it “has not used its section 
1412 authority under SDWA to direct how a water system covers the costs of compliance with a 
national primary drinking water rule, which is, at its core, a matter of State and local law.211 This 
concern is unfounded.  Although Madison replaced its LSLs while directly billing homeowners, 
many other systems have not done so. EPA in fact acknowledges that many water systems have 
funded and financed full lead service line replacement using a variety of mechanisms, including 
the Drinking Water State Revolving Funds, HUD block grants, rate revenues, and revenue from 
other sources.212 Requiring water systems to pay for the full cost of LSL replacement doesn’t 
mandate that a water system use any or all of these mechanisms, just that they pay for it in any 
way that is not directly billing the owner of the property the LSL is located on. EPA need not 
prescribe any particular funding or financing mechanism. All the agency need do is count all of 
the lead service lines within a water system as part of the pool for replacement213 and then say 
that a water system can report that those lines have been replaced only if the water system either 
covered the costs of replacing the lines or a property owner refused the water system’s offer to 
cover the costs and instead paid for it themselves.  
 
 
EPA also raises concerns that prohibiting cost-sharing would constitute an “attempt to 
assert Federal authority over how water systems charge for their services,”214 which likely 
reflects a concern by some water systems that they are prevented from using ratepayer funds to 
replace the portions of LSLs on private property. Again, a prohibition on cost-sharing in no way 
directs water systems to choose any of the myriad of ways they can finance LSLR.   
 
Indeed, a variety of mechanisms have been and can be used to pay for LSLR. While 
every state is unique and has different state and local laws, since we don’t propose that the LCRI 
mandate any one particular funding source, water systems would be free to use any funding 
source or combination of funding sources that cover the costs of full LSL replacement and are 
allowed under applicable law.  
 For example, utilities  are allowed (under federal law) to use tax-exempt bonds to 
finance LSLR on private property, backed by the ratepayer revenue to repay the bonds. (In other 
words, neither state nor federal law prohibits utilities from funding and financing LSLR the same 
way they do for any other capital project.) Other municipalities, such as Newark, New Jersey,215 
used tax exempt municipal bonds to pay for full LSL replacement. Bonds are a good example of 
utilities’ ability to finance full LSLR. Bonds are typically repaid via ratepayer funds or other 
revenues like local taxes. Bonds can be used for water system work that benefits the entire water 
 
211 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,923. 
212 https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/lslr-financing-case-studies.  
213  See Section 2.C. 
214 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,923. 
215 City of Newark, News, Newark’s Lead Service Line Replacement Program is a Model for the Nation (June 12, 
2020), available at https://www.newarknj.gov/news/newarks-lead-service-line-replacement-program-is-a-model-
for-the-nation. 

2-51 
 
system or protects public health.216 Water systems frequently use bonds to finance capital 
projects like full LSLR.217 Debt financing full LSLRs (i.e., including the portion located on 
private property) is allowed under Regulated Operations accounting so long as the utility has a 
governing board with a rate setting authority, which nearly all do, and can commit to collecting 
rates in the future to cover the costs. This is done by booking the replacement program as a 
“regulated asset” under GASB Statement No. 62.218 Denver Water did just this and successfully 
bond financed the on-going replacement of 64,000-84,000 lead service lines, including portions 
located under private property, at no direct cost to those property owners.219 Also, as discussed 
elsewhere in these comments and touted in the LCRI’s preamble, there are multiple other 
funding sources for full LSLRs, including various federal funding programs.  
It is also not clear that the concern about whether state law permits the use of rate payer 
funds for LSLR is warranted. None of the thirteen states with the most LSLs prohibit the use of 
ratepayer funds to replace LSLs on private property. In fact, six of those states actively support 
using ratepayer funds for this purpose.220 At least one other state also doesn’t prohibit the use of 
ratepayer funds under the theory that while paying for LSL replacement on one particular 
property may benefit that property owner, replacing those LSLs ultimately decreases the cost of 
treatment for lead, such as corrosion control, which benefits all of the water system’s 
customers.221 Using rate revenues to finance full LSLRs is more equitable than cost-sharing and 
can be done by structuring local water rates in a way that does not disproportionately affect low-
income customers.222 It would be an anomaly and bad precedent to allow PWSs to pass the cost 
 
216 Waterloop Podcast, Episode #184, Funding To Fight Lead: Using Municipal Bonds, 
https://youtu.be/pN8XDsAzzfg?si=XC3gitV2C06UMvpA&t=1057 (2023); see Melissa L. Kelly, Caroline Koch, 
Cynthia Koehler & Alejandro E. Camacho, Tap Into Resilience: Pathways For Localized Water Infrastructure 
(2021) at 24-33, https://www.law.uci.edu/centers/cleanr/news-pdfs/tap-into-resilience-report.pdf. 
217 Id. at 26, stating “Municipal bonds have long been the debt-financing vehicle of choice for cities and public water 
agencies.” See also, Waterloop Podcast, Episode #176, Funding To Fight Lead: How Denver Did It, 
https://youtu.be/p1DBOeNCGjY?si=K5DkAM0DHHC2rWGW&t=248; Denver Water, Water Revenue Bond Series 
2022A, https://emma.msrb.org/P21617408-P21246188-P21670639.pdf (citing the Lead Reduction Program as a 
regulated asset). See also https://www.newarknj.gov/news/newarks-lead-service-line-replacement-program-is-a-
model-for-the-nation.  
218 Governmental Accounting Standards Board, Implementation Update, Statement No. 62, Question 4.4, 
https://gasb.org/document/blob?fileName=GASB%20Implementation%20Guide%20No.%202018-1,0.pdf; 
Waterloop Podcast, Episode #176, Funding To Fight Lead: How Denver Did It, 
https://youtu.be/p1DBOeNCGjY?si=OgyIjvCtxNEMAZ1l. 
219 Waterloop Podcast, Episode #176, Funding To Fight Lead: How Denver Did It, 
https://youtu.be/p1DBOeNCGjY?si=K5DkAM0DHHC2rWGW&t=248; Denver Water, Lead Reduction Program, 
Lead Service Line Replacement, https://www.denverwater.org/your-water/water-quality/lead/lead-service-line-
replacement-program; Denver Water, Water Revenue Bond Series 2022A, https://emma.msrb.org/P21617408-
P21246188-P21670639.pdf (citing the Lead Reduction Program as a regulated asset). 
220 Shaun Goho, Marcello Saenz, Tom Neltner, Rates could fund lead pipe replacement in critical states: Laws in 
states with the most lead service lines support the practice, April 2019, 
https://clinics.law.harvard.edu/environment/files/2019/04/Rates-Fund-LSL-Replacement-
States_Harvard_EDF_2019.pdf, at ii-iii. 
221 https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/lslr-financing-case-studies (Spokane, Washington case 
study) 
222 Philadelphia, for example, uses income-based water rates and Detroit uses “lifeline” income-based rates. Brett 
Walton, Circle of Blue, Philadelphia Water Rate Links Payments to Household Income (May 16, 2017), 
https://www.circleofblue.org/2017/water-management/pricing/philadelphia-water-rate-linkspayments-household-
 

2-52 
 
of a LSLR directly to the customer on whose property the line lies. Water systems frequently 
perform work that directly affects one household or a small group of houses, without prorating 
costs. For example, PWSs replace customers’ water meters without passing on the cost directly 
to the customer receiving the new meter, and PWSs do not seek reimbursement for funds related 
to water main maintenance or upgrades from only those individuals directly benefiting from the 
water main work. Neither do water systems charge individual property owners for water used by 
a fire department to douse a fire at their property. Just as fire suppression protects the health and 
safety not only of the residents of the affected home but of others in the community, reduction of 
lead threats to health protects not only residents of the affected home but also provides 
community benefits in the form of reduced health care costs, reduced special education costs, 
and other large societal benefits.223   
 
Allowing piecemeal cost recovery for LSLRs (or water main or water meter work) would 
be inefficient and also could set a bad precedent. One can envision a scenario where allowing 
cost-sharing in this instance inspires utilities to prorate the costs of other projects and require 
payment by individual customers. 
 
If, however, water systems or states believe state or local laws prohibit any possible 
funding source for full LSL replacement other than the property owner covering the costs, as 
discussed in the LCRI primacy section 2.C.ii. above, EPA should not approve primacy for that 
state unless it removes state law barriers and adopts a program to ensure that utilities can be 
required to pay for full LSL replacement. In the alternative, if the agency chooses not to go that 
route, EPA should require the systems to state the barriers to utility funding of full LSLR in their 
replacement plans as well as any other barriers to funding, the basis for that belief, and why the 
utility cannot eliminate such impediments. The state primacy agency should be required to 
review the replacement plan and confirm this prohibition to EPA. If the state primacy agency 
does not confirm the state or local law prohibition, they must inform the water system, and the 
water system would have to eliminate cost-sharing. The LCRI should also explicitly prohibit 
impediments created by laws or policies adopted after the LCRI was proposed to excuse utilities 
from paying for full LSLR.  Otherwise, recalcitrant utilities could be incentivized to adopt new 
rules, tariffs, or policies that block this approach after the rule was proposed.  These mechanisms 
would minimize the risk of any potential protected legal challenge that could keep the LCRI 
from going into effect and would also make it much more difficult, if not impossible, for water 
systems that don’t want to pay for full LSL replacement to avoid doing so simply by asserting 
that there are impediments to their doing so. 
 
income/; City of Detroit, Lifeline Plan (last visited Jan. 30, 2024), https://detroitmi.gov/departments/water-and-
sewerage-department/dwsd-customer-service/dwsd-here-help-water-assistance-programs/lifeline-plan. Section 13 of 
our comment letter provides additional discussion of these and other approaches water systems can use to generate 
revenue for capital improvements—including utility-funded full lead service line replacements—without imposing 
unaffordable costs on low-income customers. 
223 See, Erik D. Olson, “Getting the Lead Out: Removing Lead Pipes Would Yield Hundreds of Billions of Dollars 
in Health Benefits,” NRDC 2023, https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/2023-10/getting-lead-out-health-benefits-
ib.pdf (documenting overwhelming economic benefits of removing lead service lines).  

2-53 
 
E. 
EPA should help guide selection of materials used in replacement service lines, and 
take steps to ensure those materials are safe  
EPA should use its authorities under the SDWA and other laws to ensure that the 
manufacture, installation, and use of replacement service lines does not bring a new set of health 
and environmental concerns. At a minimum: (1) EPA should give guidance to state and local 
governments to inform their selection of alternative materials that may be used in replacement 
services lines to avoid regrettable substitutions, as it is inefficient for governments all over the 
country to do this research on their own. EPA should advise that copper is the best alternative 
material due to serious concerns with the use of plastics of all types and because plastics have an 
expected life of about half of that of copper.  (2) To the extent there are gaps in understanding 
benefits and disadvantages of alternative service line materials on water quality, health effects, 
service life, and lifecycle costs, EPA should take responsibility for ensuring that research to fill 
those gaps is underway or commenced expeditiously. (3) Finally, once EPA has identified what 
substances might leach from service lines made from the potential alternative materials, EPA 
should swiftly consider establishing drinking water standards and health advisories for such 
substances (or if there are such standards or advisories for these chemicals, whether they are 
health protective.)  If any existing standards or advisories have gaps or are not health protective, 
EPA should expeditiously begin the process of updating the standards and levels (and/or 
adopting appropriate treatment techniques).  We elaborate on these points below.  
i. 
EPA should give guidance on replacement material that urges use of copper 
rather than plastics 
EPA would be missing an important opportunity to protect human health and the 
environment if it does not provide guidance to state and local governments regarding what 
material to use in replacement service lines.  Commenters understand that the universe of 
alternative materials is effectively limited to copper or various types of plastic (e.g., polyvinyl 
chloride (“PVC”), chlorinated PVC (“CPVC”), cross-linked polyethylene (“PEX”), high-density 
polyethylene (“HDPE”)).  We strongly urge EPA to recommend use of copper in 
replacement service lines, rather than plastic of any type.   
a. EPA should recommend use of copper service lines because of the harms 
caused by production and disposal of plastic 
Avoiding use of plastic services lines is imperative because toxic pollution and 
greenhouse gases are created during production and disposal of plastic pipes.  First, 
producing and disposing of plastics, and transportation of plastics feedstock such as vinyl 
chloride, are linked to serious human health harms – and these harms are experienced 
disproportionately by fenceline communities near petrochemical and waste disposal 
facilities.224  In addition, as was recently highlighted in the East Palestine, Ohio derailment 
of multiple tank cars filled with vinyl chloride, fenceline communities near transportation 
 
224 See Comments of Air Alliance Houston, et al. to EPA, Draft National Strategy to Prevent Plastic Pollution 
(April 2023), Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OLEM–2023–0228-0276 (“Comment on Draft Plastic Strategy”), at 6-20 
and citations therein, which are incorporated here by reference; Beyond Plastics, The Perils of PVC Plastic Pipes, 
2023, https://www.beyondplastics.org/publications/perils-of-pvc-pipes. 

2-54 
 
hubs and corridors are also at serious risk from transport of plastics feedstocks.225￼  Due 
to residential racial segregation, expulsive zoning226￼ and environmental racism in the 
siting of production and disposal facilities, the residents of these communities are 
disproportionately people of color.  ￼227￼￼ Second, producing and disposing of plastics 
is linked to harms228￼  Third, producing and disposing of plastics and their fossil fuel 
feedstocks contributes to climate change, and any actions that promote increased use of 
plastic will make it harder for the United States to meet its climate commitments (and 
perhaps its commitments under the global plastics treaty that is currently being 
negotiated)229￼  Moreover, since source reduction is the primary and best way to prevent 
pollution230￼ any increased demand for plastics to manufacture replacement services 
lines would be at odds with the emerging consensus that reducing plastic pollution is 
essential, as reflected in EPA’s Draft National Strategy to Prevent Plastic Pollution231￼   
b. EPA should recommend use of copper to avoid drinking water 
contamination from plastic service lines by hazardous chemicals 
and micro- and nanoplastics 
 
Not only is plastic linked to harmful pollution at the manufacturing and disposal stages, 
use of plastic products results in toxic exposures and resulting health risks. This is because 
plastic is made of a mixture of chemicals – building block polymers, additives, and 
impurities/residuals.  Several of the building block plastic polymers are made from monomers 
that are highly toxic (e.g., PVC is made from the carcinogenic vinyl chloride monomer).232 
Moreover, chemicals in monomer form are added to the polymers to achieve certain 
characteristics or functions, such as plasticizers, flame retardants and stabilizers; other chemicals 
are present in plastics as impurities or residues from the manufacturing process, such as residual 
 
225 Sun W. (2023). The Devastating Health Consequences of the Ohio Derailment: A Closer Look at the Effects of 
Vinyl Chloride Spill. International journal of environmental research and public health, 20(6), 5032. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20065032 
226 Ana Isabel Baptista, et al., U.S. Municipal Solid Waste Incinerators: An Industry in Decline, Tishman Env’t and 
Design Ctr., at 13-14 (May 2019), https://www.no-burn.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/03/CR_GaiaReportFinal_05.21-1.pdf.    
227 Toxic Free Future, PVC Poison Plastic: An investigation following the Ohio train derailment of widespread vinyl 
chloride pollution caused by PVC production (April 13, 2023), at 8-10, https://toxicfreefuture.org/wp-
content/uploads/2023/04/Report-PDF-PVC-Poison-Plastic-Investigation-4.pdf. 
228 See Comment on Draft Plastic Strategy at 20-24 and citations therein, which are incorporated here by reference. 
229 Comment on Draft Plastic Strategy, at 4-6 and citations therein, which are incorporated here by reference. 
230 Carol M. Browner, Pollution Prevention Policy Statement, EPA (June 15, 1993), 
https://www.epa.gov/p2/pollution-prevention-policy-statement (last updated June 13, 2023); see also 42 U.S.C. § 
13101 (establishing a “national policy of the United States that pollution should be prevented or reduced at the 
source whenever feasible” because “[s]ource reduction is . . . more desirable than waste management and pollution 
control.”).   
231 EPA, EPA’s Draft National Strategy to Prevent Plastic Pollution: Part of a Series on Building a Circular 
Economy for All, Off. of Res. Conservation and Recovery, EPA Doc. No. EPA 530-R-23-006 (Apr. 2023) (“Draft 
Strategy”), https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-
04/Draft_National_Strategy_to_Prevent_Plastic_Pollution.pdf.  
232 Lithner, D., Larsson, A., & Dave, G. (2011). Environmental and Health Hazard Ranking and Assessment of 
Plastic Polymers Based on Chemical Composition. The Science of The Total Environment, 409(18), 3309–3324. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.04.038.   

2-55 
 
vinyl chloride monomer in PVC.233  A recent analysis by the European Chemicals Agency 
(“ECHA”) found 470 chemical additives currently in use in PVC, of which 63 were found to 
have high or medium hazard scores.234  While the identities of some plastic additives are 
unknown, we know that many are members of classes of chemicals that are linked to serious 
health harms, such as per- and polyfluorinated alkyl substances (“PFAS”), ortho-phthalates, and 
halogenated or organophosphate flame retardants.235  Moreover, as noted in the ECHA 2023 
PVC Report, the potential for co-exposure to plastics additives that leach or migrate into 
drinking water is an additional cause for concern.236 
As a general matter, most of the additives present in plastics are not bound to their base 
plastic fibers, and thus they “can be released at all stages of the plastics’ life-cycle,” including 
during use.237  While the leaching of toxic chemicals from plastic water pipes into drinking water 
appears to be less well-studied than migration of plastic additives from consumer products and 
food packaging,238 several studies by well-regarded independent researchers indicate that 
chemicals of concern leach into drinking water during routine use of plastic pipes.  For example, 
vinyl chloride monomer has been found to leach from PVC and CPVC piping and to be produced 
as a secondary disinfection byproduct239; ortho-phthalates were found to leach from CPVC and 
PEX pipes240; and 20-30 organic compounds (some unidentified) have been found to migrate 
 
233 U. N. Env’t Programme, Chemicals in Plastics - A Technical Report (2023), 
https://wedocs.unep.org/20.500.11822/42366 (“U.N. Env’t Programme”), at Executive Summary xii, 4.  This United 
Nations report found that “more than 13,000 chemicals are associated with plastics and plastic production …, of 
which over 3,200 monomers, additives, processing aids and non-intentionally added substances are of potential 
concern due to their hazardous properties . . . includ[ing] carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, reproductive toxicity, 
specific target organ toxicity, endocrine disruption, ecotoxicity, bioaccumulation potential, environmental 
persistence and mobility, including potential for long-range environmental transport to remote locations.” U.N. 
Env’t Programme, at Executive Summary xii.   
234European Chemicals Agency, Investigation Report on PVC and PVC Additives (November 11, 2023), 
https://echa.europa.eu/documents/10162/17233/rest_pvc_investigation_report_en.pdf/98134bd2-f26e-fa4f-8ae1-
004d2a3a29b6?t=1701157368019 (“2023 ECHA PVC Report”), at 2, 8-15. 
235 U.N. Env’t Programme, at 7 (Figure 2), 12–17.   
236 2023 ECHA PVC Report, at 16. 
237 Zimmermann, L., Dierkes, G., Ternes, T. A., Völker, C., & Wagner, M. (2019). Benchmarking the in Vitro 
Toxicity and Chemical Composition of Plastic Consumer Products. Environmental Science & Technology, 53(19), 
11467. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b02293.   
238 A leading researcher in this field identified major data gaps related to chemical migration from polymeric pipes 
(in 2012), noting that these gaps pose a challenge to environmental engineers who strive to select the best pipe. 
Whelton, Andrew & Nguyen, Tinh. (2012). Contaminant Migration From Polymeric Pipes Used in Buried Potable 
Water Distribution Systems: A Review. Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology - CRIT REV 
ENVIRON SCI TECHNOL. 43. p.731. 10.1080/10643389.2011.627005, available for full download at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Andrew-Whelton-
2/publication/254216816_Contaminant_Migration_From_Polymeric_Pipes_Used_in_Buried_Potable_Water_Distri
bution_Systems_A_Review/links/551b538d0cf2bb754078cfdd/Contaminant-Migration-From-Polymeric-Pipes-
Used-in-Buried-Potable-Water-Distribution-Systems-A-
Review.pdf?_tp=eyJjb250ZXh0Ijp7ImZpcnN0UGFnZSI6InB1YmxpY2F0aW9uIiwicGFnZSI6InB1YmxpY2F0aW
9uIn19 . 
239 Walter RK, Lin PH, Edwards M, Richardson RE. Investigation of factors affecting the accumulation of vinyl 
chloride in polyvinyl chloride piping used in drinking water distribution systems. Water Res. 2011 Apr;45(8):2607-
15.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2011.02.016. Epub 2011 Feb 19. PMID: 21420710.  
240 Derek R. Faust, Kimberly J. Wooten, Philip N. Smith; Transfer of phthalates from c-polyvinyl chloride and 
cross-linked polyethylene pipe (PEX-b) into drinking water. Water Supply 1 March 2017; 17 (2): 588–596. 
doi: https://doi.org/10.2166/ws.2016.164  

2-56 
 
from polyethylene pipes (PEX and others) into drinking water in Denmark241.  In addition, a 
review of the scientific literature on contaminants migrating from pipes used in drinking water 
systems into drinking water found migration of a host of substances, including BPA, phthalates, 
nonylphenol, PFAS, and microplastics --- and the type of pipe used had an important role in the 
levels of migration of chemicals (though most of the studies were conducted outside the United 
States).242  In sum, there is concerning evidence that plastic service lines may be a source of 
exposure to a complex brew of toxic additives.  While the levels of exposure may be low (though 
we do not know this), a mixture of dozens of low-level toxicants in drinking water could present 
chronic hazards that are far greater than any individual substance in isolation—especially for 
people who are highly susceptible and/or already exposed to many toxic substances from sources 
other than drinking water. 
An additional concern with all plastic pipes is that micro- and nanoplastics will be 
released from the pipes into drinking water as a result of water abrading the pipe, resulting in 
exposure.  According to the 2023 ECHA PVC Report, microparticle releases function as the 
main carrier for plastic additive releases, which are expected to be very persistent in the 
environment (and the human body).  The report notes that for PVC, in particular, the additive 
releases are likely to be higher than for other plastics because there are generally higher additive 
concentrations in PVC than other plastics.243  The potential that drinking water is a vector for 
microplastics resulting from fragmentation of plastic service lines is concerning because of an 
emerging consensus that microplastics themselves pose health hazards.244 
 
EPA should give serious consideration to the implications of potentially widespread use 
of plastic service lines for the agency’s drinking water monitoring rules and contaminant 
standards. If it is confirmed that toxic chemicals and micro- and nanoplastics of health concern 
are released into drinking water by these plastic service lines, monitoring for these chemicals 
 
241 Brocca, D., Arvin, E., & Mosbaek, H. (2002). Identification of organic compounds migrating from polyethylene 
pipelines into drinking water. Water research, 36(15), 3675–3680. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0043-1354(02)00084-2  
Studies of PEX pipe in the United States have also found chemical leaching during the use phase.  Robert Phillips, 
Andrew J. Whelton, Matthew J. Eckelman, Incorporating use phase chemical leaching and water quality testing for 
life cycle toxicity assessment of cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) piping, Science of The Total Environment, 
Volume 782, 2021, 146374, ISSN 0048-9697, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146374. 
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S004896972101442X); see also Connell, M., Stenson, A., 
Weinrich, L., LeChevallier, M., Boyd, S.L., Ghosal, R.R., Dey, R. and Whelton, A.J. (2016), PEX and PP Water 
Pipes: Assimilable Carbon, Chemicals, and Odors. Journal - American Water Works Association, 108: E192-
E204. https://doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2016.108.0016  
242 Mohammadi, A., Dobaradaran, S., Schmidt, T.C. et al. Emerging contaminants migration from pipes used in 
drinking water distribution systems: a review of the scientific literature. Environ Sci Pollut Res 29, 75134–75160 
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-022-23085-7. 
243 2023 ECHA PVC Report at 37-38; Appendices A and B to the Investigation Report on PVC and PVC Additives, 
https://echa.europa.eu/documents/10162/17233/rest_pvc_investigation_report_appendix_a_b_en.pdf/5a1e8057-
b576-73fd-e163-4587874349d3?t=1701157496271, at 28-29. 
244 For example, a recent University of California rapid review found that exposure to microplastics is suspected to 
be a digestive hazard to humans, including cancer, as well as a hazard to the human reproductive system. CalSPEC, 
Microplastics Occurrence, Health Effects, and Mitigation Policies (Jan. 2023), at Executive Summary iii, 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5eda91260bbb7e7a4bf528d8/t/63ee3b95ee82156a46194aae/1676557207404/
CalSPEC-Report-Microplastics-Occurrence-Health+Effects-and-Mitigation-Policies.pdf. 

2-57 
 
would have to be done at residences where the pipes were installed. Any Maximum Contaminant 
Level would need to be measured at the tap. At the treatment plant actions are unlikely to be 
successful at reducing leaching from such pipes, unlike corrosion control to reduce lead and 
copper leaching.  This would create serious additional regulatory complexities and costs that 
would potentially overshadow the complexities and costs of monitoring for lead at homes. 
Analyses of synthetic organic chemicals (SOCs) tend to be very expensive, and EPA’s rules 
generally only require monitoring for them at the point of entry into the distribution system. 
SOCs introduced into tap water by plastic service lines would necessitate widespread and 
presumably very expensive in-home monitoring for toxic SOCs. 
c. Plastic service lines are not a good option because they are vulnerable to 
degradation and highly toxic releases during fires 
It is also important to avoid plastic service lines because they are vulnerable to thermal 
degradation from wildfires and building fires.  Not only can a plastic water distribution system 
be destroyed by fires, the degradation of the plastic (whether PEX, HDPE, PVC or CPVC) can 
result in leaching of highly toxic volatile organic compounds, such as benzene.245  
Contamination of drinking water by the carcinogen benzene after recent wildfires in California 
and Hawaii has been well documented, including levels of benzene in California at many times 
the permitted levels under federal and California law.246  And the high levels of toxic chemicals 
can persist for months to years.247   
This concern must be disclosed to state and local governments since large swaths of the 
country are at significant wildfire risk.  Nearly 80 million properties stand a significant chance of 
exposure to fire, impacting 1 in 6 U.S. residents – a number that will increase over the next thirty 
years.248  Nearly half of the people who are vulnerable live in the South, and people of color face 
a disproportionate risk of being impacted by wildfires.249 
In addition, concern about emission of toxic gases when plastics burn has led the 
International Association of Fire Fighters to call for restrictions on use of plastic, including 
plastic pipes, in buildings.250 
 
245 Isaacson, Kristofer P. and Proctor, Caitlin R. and Wang, Q. Erica and Edwards, Ethan Y. and Noh, Yoorae and 
Shah, Amisha D. and Whelton, Andrew J., Drinking water contamination from the thermal degradation of plastics: 
implications for wildfire and structure fire response, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2021,7, 274-284, 
https://doi.org/10.1039/D0EW00836B. 
246 E.g., The Conversation, Plastic pipes are polluting drinking water systems after wildfires – it’s a risk in urban 
fires too (Dec. 14, 2020), https://theconversation.com/plastic-pipes-are-polluting-drinking-water-systems-after-
wildfires-its-a-risk-in-urban-fires-too-150923;  
Partlow, Joshua, et al. “The Toxic Aftermath of the Maui Fires Could Last for Years.” Washington Post, 17 Aug. 
2023, https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2023/08/17/maui-fires-pollution-water-
soil/?next_url=https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2023/08/17/maui-fires-pollution-water-soil/. 
247 Id. 
248 Muyskens, John, et al. “1 in 6 Americans Live in Areas with Significant Wildfire Risk.” Washington Post, 17 
May 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/interactive/2022/wildfire-risk-map-us/. 
249 Id. 
250 International Association of Fire Fighters, IAFF AND UA CALL FOR BUILDING CODE CHANGES TO 
RESTRICT PLASTIC PIPING, June 4, 2019 https://www.iaff.org/news/iaff-and-ua-call-for-building-code-changes-
to-restrict-plastic-piping/  

2-58 
 
d. Among the types of plastic that could be used in replacement service 
lines, it is most critical to avoid use of PVC and CPVC 
While concerns about use of plastic in replacement service lines applies to all types of 
plastic, it is especially important that EPA recommend against the use of PVC or CPVC service 
lines.  First, the dangers of vinyl chloride across the life-cycle have been well-established and 
documented – from the potent toxicity of vinyl chloride monomer (which is known to persist in 
residual form and leach into drinking water251), to the fenceline communities who are exposed to 
vinyl chloride and ethylene dichloride at dangerous levels,252 to the millions of people who are at 
risk from transportation of vinyl chloride around the country for the production of PVC.253 
Second, it is well-documented that lead is used as a stabilizer in PVC manufactured in 
China and India (and perhaps elsewhere).254  It would obviously be unacceptable to allow state 
and local governments to install replacement service lines that contain lead.  An additional 
concern with PVC manufactured in China is that their PVC uses coal as a source of carbon (as 
opposed to oil and gas, which is used elsewhere) and as a result it uses a mercury-based catalyst, 
resulting in significant mercury pollution across the globe.255   
 
Finally, EPA has just commenced a process under the Toxic Substances Control Act 
(“TSCA”) that is likely to result in vinyl chloride being designated as a high-priority substance 
that will undergo a three-year risk evaluation, likely followed by a risk management rulemaking 
process.256  It would be self-defeating for EPA to allow or even effectively encourage wide-scale 
purchase of PVC/CPVC service lines, creating significant new demand for vinyl chloride, just as 
it is embarking on a process of understanding whether vinyl chloride presents unreasonable risk 
under TSCA.  If EPA determines in 3-4 years that vinyl chloride presents unreasonable risk 
under TSCA in connection with conditions of use that are tied to manufacture of PVC resins and 
PVC service lines, it would create a very difficult and untenable situation for any state or local 
governments that had just invested millions of dollars to install PVC/CPVC service lines. 
 
251 Walter RK, Lin PH, Edwards M, Richardson RE. Investigation of factors affecting the accumulation of vinyl 
chloride in polyvinyl chloride piping used in drinking water distribution systems. Water Res. 2011 Apr;45(8):2607-
15.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2011.02.016. Epub 2011 Feb 19. PMID: 21420710. 
252 In particular, see EPA, Calvert City, Kentucky Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) Air Quality Risk Assessment 
(January 22, 2024) p. 83-85  
253 Ajasa, Amudalat. “Millions of Americans Face Risk of a Toxic ‘Bomb Train.’” Washington Post, 29 Jan. 2024, 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2024/01/29/vinyl-chloride-trains-chemical-report/. 
254 See, e.g., Zhang, Y., & Lin, Y. P. (2015). Leaching of lead from new unplasticized polyvinyl chloride (uPVC) 
pipes into drinking water. Environmental science and pollution research international, 22(11), 8405–8411. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-014-3999-9; The Print, Lead in PVC pipes is poisoning India’s drinking water, but 
govt’s done nothing in 2 years (March 19, 2019), https://theprint.in/india/lead-in-pvc-pipes-is-poisoning-indias-
drinking-water-but-govts-done-nothing-in-2-years/207444/.   
255 Cardiff University, Cleaning Up PVC Production, Global impacts, 
https://www.cardiff.ac.uk/chemistry/research/impact/cleaning-up-pvc-
production#:~:text=Typically%2C%20PVC%20produced%20elsewhere%20makes,to%20use%20mercury%2Dbase
d%20catalysts.  
256 EPA, Initiation of Prioritization Under the Toxic Substances Control Act, 88 Fed. Reg. at 87423 (Dec. 18, 2023). 

2-59 
 
e. Copper generally lasts much longer than plastic, reducing long-term costs 
and making the necessity for replacements in 20-30 years much less likely 
Studies have found that copper service lines can be expected to last for 50-60 years, as 
compared to plastic such as polyethylene, which would be expected to last 20-40 years.257  
Considering this differential in service life, utilities and homeowners may need a second 
replacement of the plastic if that material is used for a LSLR now, effectively doubling the 
lifecycle cost of a plastic service line. This is an important consideration that EPA should bring 
to the attention of local and state policymakers.258  
f. Additional cost, lifecycle, and other considerations 
EPA’s guidance to state and local governments must address cost comparisons of using 
plastic vs. copper as replacement service line material.  This cost discussion should take into 
account cost over the lifespan of the replacement material from cradle-to-grave (including 
distribution and disposal), rather than merely cost at installation.  Among other considerations, 
this lifecycle analysis should take into account, at a minimum: 
• As noted above, the likely longevity of new service lines must be highlighted for 
state and local decisionmakers.  Copper service lines could be expected to last for 
50-60 years, as compared to plastic, which would be expected to last 20-40 
years.259   
• Costs to power the system with service lines of different materials.  Our 
understanding is that operating a system with PVC service lines is more energy-
intensive than with other service line materials because the walls are thicker, 
requiring more energy to move the water through the system.260 
• The disposal options for replacement pipes at the end of their lifespan, including 
costs and potential liability for disposal of potentially toxic degraded plastic pipe.  
Our understanding is that there are no environmentally sound disposal options for 
plastic, whereas copper can be recycled.  
• Health and environmental effects of manufacture and use, as described above.  
 
257 Lee, Juneseok, and Myles Meehan. 2017. “Survival Analysis of US Water Service Lines Utilizing a Nationwide 
Failure Data Set.” Journal - American Water Works Association 109 (9): 13–21. 
https://doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2017.109.0098 .   
258 We recognize that in less common circumstances, soil corrosivity may adversely affect the longevity of copper 
service lines. EPA’s guidance could acknowledge the need to account for localized soil factors, but this should not 
deter EPA from recommending that, in general, copper is expected to have a longer service life.  
259 Lee, Juneseok, and Myles Meehan. 2017. “Survival Analysis of US Water Service Lines Utilizing a Nationwide 
Failure Data Set.” Journal - American Water Works Association 109 (9): 13–21. 
https://doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2017.109.0098.   
260 Maury D. Gaston, Carson Smith, and James C. Hogeland, Pipe inside diameter key to energy efficiency, Journal 
of the American Water Works Association, Volume 106, Issue 6 (June 2014), 
https://doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2014.106.0084. 

2-60 
 
ii. 
EPA should undertake or fund studies needed to conduct the analyses that 
state and local governments need to make sound decisions about replacement 
service lines 
We urge EPA to develop the information that is needed to ensure sound decisionmaking 
regarding replacement service line materials.  At a minimum, this information must take into 
account the potential that replacement materials would result in leaching or contamination of 
drinking water with toxic substances, including micro- and nanoplastics.   
As a starting point, we urge EPA to conduct a systematic review of the literature related 
to lifecycle health impacts of the various materials that could be used as replacement service 
lines.  If EPA identifies data gaps that would hinder it from providing well-reasoned guidance to 
state and local governments about the life-cycle impacts of different types of service lines, it 
should ensure that such data gaps are filled.  Among other sources of authority to conduct or 
fund information development about toxic substances leaching into drinking water from plastic 
pipes, EPA can rely on TSCA section 10(a),261 which allows EPA to conduct such research, 
development, and monitoring as is necessary to carry out TSCA, including via contracts and 
grants.262 
We also urge EPA to investigate whether recycled copper can appropriately serve as a 
replacement material for LSLs. We are aware of concerns that at least some recycled copper may 
contain elevated lead levels due to lead solder or leaded brass that is combined with the copper 
during the recycling process.263 If the content of recycled copper includes contaminants that 
would not be appropriate for use in service lines, we urge EPA to consider whether there are 
actions it can take to ensure a stream of recycled copper that can be used in service lines. There 
is emerging science that there are methods available to remove lead from recycled copper.264 
EPA’s Safer Choice Program (part of the Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution 
Prevention) has expertise in “informed substitution” and use of standards to incentivize use of 
more environmentally friendly products and ingredients to minimize the likelihood of unintended 
consequences and seed more circular economies. Conferring with leaders of this program could 
be helpful in developing guidance for state and local governments. 
 
261 15 U.S.C. 2609(a). 
262 Since the plastics that are used to manufacture potential replacement service lines (including the polymers and 
additives) are subject to regulation under TSCA, understanding the impact of these plastics when used in service 
lines on human health and the environment is necessary to carry out EPA’s duties under that law. 
263 Antonia Loibl, Luis A. Tercero Espinoza, Current challenges in copper recycling: aligning insights from material 
flow analysis with technological research developments and industry issues in Europe and North America, 
Resources, Conservation and Recycling, Volume 169,2021,105462,ISSN 0921-3449, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2021.105462; Konstantin Born, Mehmet Metehan Ciftci, The limitations of end-
of-life copper recycling and its implications for the circular economy of metals, Resources, Conservation and 
Recycling, Volume 200, 2024, 107318, ISSN 0921-3449, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2023.107318. 
264 See id.; Hilgendorf S, Binz F, Welter J-M, Friedrich B. Lead removal from brass scrap by fluorine-free 
compound separation. Materials Science and Technology. 2016;32(17):1782-1788. 
doi:10.1080/02670836.2016.1223574. 

2-61 
 
iii. 
EPA should ensure that its drinking water standards and action levels are set 
at optimal values for substances that are likely to enter drinking water from 
all potential replacement service line materials 
To avoid replication of the lead service line crisis that the Proposed Rule is designed to 
correct, EPA should attempt to get ahead of the curve by ensuring that its drinking water 
standards are set at appropriate levels for copper, as well as for all substances that it determines 
may leach from replacement service lines made from all types of plastic that may be used.   
While EPA may not yet have enough information about the universe of substances that 
are likely to leach from plastic service lines, it does have enough information to assess whether 
its copper action level is set at an appropriate level.  It should undertake that analysis without 
delay, and, if necessary, update the level expeditiously.   
Once EPA has an understanding of the substances that leach from plastic pipes into 
drinking water under routine and high-heat conditions, it should reassess the appropriateness of 
existing advisory levels or drinking water standards without delay, and update them as necessary.  
Any substances -- including microplastics -- that do not have standards, should be considered for 
an expedited standard under the “urgent threats to health” authority of the SDWA if 
appropriate.265 or added to the next round of unregulated contaminant monitoring and considered 
for the Candidate Contaminant List and standard development on an expedited basis. 
It is critical that we learn our lesson and take a precautionary approach to preventing 
harm from contamination of drinking water from service lines. 
F. 
Lead Pipe Disposal Concerns 
The tracking of and disposal of lead pipes after removal or disconnection is an issue of 
concern. While EPA need not direct how water systems abandon or dispose of lead service lines 
in the LCRI, tracking such information and making it publicly available are well within the scope 
of the LCRI’s inventory requirements and would only nominally increase the reporting burden 
on water systems performing lead service line replacement. 
Although very little research has directly and specifically examined lead contamination 
from lead pipes left in the ground after disconnection, the extent of soil and groundwater 
contamination from other sources of lead are well studied. For example, the contamination of 
soil and groundwater from lead has been extensively studied in similar situations where lead 
bullets contaminate firing ranges, around industrial lead smelters, or from lead mine tailings. The 
rate that lead pipes will leach into soil and groundwater will vary by soil type and particle size, 
pH, soil chemistry, and the depth of groundwater. In addition, the application of road salts on 
driveways, walkways and roadways will likely accelerate the mobilization of lead into soil and 
groundwater.266 
 
265 SDWA section 1412(b)(1)(D), 42 U.S.C. 300g-1(b)(1)(D). 
266 S. S. Nelson, D.R. Yonge, & M.E. Barber, Effects of road salts on heavy metal mobility in two eastern 
Washington soils,J. of Env’t Eng’g, 135(7), 505-510 (2009) 

2-62 
 
Although one form of disposal entails sending removed lead service lines and connectors 
for disposal and recycling at lead smelters, cost cutting efforts can lead to the abandonment of 
sections of lead pipe in the ground. Such methods to replace lead pipes include the use of a 
directional boring technique that disconnects and abandons the lead service line in place.267 The 
LCRI explicitly contemplates that systems may disconnect and leave in place certain LSLs.268 
While such methods may save costs and disturb less property, the risks associated with leaving 
lead pipes in soil has not been evaluated by water systems or federal agencies.  
Due to the proposal’s inventory requirements, including a deadline for baseline 
inventory, annual updates, and the inclusion of connector materials and locations; as well as with 
data collection requirements as replacement occurs as required or incentivized by the proposal, 
EPA can and should require that all lead service lines and lead connectors  that are not 
completely removed during pipe replacement projects be continually tracked in the 
aforementioned inventories. This information should be required to be made publicly available 
and accessible by address from online databases.  
In addition, public health advocates have identified concerns about the safe disposal of 
removed lead service lines, particularly when lead wastes are transferred abroad for recycling.269 
It would be tragic if well-intended efforts to rid the United States of the scourge of lead 
poisoning have the unintended consequence of contributing to increased lead poisoning in 
communities near disposal, recycling and waste-handling facilities, and among workers at those 
facilities, in the United States. Similarly, it would be unacceptable if the removed LSLs were 
sent to other countries that receive and process lead wastes (many of which likely have even 
more inadequate environmental and public health safeguards for disposal and recycling of lead 
than the United States). Water systems that remove LSLs need guidance on the safest approach 
to disposal and/or recycling taking all factors into account (e.g., public health, the environment, 
cost, preserving critical resources).  It is critically important that EPA discourage export of 
removed LSLs and connectors to other countries as a way around U.S. laws, regulations, and 
enforcement. We also urge EPA to expeditiously propose scientifically-grounded guidance on 
the best approach to disposal and/or recycling--and to seek public comment on that guidance so 
that workers and communities can provide input.  .   
In addition, the LCRI should add to proposed section 141.84(c)270 a requirement that 
each water system include in its service line replacement plan an explanation of how it intends to 
dispose of removed lead service lines and connectors. Also, the LCRI should add a requirement 
that water systems track and record for each address where a LSL is removed or disconnected 
and abandoned how it was disposed of, and report a summary of how they actually disposed of 
removed lead service lines and connectors in the annual service line replacement reports required 
 
267 Denver Water, Lead Reduction Program, Lead Service Line Replacement, https://www.denverwater.org/your-
water/water-quality/lead/lead-service-line-replacement-program (last visited Feb. 1, 2024).  
268 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,066 (Dec. 6, 2023) (§ 141.84(d)(6)(iii)(B)-(C)). 
269 See, e.g., Basal Action Network, Lead Pipes Removed in the U.S. May Result in Poisoning Abroad, April 20, 
2022, https://www.ban.org/news/2022/4/20/lead-pipes-removed-in-the-us-may-result-in-poisoning-abroad (last 
visited Feb. 4, 2024).  
270 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064.  

2-63 
 
by proposed section 141.90(e)(8).271 And, for transparency, all service line replacement plans 
and annual service line replacement reports must be made publicly available.  
G. 
Service Line Replacement Plans (§ 141.84(c)) 
We support EPA’s stated goal driving the development of replacement plans: to ensure 
the equitable replacement of all LSLs and GRRSLs.272 As discussed in detail throughout these 
comments, the best way to ensure equitable replacements of these lines is to require systems to 
pay for the replacements. We’re also supportive of the LCRI’s recognition that community 
engagement is important during the creation of replacement plans,273 however; the final LCRI 
should require at least two public meetings so that community members can engage on topics on 
which they are the actual experts, such as how to best inform renters, for example. We agree with 
EPA that it is crucial to have communications strategies specific to renters, tenants, and property 
owners;274 this is discussed in greater detail in section 8 of our comments on Public Education. 
Other specific suggestions for improving the replacement plans are below. 
i. 
Specific Changes to Replacement Plan Requirements 
The LCRI only requires the development of a replacement plan if a system has “one or 
more lead, galvanized requiring replacement, or lead status unknown service line.”275 The 
development of a replacement plan should also be required when a system has one or more lead 
or lead status unknown connectors. The public health risks of connectors are discussed in section 
2(D)(i) on connectors. 
The LCRI requires replacement plans to create a strategy to prioritize replacements.276 
Consistent with the mandates of the SDWA, the LCRI must instead require the prioritization of 
replacements in areas with “subpopulations at greater risk” from the effects of lead and those 
who are disproportionately impacted by lead exposure,277 and replacements for lines or 
connectors serving schools and childcare facilities. 
The LCRI also states that the plan should include a funding strategy addressing whether a 
system will make customers pay for the portion of the line located on private property.278 This 
must be changed in the final rule so that plans include how the system will cover the cost of the 
full replacement.279 This should include details on funding mechanisms the system will employ 
for full replacements, and how it will address or eliminate any legal barriers to fully replacing 
and funding full replacements. 
 
271 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,081.  
272 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,882. 
273 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,906. 
274 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,925 
275 88 Fed. Reg. 85,064 (§ 141.84(c)). 
276 Id. (§ 141.84(c)(1)(v)) 
277  42 U.S.C. 300g-1 (b)(3)(C)(i)(V). 
278 Id. (§ 141.84(c)(1)(vi)) 
279 See supra section 2(D)(iv). 

2-64 
 
Relatedly, in addition to identifying any “laws, regulations, or water tariff agreements 
that affect a PWS’s ability to gain access” to a line,280 the final rule should require that plans also 
identify tangible steps the system is taking or will take to overcome these obstacles, including 
revising tariffs, bond instruments, or contractual agreements with customers, and working with 
state or local governments to amend laws or regulations restricting access if necessary. The plan 
should include timelines for completing such actions. 
There are two instances when a replacement plan, or at least parts of a replacement plan, 
must be updated: when legal or contractual barriers to full LSLR change, and when material 
validation reveals a problem with the validation method.281 Plans must include a strategy for 
identifying material composition of service lines; this should be updated in the final rule to 
include identification of the material composition of connectors as well. If the validation process 
reveals that the strategy for identifying materials is inaccurate because the error rate is too high, 
the replacement plan must be updated to include a new strategy for materials identification. EPA 
should also require, not merely recommend, that replacement plans are updated if state laws or 
water tariff agreements change during the replacement period. Such changes directly impact 
multiple elements of the replacement plan, such as the standard operating procedure and funding 
strategy. 
Like our suggested threshold for the online inventory requirement, replacement plans 
must be available online if a system serves more than 10,000 persons, and not the proposed 
LCRI’s current threshold of over 50,000. 
Finally, as discussed in section 2(F), replacement plans should describe how systems plan 
to dispose of lead service lines and connectors that are removed or disconnected.  
ii. 
Response to EPA’s Specific Request for Comment 
EPA seeks comment on the 50,000 threshold and whether plans should be updated if state 
laws change. 
The threshold for replacement plan availability online should be lowered to systems 
serving more than 10,000. Plans must be updated if relevant state laws change, and if validation 
reveals a problem with a system’s material identification method. 
 
 
280 Id. (§ 141.84(c)(2)) 
281 Validation considerations are discussed in section 5(C) of our comments. Also, if EPA accepts our 
recommendation in section 5 to require systems to verify the material of unknown service lines sooner than the end 
of the mandatory replacement program, replacement plans also should be updated once a system identifies the 
material of all previously unknown service lines.  

3-1 
 
Section 3: The LCRI’s Compliance Date 
We support EPA’s proposal to begin requiring compliance with certain LCRR provisions 
as scheduled on October 16, 2024. However, EPA should also require compliance with much or 
all of the LCRI less than three years after the LCRI’s promulgation.  
A. 
Background 
In relevant part, section 1412(b)(10) of SDWA provides that “[a] national primary 
drinking water regulation . . . (and any amendment thereto) shall take effect on the date that is 3 
years after the date on which the regulation is promulgated unless the Administrator determines 
that an earlier date is practicable, except that the Administrator, or a State (in the case of an 
individual system), may allow up to 2 additional years to comply with a . . . treatment technique 
if the Administrator or State (in the case of an individual system) determines that additional time 
is necessary for capital improvements.”1  
In the LCRI, “EPA is proposing a compliance date of three years after promulgation of a 
final [LCRI] rule and is proposing that systems continue to comply with the [1991] LCR until 
that date, with the exception of the [2021] LCRR initial LSL inventory, notification of service 
line material, associated reporting requirements, and the requirement for Tier 1 public 
notification for a lead action level exceedance under subpart Q.”2 EPA does not propose a 
universal two-year extension in the LCRI “because EPA has not determined that an additional 
two years is necessary for water systems nationwide to make capital improvements to begin 
compliance with the LCRI.”3 In addition, EPA reasons that “the requirements in the proposed 
LCRI for which capital improvements may be necessary would not be required to be completed 
by the compliance date for the rule. Instead, the compliance date marks the beginning of an 
extended time period for systems to conduct lead service line replacement and install new or 
reoptimized corrosion control treatment under the revised requirements.”4 
We support EPA’s decision to require compliance as planned with the LCRR provisions 
related to the initial LSL inventory, notifications of service line materials, certain reporting 
requirements, and Tier 1 public notification requirements. As EPA has correctly concluded, water 
systems and States have had plenty of time to prepare for these changes, the inventories are an 
essential prerequisite for the LSLRs required by the LCRI, and allowing these LCRR provisions 
to take effect will help protect public health. We also support EPA’s proposal to set a uniform 
compliance date for water systems of all sizes. The LCRI’s essential public health protections 
should not be delayed for any customers. However, for all water systems, some or all of the 
LCRI itself should also take effect immediately or sooner than three years from the promulgation 
date.  
 
1 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(10).  
2 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,967.  
3 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,897.  
4 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,897. 

3-2 
 
B. 
The LCRI’s compliance date should be less than three years after the date 
the rule is promulgated 
Consistent with SDWA, EPA should determine that a compliance date earlier than three 
years after the LCRI’s promulgation is practicable for all water systems. The three-year delay 
between the promulgation of a new national primary drinking water regulation and its 
compliance date is meant to allow water systems and states adequate time to prepare for the new 
regulation, particularly when the regulation requires substantial changes to state regulations, 
water system operations, or capital improvements. However, there are many changes that water 
systems can implement in much less than three years, and the final LCRI should determine that it 
is practicable for the rule, or substantial parts of it, to have a compliance date no later than one 
year after the rule is promulgated.  
At a minimum, for the following reasons, EPA should set a compliance date one year 
after promulgation for portions of the LCRI including corrosion control treatment (CCT) studies 
and optimal corrosion control treatment (OCCT) implementation, public education language 
updates, tap sampling updates, and sampling in schools and child care facilities: 
 The CCT provisions in proposed sections 141.81(d)-(e) and 141.82(a)-(i)5 regarding 
the conduct of CCT studies and the designation and implementation of OCCT should 
be effective no more than one year after the LCRI’s promulgation. Water systems can 
initiate the design of CCT studies compliant with the LCRI starting on day one, and it 
would be inefficient and unnecessary for water systems to continue using old CCT 
study methods for an extra three years. The CCT study design must be customized for 
each water system anyway, so there is no reason to continue using old requirements 
when water systems start a new CCT study after the LCRI’s promulgation date.  
 The LCRI’s public education requirements in proposed section 141.856 should also 
take effect no later than one year after the LCRI’s promulgation. These provisions 
require water systems to distribute critical public health information and require 
primarily updated paperwork and administrative processes that can be implemented 
within a year or less. For example, some of these provisions simply require systems to 
update the mandatory language included in public notifications and consumer 
confidence reports (CCRs). Updating required language is relatively easy to 
implement and requires no new capital improvement investments, especially for 
language that is required to be copied verbatim from the LCRI. Systems should not 
need more than a few months to prepare updated public education materials. And 
unnecessarily delaying the distribution of more accurate and informative public 
education materials fails to protect public health to the extent feasible.  
 The LCRI’s tap sampling requirements in proposed section 141.867 should also take 
effect no later than one year after the LCRI’s promulgation. Like the public education 
language updates, updating sample collection procedures, particularly the addition of 
 
5 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,057-58, 85,059-61.  
6 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,068-73. 
7 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,073-77.  

3-3 
 
fifth liter samples, is a comparatively minor change to existing procedures. It requires 
no new major capital improvement investments and should not require more than a 
few months to implement.  
 The LCRI’s monitoring requirements for schools and child care facilities in proposed 
section 141.928 should also take effect within one year. As proposed, the LCRI mostly 
maintains the LCRR’s requirements regarding schools and child care facilities,9 
which means water systems have had notice of the likely changes and time to prepare 
since 2021. Also, water systems have extensive experience conducting tap 
monitoring, so requirements to sample in schools and child care facilities are not a 
major change from existing workflows and do not require substantial new capital 
improvements. Even if EPA strengthens these provisions as recommended elsewhere 
in our comments, implementing better protections for water that children drink day in 
and day out should be one of the highest priorities of the LCRI due to children’s 
unique vulnerability to lead.  
In addition, the compliance date for water systems to begin mandatory lead service line 
replacements (LSLRs) under proposed section 141.8410 should be one year after the LCRI’s 
promulgation. That would give water systems a full year to update their initial service line and 
connector inventory to generate their “baseline inventory,”11 prepare their service line 
replacement plan,12 and secure funding and, if needed, access permissions for the first year of 
LSLRs. Requiring the mandatory LSLRs to begin less than three years after the LCRI’s 
promulgation is practicable and reasonable for several reasons.  
First, on December 16, 2021, the Biden-Harris Administration announced its action plan 
to “marshal[] every resource to make rapid progress towards replacing all lead pipes in the next 
decade.”13 Among other goals, EPA declared that “[r]eplacing 100 percent of lead service lines 
(LSLs) is an urgently needed action” and that “EPA intends to propose for public comment a new 
rule to revise the LCRR to advance the goals described above.”14 By October 2024, water 
systems will have had nearly three years to begin preparing for more aggressive LSLR 
requirements. Providing an additional three years to prepare for LSLRs after the LCRI’s 
promulgation would be duplicative and unnecessary.  
Second, the structure of the LCRI’s proposed LSLR mandate would require compliance 
based on a three-year rolling average, which means that water systems will have three years after 
the commencement of LSLRs to achieve the required average annual replacement rate of ten 
percent per year.15 Systems would have ample time to catch up if LSLRs in the first year or two 
proceed at a pace slower than ten percent per year. Also, by requiring LSLRs to begin one year 
 
8 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,083-85.  
9 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,956.  
10 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,062-68.  
11 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,062 (§ 141.84(a)(2)).  
12 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064 (§ 141.84(c)). 
13 Fact Sheet: The Biden-Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-lead-pipe-and-paint-action-plan/ (Dec. 16, 2021).  
14 86 Fed. Reg. 71,574, 71,574 (Dec. 17, 2021).  
15 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064-65 (§ 141.84(d)(5)).  

3-4 
 
after the LCRI’s promulgation, compliance with the LSLR mandate would be assessed beginning 
four years after the LCRI’s promulgation, which fits more comfortably within SDWA’s time 
limits for major capital improvements.16  
Third, as EPA itself notes, “there is significant funding available [now] through the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and other sources for LSL identification and replacement.”17 The 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law includes $15 billion in funding dedicated to LSLRs, as well as 
$11.7 billion for the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund that may be spent on LSLR, to be 
made available in installments in fiscal years 2022 through 2026.18 Fortunately, the annual 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law funding is “to remain available until expended,”19 which means 
that the appropriations are “available for obligation for an indefinite period.”20 However, if the 
LCRI’s mandatory LSLRs do not begin until late 2027, a year after the final appropriations in the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, there is a substantial risk that water systems waiting until fiscal 
year 2027 to begin LSLRs may not be able to access the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law funding 
because it will have been used up by other water systems that got started earlier. Requiring 
systems to start LSLRs in late 2025, one year after the LCRI’s promulgation, would encourage 
more water systems to seek funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law in fiscal years 2025 
and 2026 when funds are more likely to be available. In addition, there is always a risk that 
Congress may try to claw back unspent funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which is 
another reason to compel water systems to start LSLRs sooner, while the funding is available.  
Fourth, it is imperative that the LSLR-related requirement for water systems to replace 
lead connectors when encountered (in proposed section 141.84(e)21) take effect as soon as 
possible and no later than one year after the LCRI’s promulgation. As proposed, water systems 
are not required seek out and remove known lead connectors. Until this provision goes into 
effect, there is a risk that water systems conducting LSLRs or other infrastructure projects will 
needlessly leave lead connectors in service and will never have any obligation to go back and 
remove them.  
 
16 See 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(10). In the proposed LCRI, LSLRs are not required to begin until three years after the 
LCRI’s promulgation and compliance with the LSLR mandate cannot be measured for another three years, so LSLR 
compliance is first assessed a total of six years after the LCRI’s promulgation. That creates a question about whether 
the regulatory structure satisfies the requirements in SDWA section 1412(b)(10), which specify that national primary 
drinking water standards shall take effect no more than three years after promulgation except that EPA may allow up 
to an extra two years for capital improvements (a total of up to five years after promulgation). We believe that the 
essence of the LSLR mandate is the replacement rate of ten percent per year, which can be achieved within SDWA’s 
statutory timeframe with either a one- or three-year compliance date. However, a one-year compliance date coupled 
with the three-year rolling average method for determining compliance with the mandatory LSLR requirement 
would help to eliminate potential questions about the LCRI’s compliance with SDWA’s timing provisions. 
Alternatively, as discussed elsewhere in these comments, setting MCLs for lead and copper would be another way to 
ensure compliance with SDWA, including the statutory timing requirements.  
17 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,897. 
18 Bipartisan Infrastructure Law or, formally, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), Pub. L. No. 117–58, 
135 Stat. 429, at 1399-1400 (Nov. 15, 2021). 
19 Id.  
20 U.S. Gov’t Accountability Office, Office of the General Counsel, Principals of Federal Appropriations Law, Ch. 
2, The Legal Framework, GAO-16-464SP, at 2-9 (4th ed. 2016), https://www.gao.gov/assets/2019-11/675709.pdf.  
21 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,066.  

3-5 
 
Fifth, requiring LSLRs to begin one year after the LCRI’s promulgation, with compliance 
assessed beginning four years after the LCRI’s promulgation (based on the three-year rolling 
average annual replacement rate), would align the LSLR timing with the timing of primacy 
states’ new implementing regulations. SDWA’s primacy provisions require primacy states to 
adopt drinking water regulations at least as stringent as EPA’s national primary drinking water 
regulations no later than two years after a regulation’s promulgation, with a possible extension of 
up to two years.22 Thus, all primacy states would have completed their regulatory updates no 
later than the date when compliance with the LSLR mandate would begin to be assessed.  
* * * * * 
In sum, EPA should require compliance with the LCRI, or at least specified parts of it, no 
later than one year after promulgation. For all of the reasons discussed above, an earlier 
compliance date is practicable and appropriate to protect public health to the extent feasible. An 
earlier compliance date is also consistent with EPA’s practices in other drinking water 
regulations. For example, the national primary drinking water regulation “Stage 2 Disinfectants 
and Disinfection Byproducts Rule” required water systems of all sizes to begin complying with 
aspects of the rule in less than three years and required some systems to begin compliance in less 
than one year.23  
C. 
To ensure compliance with SDWA, the language describing the mandatory 
LSLR requirements should be modified 
Proposed section 141.84(d) of the LCRI sets a default ten-year deadline for mandatory 
full service line replacements, requires annual replacements at a rate of at least 10 percent, and 
specifies that the replacement rate shall be calculated as a three-year rolling average that is first 
assessed at the end of the third year of the mandatory service line replacement program.24 
Functionally, these provisions create a treatment technique that, unless exceptions apply, requires 
water systems to comply by conducting LSLRs at the rate of 10 percent per year beginning on 
the compliance date of the rule. We believe that structure is compliant with the timing 
requirements in SDWA section 1412(b)(10).25 However, to avoid any questions about how a ten-
year deadline comports with SDWA’s statutory language, EPA should frame the mandatory 
LSLR requirements as an annual replacement rate mandate, the logical consequence of which is 
a ten-year deadline. For example, proposed section 141.84(d)(4)26 should be modified to read: 
Deadline for completing mandatory service line replacement. As a consequence of 
the mandatory replacement rate specified in § 141.84(d)(5), the practical deadline 
for water systems to replace all lead and galvanized requiring replacement service 
lines under the control of the water system is no later than ten years after the 
compliance date specified in § 141.80(a)(3) unless the system is subject to a 
 
22 42 U.S.C. § 300g-2(a)(1). 
23 71 Fed. Reg. 388, 414-17 & tbl. IV.E-1 & fig. IV.E-1 (Jan. 4, 2006). 
24 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064-65 (§ 141.84(d)(4)-(5)).  
25 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(10). 
26 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064. 

3-6 
 
different replacement rate and resulting deadline under paragraphs (d)(5)(iv) and 
(v) of this section. 
Proposed sections 141.84(d)(5)(iv) and (v)27 would need similar modifications to make the 
annual replacement rate the primary requirement and the deadline a logical consequence of the 
replacement rate. By making these modifications, which do not change the essence of the LSLR 
mandate, EPA could clarify that the essence of the LSLR mandate is the ten percent annual 
replacement rate.  
D. 
Responses to EPA’s requests for comment 
EPA seeks comment on “all aspects of the proposed LCRI compliance dates and whether 
it would be practicable for water systems to implement any of the proposed LCRI requirements 
earlier than three years from the date of final action on the proposed LCRI. Specifically:  
1. Whether it is practicable for water systems to implement notification and risk 
mitigation provisions after full and partial service line replacement (§ 141.84(h)), 
notification of a service line disturbance (§ 141.85(g)), and associated reporting 
requirements (§ 141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) upon the effective date of the LCRI.  
2. Whether earlier alternative compliance dates for LCRI are practicable such that water 
systems transition directly from LCR to LCRI in less than three years (i.e., one or two 
years) based on the assumption that water systems would comply with the LCR until the 
LCRI compliance date.  
3. Whether there are other LCRR provisions besides the initial inventory and 
notifications of service line material for which the October 16, 2024 compliance date 
should be retained.”28 
As discussed above, it would be practicable for some or all of the LCRI’s requirements to 
take effect less than three years after the LCRI’s promulgation, and we specifically recommend 
that many or all provisions take effect no later than one year after promulgation. We believe that 
it is practicable for the notification and reporting provisions discussed in EPA’s first question to 
take effect immediately or nearly immediately after the LCRI’s promulgation, because these are 
largely administrative and procedural changes that do not require major capital improvements or 
much time to plan and implement. In response to EPA’s second and third questions, we support 
allowing the specified provisions of the LCRR (plus the LCRR’s Tier 1 public notification 
provisions, as discussed elsewhere in the LCRI) to take effect as planned in October 2024 and we 
believe that all of the LCRI can and should take effect one year after it is promulgated.  
 
27 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,065. 
28 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,038.  

4-1 
 
Section 4. The Threshold for Lead Action Level Exceedances Must Be More Stringent and 
Actions Required After a Lead Action Level Exceedance Should Be Strengthened  
A. 
A lead action level lower than 10 ppb is necessary to prevent harm to the extent 
feasible as required by the SDWA  
 We applaud EPA for proposing to lower the action level (“LAL”) from 15 parts per 
billion (ppb).  If systems exceed the lead and/or copper action level, they must take certain 
actions including optimizing or re-optimizing OCCT, educating or notifying the public, and 
monitoring and treating source water.1 The 15 ppb LAL is not, and never was intended to be, 
health based.2  Rather, EPA set the action level in 1991 at 15 ppb because that was the lead level 
it believed water systems could achieve at the time using corrosion control.3 Yet, EPA never 
lowered the action level after that, despite decades of data showing that water systems using 
corrosion control have achieved and can achieve lead levels well below 15 ppb.4 That EPA has 
now publicly recognized that the LAL must be lowered from the very high level of 15 ppb is a 
necessary step forward.   
 In the final LCRI, however, EPA must lower the LAL much further than 10 ppb—ideally 
to 1 ppb, but no higher than 5 ppb—both to protect health and comply with the SDWA.  Public 
health experts and EPA agree that any level of lead in drinking water presents risk of harm.5  The 
SDWA requires a treatment technique under the LCR to “prevent known or anticipated adverse 
effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible.”6  Lowering the LAL significantly lower 
than 10 ppb will ensure treatment techniques under the LCRI prevent adverse health effects as 
much as is feasible. 
i. 
Lowering the LAL will better prevent adverse health effects 
 Lowering the LAL to only 10 ppb is insufficiently health protective and does not prevent 
adverse health effects of lead to the extent feasib as required by the SDWA.7  Lowering it much 
further would result in more systems having an “LAL exceedance” and thus having to take 
immediate steps to control lead levels and educate the public. EPA has recognized the 
commonsense notion that requiring lead reduction measures at lower lead levels would provide 
greater health benefits.8   
 And EPA’s own analyses confirm that a LAL of 10 ppb is not health protective—
particularly for children, one of the subpopulations most vulnerable to lead exposure.  EPA has 
 
1 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,939, 84,943. 
2 See, e.g., U.S. EPA, Understanding the Lead & Copper Rule (Sept. 2020), 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2019-10/documents/lcr101_factsheet_10.9.19.final_.2.pdf.  
3 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,490-91.   
4 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,940 (majority of water systems do not have LAL exceedances at 15 ppb, nor would they at 10 
ppb); 86 Fed. Reg. at 4200 (citing a 90 percent decrease in the number of large systems exceeding the action level). 
5 88 Fed. Reg. 84,879; Deniz Yeter et al., Disparity in Risk Factor Severity for Early Childhood Blood Lead among 
Predominantly African-American Black Children: The 1999 to 2010 US NHANES, 17(5) INT’L J. ENV’T RESEARCH 
PUB. HEALTH 1552 (Mar. 2020), https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7084658/. 
6 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A).   
7 Id. 
8 88 Fed. Reg. 84,902. 

4-2 
 
estimated that to prevent the blood lead level of thousands of children under age 7 from 
exceeding CDC’s then-“reference value” of 5 μg/dL (elevated childhood blood lead level), their 
drinking water would have to be limited to about 5 ppb each day, on average, to account for the 
totality of their exposures from multiple media (aggregate exposure).).9  Thousands of children 
ages 2 to <6 would have to have the lead in their water limited to about 3 ppb to avoid exceeding 
the current CDC reference value of 3.5 μg/dL.  The EPA analysis also found that for 2.5 percent 
of children from 1 to 7 years of age, blood lead levels will not be below the new CDC reference 
(3.5 μg/dL) even if they have no lead (0 ppb) in water, due to aggregate exposure from all 
sources..10  In other words, there is no margin of safety.  Any lead exposure from tap water is 
expected to put thousands of children under 7 above the CDC reference level.  That is one reason 
the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that drinking water in schools never exceed 1 
ppb of lead.11  EPA is not the only federal agency that recognizes that drinking water that 
contains lead levels as high as 10 ppb unnecessarily and unacceptably endangers health.  The 
FDA requires lead in bottled water to be no greater than 5 ppb.12 
 EPA’s Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
(“economic analysis”) reviews the concentration-response functions for lead and IQ, citing a 
2019 epidemiological study that carried out a pooled analysis of multiple cohort studies that 
evaluated the correlation between blood lead levels and “full-scale IQ (the composite of verbal 
and performance IQ scores) in children 5-10 years old.13 Alarmingly, the study found that not 
only were blood lead levels significantly correlated with IQ loss, but the decreases in IQ loss as it 
related to blood lead levels was highest at lower blood lead levels: average IQ loss of 3.8 points, 
1.8 points, and 1.1 points was associated with blood lead levels of 2.4-10 μg/dL, 10-20 μg/dL, 
and 20-30 μg/dL, respectively.14 That is, blood lead levels that within the CDC and EPA 
reference value (a 3.5-5 μg/dL range) – which is supported by EPA’s own modeling limits, are 
associated with the highest IQ loss among children. This research is consistent with and 
supported by other studies that have found that the most adverse health effects associated with 
lead exposure occur at the low-level blood lead levels.15 As stated above, EPA scientists 
published a detailed research article on modeled blood lead levels and lead concentrations in 
drinking water and taken together with the economic analysis, the proposed LCRI will not 
 
9 EPA Off. Res. & Dev., EPA Tools and Resources Webinar: Multi-Media Modeling of Children’s Lead Exposure 
(2018), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2018-10/documents/multimedia_pb_slides.pdf (citing Valerie 
Zartarian et al., Children’s Lead Exposure: A Multimedia Modeling Analysis to Guide Public Health Decision-
Making 125 Env’tl Health Persp. (2017), https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/10.1289/ehp1605). The CDC reference value 
of 5 micrograms of lead per deciliter (ug/dL) in blood was established in 2012 and was updated to 3.5 ug/dL in 
2021.  See CDC, CDC updates blood lead reference value to 3.5 ug/dL, https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/news/cdc-
updates-blood-lead-reference-value.html . Of course, even that level is not “safe,” since there is no safe level of lead 
exposure. 
10 EPA Off. Res. & Dev., EPA Tools and Resources Webinar: Multi-Media Modeling of Children’s Lead Exposure 
(2018), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2018-10/documents/multimedia_pb_slides.pdf.   
11 Council on Env’t Health, Prevention of Childhood Lead Toxicity, 138(1), Pediatrics (2016), 
https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/138/1/e20161493/52600/Prevention-of-Childhood-Lead-
Toxicity?autologincheck=redirected.  
12 See 21 C.F.R. § 165.110(b)(4)(iii)(A). 
13 88 Fed. Reg. 8500. 
14 Bruce P. Lanphear et al., Low-Level Environmental Lead Exposure and Children’s Intellectual Function: An 
International Pooled Analysis, 113 Env’t Health Perps. 894 (2005), http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/EHP5685. 
15 EPA, Integrated Science Assessment for Lead: External Review Draft, Off. of Rsch. and Dev., at lxxxviii (Mar. 
2023) (“Draft ISA”), at IS-101, https://ordspub.epa.gov/ords/eims/eimscomm.getfile?p_download_id=546539. 

4-3 
 
protect children at an action level of 10 and as demonstrated by (Lanphear 2019) may even result 
in elevated IQ loss for children aged 5-10 years old. 
 These harms also will not be evenly distributed. Black children have the highest median 
blood lead levels. .16  Children living in homes below the federal poverty line had higher blood 
lead levels than children living above the poverty line, and Black children living below the 
poverty line had markedly higher blood lead levels than children in any other demographic 
reported.17 Those disparities are not surprising since people of color are more likely to live in a 
home with a lead service line, and Black children are more likely to live in a home with lead 
paint.18   
 A 10 ppb LAL also unnecessarily exposes tens of millions of older children and adults to 
the risk of harm.  Sixty-one million people in the country are served by water systems with 90th 
percentile lead levels above 5 ppb lead; and 186 million people are served by drinking water 
systems with 90th percentile lead levels above 1 ppb.19  All of those people are at risk of harm 
from exposure to lead in their drinking water.   
 While the proposed rule’s 10-year mandate for the removal of lead service lines by most 
systems, if fully implemented, would be a major step forward, that mandate will not obviate the 
need for other measures to protect health like CCT, public education, and point of use devices 
that would be triggered by a LAL exceedance.  As discussed earlier, the proposed 10-year 
mandate contains many loopholes, some of which will allow certain water systems to take 
decades to remove all service lines and others that will permit and/or result in many lead services 
lines not being removed at all.20  As discussed in the CCT section of these comments, those 
loopholes and several other reasons make CCT following a LAL exceedance necessary to protect 
health.21  The LCR’s LAL is a significant driver for reducing lead exposure, and setting a 10 ppb 
LAL rather than a significantly lower LAL, would not “prevent known or anticipated adverse 
effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible.”22   
ii. 
Lowering the LAL below 10 ppb is feasible 
 Lowering the LAL to significantly below 10 ppb is also feasible.  EPA explains in the 
proposed LCRI how it chose 10 ppb to be the new LAL.23 The primary reason EPA selected 10 
ppb was because it “is supported by past CCT performance data as being generally representative 
of OCCT.”24 EPA states that a 5 ppb LAL “would not be considered generally representative of 
 
16 Indicator B2, Table in ACE: Biomonitoring – Lead, EPA, https://www.epa.gov/americaschildrenenvironment/ace-
biomonitoring-lead#B2; Rocha, A., & Trujillo, K. A. (2019). Neurotoxicity of low-level lead exposure: History, 
mechanisms of action, and behavioral effects in humans and preclinical models. Neurotoxicology, 73, 58-80. 
17 Id. 
18 86 Fed. Reg. 71,574-01, 71,575; Yeter et al., Disparity in Risk Factor Severity for Early Childhood Blood Lead, 
supra note 4 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7084658/). 
19 See Kristi P. Fedinick, Millions Served by Water Systems Detecting Lead, NRDC (May 13, 2021), 
https://www.nrdc.org/resources/millions-served-water-systems- detecting-lead. 
20 See Sections 2.A, 2.C., and 2.D of our comments. 
21 See Section 10.A of our comments. 
22 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
23 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,939-41.   
24 Id. at 84,939.   

4-4 
 
optimized conditions for systems with LSLs.”25 But that is not the applicable test.  The Final 
Rule must be a rule that prevents adverse health effects to the extent feasible.26 And as discussed 
earlier, a treatment technique is “feasible” if it is achievable “with the use of the best technology, 
treatment techniques and other means which the Administrator finds . . . are available (taking 
cost into consideration).”27 As interpreted by EPA and the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, 
“feasible” means “technically possible and affordable,”28 “by large metropolitan or regional 
public water systems.”29  
 EPA has extensive evidence and its own analyses demonstrate that LALs lower than 10 
ppb are technically possible and affordable by large metropolitan or regional public water 
systems. Indeed, according to EPA’s calculations, over two-thirds of water systems already have 
achieved and would continue to achieve 90th percentile lead levels lower than 5 ppb.30 EPA’s 
analysis shows that about 95 percent of larger water systems (serving populations of 10,000 or 
more) would meet a 5 ppb lead action level when they don’t have LSLs.31 Even among those 
large systems that do have LSLs, from 0 to 9 percent of systems (depending upon size) that don’t 
have corrosion control, and about 28-39 percent of systems (also depending on size) with 
corrosion control, would meet a 5 ppb action level.32 As discussed in the lead service line 
replacement section at greater length, the statutory test is whether it is technically possible and 
affordable for large metropolitan systems to achieve the standard, not whether every single 
system currently meets the standard. If the latter were the case, there would be little point in 
adopting the regulation, since every large system would already be meeting its requirements. 
EPA would therefore violate the SDWA if the LAL in the final LCRI is 10 ppb or higher.   
 In addition, EPA determined 35 years ago that lead in water can be reliably measured at 5 
ppb (and has further concluded that when lead is measured in water at 5 ppb, there is a high 
degree of confidence that lead is present at or above that level).33  But as set forth in Section 10.J, 
evidence shows that lead can be reliably measured at much lower levels—as low as 0.5 ppb.34   
 
 
EPA’s bases for lowering the LAL to no lower than 10 ppb also are not reasonable.  As 
mentioned above, EPA’s primary basis is its reliance on “past CCT performance data,”35 which 
violates the SDWA.  Past CCT performance data is not representative of how effective CCT can 
be and EPA is partially to blame.  For example, in the past under the old LCR and the LCRR, 
once a small or medium water system had a lead action level exceedance, under some 
circumstances they were only required to employ CCT to reduce lead levels to the action level 
 
25 Id. at 84,940.   
26 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A).   
27 Id. § 300g-1(b)(4)(D). 
28 City of Portland v. EPA, 507 F.3d 706, 712 (D.C. Cir. 2007). 
29 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,901 (quoting H.R. Rep. No. 93-1185 (1974)); see also Section 2.C. 
30 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,940 (Exhibit 4), 84,941 (Exhibit 5). 
31 Id. 
32 Ibid. 
33 See 86 Fed. Reg. at 4,281-82 (§ 141.2), 4,207-08 (defining Practical Quantitation Level and explaining that that 
level is 5 ppb for lead); 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,942-43; 53 Fed. Reg. 31,516, 31,550 (Aug. 18, 1988). 
34 Section 10.J. 
35 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,939. 

4-5 
 
(15 ppb).36 The original LCR and LCRR did not require those systems to get their lead to a level 
as low as possible.37 (The LCRI improperly does the same.38)  If EPA had required them to 
employ CCT to reduce lead levels to as low as possible, in line with SDWA mandates, past CCT 
performance would likely have been better.  
 It also is not reasonable because the 1991 LCR’s CCT requirements have not kept up 
with advances in corrosion control science. For example, it is now known that polyphosphate- 
and silicate-based corrosion inhibitors are ineffective for controlling lead release, and that 
orthophosphate should be tested across a broader range of dosages.39 As a result, systems that 
conducted CCT tests under the 1991 LCR requirements may not have actually identified an 
effective, let alone optimized, corrosion control treatment. It is nonsensical to base the LAL on 
results obtained by systems that are relying on outdated, demonstrably ineffective CCT options. 
To base the lead action level on water systems’ past illegal and non-health protective actions 
would be “rewarding” the systems for failing to abide by the LCR and failing to employ modern 
scientific knowledge to protect consumers.   
 Another reason EPA sets forth for not proposing a LAL lower than 10 ppb is because it 
“found that requiring small and medium water systems to install OCCT regardless of their tap 
levels would impose ‘an unworkable administrative burden upon States’” and strain resources for 
the water systems.40 That is because small and medium systems with limited resources constitute 
the overwhelming majority of systems, (naturally) more systems would have LAL exceedances, 
and those additional exceedances would trigger CCT requirements that strain limited resources 
of both the states and those water systems.41  But this concern is irrelevant under the statute, 
which requires EPA to base its determination of feasibility on what large systems can achieve. 
Moreover, the concern about unworkability for smaller systems is unfounded for several reasons.  
 First, those types of reasons are why the proposed rule permits small systems to avoid 
CCT altogether and choose other options for controlling lead.42 And small systems permitted to 
choose alternative options constitute more than 82 percent of the “small and medium systems” 
over which EPA expresses concern.43  If CCT would be too difficult for small systems, such 
systems could choose another option, avoiding CCT altogether.  And for medium systems and 
the subset of small systems that want to implement CCT, EPA should develop ways to mitigate 
the burdens for such systems and states, rather than enacting a rule that would require fewer 
systems to implement CCT.  Requiring more systems to do CCT would generate substantial 
public health benefits and, conversely, relieving small and medium systems from CCT would 
create substantial, unnecessary public health risks and fail to protect public health to the extent 
feasible.   
 
36 LCR, 40 C.F.R. 141.81(c)(1991), as in effect under the original LCR, see, 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460, at 26,550 (June 7, 
1991), and LCRR at 86 Fed. Reg. at 4,285 (LCRR revising 40 C.F.R. 141.81(c)). 
37 See LCR and LCRR versions of 40 C.F.R. 141.81(c), cited supra note 36; see also infra Section 10.B. 
38 See infra Section 10.D. 
39 Infra Section 10(C)(i), (E)(iv).  
40 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,941-42 (quoting 56 Fed. Reg. 26,492).   
41 Id.  
42 See id. at 84,945; infra Section 6. 
43 Id. at 84,941-42 (40,113 of 48,513 = 82 percent).   

4-6 
 
 There are several ways EPA has proposed to and could mitigate the burdens on water 
systems and States.  EPA’s proposed section 141.82(c)(3) allows water systems to evaluate 
corrosion control treatments using “analyses based on documented analogous treatments with 
similar size systems that have similar water chemistry and similar distribution system 
configurations.”44 We propose transparency requirements for CCT studies in Section 10.C.iv. of 
our comments in part to make it easier for small and medium water systems to take advantage of 
this option for CCT studies. And in Section 10.D. of these comments, we propose that EPA 
conduct, or require States to conduct, systematic corrosion control studies using typical, 
representative source waters across the country (or their state) to provide a robust baseline of 
CCT studies that states and water systems could use to extrapolate to treatment requirements for 
individual small- and medium-size systems.  In that section we also propose modified procedures 
for determining OCCT for small and medium systems that are meant to make it quicker and 
easier for those systems to complete their initial CCT requirements following LAL exceedances 
and that would rely on State expertise for CCT determinations.45  
 EPA’s administrative concerns, therefore, are largely unwarranted.  Even if warranted, 
however, such concerns should not and cannot legally override the countervailing requirement to 
protect health to the extent feasible.     
 EPA concludes a 10 ppb LAL would prevent known or adverse health effects to the 
extent feasible,46 but knows that it uses an improper test to reach its feasibility conclusion.  The 
basis for EPA’s conclusion is that a 10 ppb LAL “would ensure the treatment technique of CCT 
is feasible for small and medium systems.”47  But as noted above, and as EPA acknowledges 
earlier in the proposed rule, feasibility means feasible “by large metropolitan or regional public 
water systems.”48  EPA therefore must set the LAL in the Final Rule significantly lower than 10 
ppb and at a level that meets the applicable standard.           
B. 
Responses to EPA’s requests for comment about the Lead Action and Trigger 
Levels 
1. EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of 0.010 mg/ L, as well as 
comment and supporting data on alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, with 
regards to generally effective corrosion control treatment and identifying systems most at 
risk of elevated levels of lead in drinking water.  
 The final LCRI should include a lead action level of no higher than 5 ppb because that 
will better prevent adverse health effects and is feasible.49  
 
44 Id. at 85,059 (§ 141.82(c)(3)). 
45 See Section 10.D.   
46 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,943. 
47 Id.   
48 Id. (quoting H.R. Rep. No. 93-1185 (1974)).    
49 See supra Section 4.A.  

4-7 
 
2. EPA is also seeking comment on the use of the action level to determine when additional 
public education is required, and the use of the same action level for public education as 
for the CCT provisions.  
 
We agree that enhanced public education requirements should be triggered by tap 
sampling results that exceed a specified threshold. In our CCT section, we have proposed 
alternative triggers for CCT requirements that are feasible and would be more health protective.50 
We agree that using the same trigger levels for CCT and for enhanced public education is logical 
and would help to simplify the rule.  In our public education section 8.E, we have more specific 
suggestions about the manner and frequency of the public education following that trigger.51  
3. EPA is seeking public comment, data, and information on the anticipated benefits and 
tradeoffs, including for public health and administrative burden on systems and States, if 
more small and medium systems are required to conduct a detailed OCCT demonstration 
and take other actions if they exceed the proposed action level of 0.010 mg/L or other 
lower values, while water systems are simultaneously required to mandatory conduct full 
service line replacement. 
 
As discussed above, EPA is legally required to include in the final rule a LAL lower than 
10 ppb, and legally required to mandate CCT upon an LAL exceedance.  We also believe that at 
both a 10 ppb or a lower LAL, the anticipated benefits of requiring detailed OCCT 
demonstration and other actions upon a LAL exceedance for small and medium system outweigh 
the administrative burdens while those systems simultaneously conduct lead service line 
replacement.  As discussed above (and also in sections 10.C.-E), requiring CCT upon an 
exceedance would generate substantial public health benefits and we propose several ways to 
mitigate the burdens for water systems and states. Similarly, while we recommend public 
outreach activities be conducted by all systems independently of the LAL, enhanced public 
outreach will be beneficial at both 10 ppb or a lower LAL.52  
C. 
Additional requirements for systems with multiple lead action level exceedances  
EPA proposes that filters be made available to consumers in water systems that have had 
multiple LAL exceedances.  This is necessary and we support this.  However, for the reasons 
discussed below, EPA must also require water systems to provide filters to consumers after even 
one LAL exceedance and those filters must be provided at no cost to the consumer.    
i. 
EPA must require water systems with a lead action level exceedance to 
provide filters to all consumers in the system 
We applaud EPA for recognizing that consumers in water systems with LAL exceedances 
need protection from lead exposure while “during the period that the system completes the 
longer-term actions that are expected to resolve the underlying problem,” like OCCT and 
mandatory LSLR.53  EPA has stated that selecting and implementing OCCT generally takes 
 
50 See infra Section 10.E. 
51 See infra Section 8.E. 
52 See infra Section 8.E.i, iv.  
53 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,954.   

4-8 
 
about 5 years.54  And the mandatory LSLR proposal would require completion within 10 years 
for most systems, and no fewer than five.  Accordingly, it is imperative to reduce exposure in the 
short term while those activities are completed because an LAL exceedance indicates a present 
worrisome lead exposure problem throughout the system. 
We also agree with EPA that pitcher filters or point of use filters are what water systems 
should be required to provide consumers in such situations with high lead exposure.  The SDWA 
requires treatment-technique regulations to “prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the 
health of persons to the extent feasible”55 and grants EPA the authority to regulate public water 
systems to achieve this.56 And Congress has explicitly required EPA to consider and list POU 
devices that can be used, subject to certain safeguards, as an available technology for small 
systems to comply with drinking water standards.57  NSF/ANSI requires filters for lead to reduce 
lead levels to 5 ppb to receive certification.58 Thus, certified filters provide immediate assistance 
for preventing adverse health effects from lead exposure and will allow consumers to continue 
using water from the utility rather than switch to costly bottled water. 
This protection, including under EPA’s reasoning, is necessary for consumers any time 
there is a lead action level exceedance. EPA perplexingly proposes that water systems provide 
filters to consumers where there is an action level exceedance, but only when the system has 
exceeded the LAL at least three times in a rolling five-year period.59  But this makes no sense.  
Even one LAL exceedance, which means that the water at more than ten percent of sampled sites 
have lead levels higher than 10 ppb (under the proposed LAL), is alarming given that exposure 
to any level of lead presents risk.  It also indicates that corrosion control treatment and/or other 
measures a water system is taking is not effective for controlling lead.60   
EPA further reasons that filters should be made available to consumers with multiple 
exceedances “because those exceedances are indicative of recurring high lead levels that warrant 
additional measures while OCCT and mandatory service line replacement are being 
implemented.”61  But that logic is not limited to multiple action level exceedances.  EPA states 
that “[t]ap sampling . . . is intended to determine the effectiveness of CCT.”62  So once there is 
an LAL exceedance, there is indication that CCT is not effective.  That CCT will remain 
ineffective until new measures such as OCCT and LSLR are implemented, which, as stated 
above, EPA estimates will take at least five years.  The results of two more sampling periods 
within those five years will therefore shed no new light on the ineffectiveness of the current 
CCT.  The consumed water will remain ineffectively treated until new measures are 
implemented.  Thus, EPA’s reasoning that filters should be provided because measures to reduce 
the lead level in such circumstances will not reduce them right away apply equally to a system 
 
54 Id. at 84,937. 
55 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
56 Id.  § 300g. 
57 See  id. § 300g-1(b)(4)(E)(ii).   
58 Nat’l Sanitation Found., Drinking Water Treatment Units Must Now Meet Stricter Requirements for Lead 
Reduction Certification, https://www.nsf.org/news/drinking-water-treatment-units-stricter-requirements-lead-
reduction-cert. 
59 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,072-73 (§ 141.85(j)).  
60 See id. at 84,939. 
61 Id. at 84,954.   
62 Id.  at 84,929. 

4-9 
 
with one LAL exceedance as a system with three exceedances within a five-year rolling period.  
EPA also knows that subsequent testing does not, and would not, demonstrate that lead levels are 
lower/better controlled than in the last sampling period.  EPA understands that lead levels vary 
greatly day to day, even at a single site,63 so sampling on different days without any change in 
treatment reveals little.  Again, there would be no reason to believe that risk has diminished 
when, as EPA explains, the actions begun after the LAL exceedance would not have produced 
any results yet.  Thus, providing filters only after three exceedances within a five-year rolling 
period simply subjects consumers drinking water with ineffective CCT to high levels of lead in 
their water for two or more additional sampling periods.  EPA therefore should require any water 
system with one LAL exceedance to provide filters to all of its consumers.  If EPA insists on not 
requiring filter provision until there has been more than one LAL exceedance, it should require 
their provision after two LAL exceedances in a five-year rolling period rather than three.   
ii. 
Filters should be delivered to all consumers in the water system at no 
charge  
As discussed in more detail below, for the required filter provision after LAL exceedances to 
be effective, water systems must be required to deliver filters to all consumers in the water 
system and continue delivery of cartridges until there is evidence that very high levels of lead 
have abated, all at no cost to the consumers.  Consumers must also receive instructions and 
information about proper installation and maintenance of their filters. 
The Federal Register Notice for the proposed LCRI contains ambiguous language when 
describing EPA’s proposal regarding the provision of filters for multiple exceedances.  More 
specifically, the provision makes it unclear whether water systems with multiple exceedances 
must provide filters for free.  The relevant proposed language for Section 141.85 states: 
Water systems with multiple lead action level exceedances, as specified in 
paragraph (j)(1) of this section, must conduct annual public outreach and 
make filters certified to reduce lead available as specified in paragraphs 
(j)(2) through (6) of this section.64   
Paragraph (j)(2) then says: 
No later than 60 days after the tap sampling period in which a water system 
meets the criteria of paragraph (j)(1) of this section, a water system must 
make available to all consumers pitcher filters or point-of-use devices 
certified by an American National Standards Institute accredited certifier 
to reduce lead, six months of replacement cartridges, and instructions for 
use. A water system must continue to make replacement cartridges 
 
63 Id. at 84,907; see also 2021 EPA Emergency Administrative Order for Clarksburg Water Board ¶¶ 18-19, 23, 
CWA-03-2021-0110DS (U.S. Env’tl Prot. Agency July 14, 2021) (showing large variability in sampling at same 
site, including one residence sampling at 20.3 ppb one day and then 8,940 ppb 5 days later), 
https://yosemite.epa.gov/OA/RHC/EPAAdmin.nsf/Filings/5D20FEB828000B458525871300486662/$File/Clarksbu
rg%20Water%20Board.%20PWS%20Emergency%20Administrative%20Order.%207.14.2021.pdf. 
64 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,068 (§ 141.85) (emphasis added).   

4-10 
 
available until the system may discontinue actions in accordance with 
paragraph (j)(6) of this section.65   
But the proposal fails to clarify whether “make available” means solely to alert consumers to a 
place where they can purchase such filters or means make the filters available to consumers at no 
cost to them.    
Other regulatory language and the preamble do not clarify this ambiguity, but rather add 
to the confusion.  For example, section 141.85(j)(3) requires water systems to submit a “filter 
plan” that describes “delivering filters when requested by the consumer,” and subsection (j)(4) 
mandates community outreach that includes “how to obtain a filter certified to reduce lead” as 
required by (j)(2), both of which seem to imply that consumers could receive filters at no cost.66  
The applicable request for comment also implies that water systems would not charge consumers 
for filters. EPA seeks comment on an alternative approach of delivering filters and replacement 
cartridges to every household,67 implying that that mechanism would be at no cost to the 
consumer.  EPA mentions that some have raised concerns that that alternative might waste staff 
and financial resources since not every household will opt to use the filter.68  The absence of 
mentioning the financial differential between allowing consumers to pay when requested and 
delivering to all consumers at no cost supports an inference that the proposed provision means 
make filters available at no cost.  Finally, the corollary reporting provision refers to reporting the 
number of filters “provided.”69  The term “provided” is used both in that same subsection and 
elsewhere in the proposed LCRI when filters, public education materials, and other items are 
presumably provided for free.70       
But the Federal Register notice contains language that points to the opposite 
interpretation.  When describing water systems with multiple exceedances making certified 
filters “available” to all consumers, the preamble also says “EPA anticipates that systems would 
also plan for providing filters and cartridges at no direct cost to low-income consumers, at a 
minimum,”71 implying that water systems are permitted to charge customers for filters they make 
“available.”       
At a minimum, EPA must clarify the language in the final LCRI so that the meaning is 
clear.  And for the provision to have any meaningful effect, that clarification must be a mandate 
that filters be provided to consumers in a water system with a LAL exceedance at no cost.  If the 
filter requirement allows water systems to make consumers to pay for the filters, the provision 
will have little practical effect other than reinforcing current inequities where lead exposure will 
be addressed for people with economic means, and not for low-wealth persons, a result that 
 
65 Id. at 85,072 (§ 141.85(j)(2)) (emphasis added).   
66 Id. (§ 141.85(j)(3)-(4)); see also id. at 85,088 (§ 142.14(d)(8)(xvi)) (referring to the proposed program of making 
filters “available” as “filter distribution plans”).   
67 Id. at 84,955. 
68 Id. 
69 Id. at 85,082 (§ 141.90(f)(10)(i)).   
70 See, e.g., id. at 85,082 (§ 141.90(f)(10)(ii)) (public education materials), 85,086 (§ 141.93(c)(1)(B)) (small water 
systems providing POU filters as alternative to CCT), 85,067 (§ 141.84(h)(iii)) (partials). 
71 Id. at 84,955. 

4-11 
 
disproportionately affects people of color.72 We also oppose allowing water systems to provide 
filters at no cost only to low-wealth consumers.  Any such program would require eligible 
consumers to submit documentation to show their income level, adding more barriers to 
protecting their health.  Protection from lead exposure in drinking water also is a public health 
issue that EPA should be seeking to eradicate for all. 
We further suggest that EPA adopt a program that contains the following requirements.  
Within 30 days following a lead action level exceedance, water systems must deliver filters 
independently certified to meet NSF/ANSI standards to reduce lead, with instructions and 
cartridges sufficient for one year to all consumers.  Given: the risks associated with lead 
exposure; the immediate effectiveness of filters in the short term; the limits of any outreach 
campaign; and, the lack of transportation for some people, delivery should be required rather 
than notification that filters can be picked up somewhere. (If EPA does not include an automatic 
delivery mandate in the final rule, it should require pickup be established at a one or more 
centralized location(s) and that the water system offer an easily accessible way to request 
delivery of filters, and deliver filters and supplies when requested.  The water system should be 
required to continue delivering cartridges unless and until it has taken additional actions to 
reduce lead levels and has two consecutive sampling periods without an LAL exceedance.  
Finally, EPA should make publicly available on a website educational videos explaining how to 
install and maintain filters and cartridges (or require water systems to make such videos) and 
require water systems to include a link to those videos in materials it delivers with the filters.  
Experience in Flint, Michigan following their lead-in-drinking-water crisis shows that numerous 
people were not able to install filters and/or change cartridges without assistance.73  Thus in 
order for filters to have the effect intended, it is important that EPA include in the final rule 
mechanisms to ensure that people who receive filters can access filter instructions and know that 
such instructions are available.         
D. 
Responses to EPA’s requests for comment about Additional Requirements for 
Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances 
1. Whether water systems should be required to take additional actions when the system 
exceeds the lead action level multiple times and if so, what actions are appropriate and 
feasible, and when these additional actions should be required under the LCRI.  
 
As discussed above in Section 4.C.i, additional actions should be required for not only 
multiple LAL exceedances, but after one exceedance.  As discussed in Section 4.C.ii, those 
actions should include the delivery of filters and related materials.  In our public education 
 
72 See Env’t Def. Fund & Am. Univ. Sch. of Pub. Affairs, Lead Pipes and Environmental Justice: A study of lead 
pipe replacement in Washington, DC 6-7 (Mar. 2020), 
https://www.edf.org/sites/default/files/u4296/LeadPipe_EnvironJustice_AU%20and%20EDF%20Report.pdf; see 
also, Environmental Justice section of these comments, infra section 15, for additional citations and details.   
73 See, Concerned Pastors for Social Action, 217 F. Supp. 3d 960, 974 (E.D. Mich. 2016) (describing witness 
testimony from crisis responders that as many as 52% of homes visited in Flint had residents who had various 
problems installing filters); Hr’g Tr. 27:16-51:2, 47:14-49:1, Concerned Pastors for Social Action v. Khouri, No. 
16-10277 (E.D. Mich. Sept. 14, 2016), ECF No. 95 (Testimony of Michael Hood) (Executive Director of frontline 
crisis intervention humanitarian relief agency reporting on various issues Flint residents experienced with correctly 
installing and maintaining filters and cartridges, noting that 52 percent of the hundreds of homes organization visited 
had filter problems).  

4-12 
 
section, we have suggestions about the manner and frequency of the public education following a 
LAL exceedance.  See Section 8.E.  In our CCT section, particularly Section 10(E), we have 
suggestions about the contours of CCT that should be required after one or more LAL 
exceedances.  
2. Whether EPA should use three action level exceedances in a five-year period for 
identifying systems with multiple action level exceedances where additional action is 
warranted and, whether additional actions should be required sooner, or later, than the 
five-year period, or whether EPA should use a modified metric (number of consecutive 
action level exceedances in a set time period) or a different metric entirely (i.e., based on 
one or more factors other than the number of action level exceedances in a set time 
period). 
 
As discussed above in Section 4.C.i, EPA should require additional actions, such as the 
delivery of filters to all consumers at no charge, to occur after a water system has one LAL 
exceedance.  
3. The proposed public education activities after a system exceeds the lead action level 
multiple times. EPA is specifically seeking any information, data, or analysis on whether 
the proposed public education activities support preventing adverse health effects in this 
situation. EPA is also requesting comment on whether systems should be required to 
conduct more than one (e.g., two or three) of the public education activities proposed.  
 
As described in more detail in Section 8.E.i, some of the proposed public education 
activities may be ineffective without additional criteria (e.g. for town hall meetings, publicity and 
notice requirements). Because face to face, individualized contact tends to be more effective than 
other outreach activities, we would encourage EPA to require water systems to contact customers 
by two of the following options: phone, text, email, door hanger, or through an outreach activity 
in partnership with a local community organization. 
4. Whether EPA should require water systems to make filters certified to reduce lead and 
replacement cartridges, along with instructions for use, available to all consumers within 
60 days of a system having multiple action level exceedances and whether there are any 
supporting or contrary data on whether the proposed filter requirement would be 
protective of public health.  
As described above in Section 4.C.ii, within 30 days following a LAL exceedance, water systems 
should be required to deliver filters  independently certified to meet NSF/ANSI standards to 
reduce lead and replacement cartridges, along with instructions for use, to all consumers at no 
charge, and continue to deliver replacement cartridges.  Because those filters would reduce lead 
levels to 5 ppb74 in a water system where more than 10 percent of sites sampled exceeded 10 
ppb, the filter requirement would be more health protective than not providing filters.    
 
74 See supra Section 4.C.i.  

4-13 
 
5. The proposed requirements for systems to develop a filter plan and submit to the State 
after the system has multiple action level exceedances for the first time, and whether EPA 
should require systems to take additional actions to facilitate filter distribution.  
 
We agree that water systems should develop a filter plan and submit it to the State.  Our 
suggestions for additional required actions are set forth above in Section 4.C. 
6. Alternative requirements for systems with multiple action level exceedances to provide 
filters to their consumers, such as requiring water systems to provide filters and 
replacement cartridges to consumers served by an LSL, GRR service line, or unknown 
service line or to all consumers, or to require systems to consult with the State upon 
meeting the criteria for multiple action level exceedances, after which the State 
determines the appropriate action to reduce lead exposure.  
 
We support requiring water systems to deliver filters at no charge to all consumers in the 
system following an LAL exceedance.  While such filters must, at a minimum, be delivered to 
consumers with LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines, they should be delivered to 
all consumers.  As set forth in Section 2.C.i., many lead connectors do not “count” as a lead 
service line under the proposed rule, but can release lead similar to the way a lead service line 
releases lead, and therefore pose a public health risk. Indeed, in many systems the majority or 
even all of known lead plumbing takes the form of lead connectors.75 But the inventories do not 
include the location of shorter connectors and therefore delivering filters to only those consumers 
with LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines, would clearly leave some consumers 
unnecessarily unprotected from water flowing through materials that can and will leach lead.  
Water systems should also be required to deliver filters to all consumers, regardless of whether 
they have lead service lines, because some water systems with LAL exceedances claim to have 
no lead service lines,76 yet those consumers are still at risk from high lead levels.    
 
We do not support EPA providing States discretion to determine the appropriate action 
following whichever number of LAL exceedances trigger the provision of certified filters.   
Provision of filters can provide immediate protection and reduce levels to 5 ppb.  As discussed 
above, EPA acknowledges that other actions take time to implement.  States should not be 
allowed to authorize the use of other actions in the place of filters that will unnecessarily leave 
consumers exposed to high levels of lead for a longer period of time. 
7. An additional provision providing discretion to States to allow systems with multiple 
action level exceedances to discontinue the proposed required actions sooner if the 
system takes actions (e.g., installs optimized or reoptimized CCT, completes mandatory 
service line replacement) and is at or below the lead action level for two consecutive 
monitoring periods.  
 
75 Simoni Triantafyllidou, U.S. EPA Office of Research & Dev., EPA Tools & Resources Webinar: Identifying Lead 
Service Lines in the Community (Oct. 26, 2022) at slide 9, https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-
11/508%20Compliant%20-%20Identifying%20Lead%20Service%20Lines_Oct%202022.pdf. 
76 See, e.g., Portland.gov, Lead & Drinking Water, https://www.portland.gov/water/water-quality/lead. 

4-14 
 
As stated above in Section 4.C.ii, we propose allowing water systems to discontinue the 
proposed actions if the system takes additional actions and is at or below the lead action level for 
two consecutive monitoring periods.  
8. Whether, in addition to the proposed requirements, EPA should provide States discretion 
to determine appropriate action following a multiple action level exceedance that is 
tailored to meet specific system needs. 
 
We support EPA permitting States to determine additional appropriate actions that a 
water system must take following an LAL exceedance, or multiple LAL exceedances tailored to 
a specific water system as long as those actions must be in addition to, and not in place of, the 
actions required by the final LCRI. In setting the minimum requirements of the LCRI, EPA must 
keep in mind that some states have “not more stringent than federal law” clauses that could 
preclude state officials from taking any additional actions not required by the LCRI.  
E. 
EPA must adopt a higher percentile benchmark than the 90th percentile benchmark 
adopted in 1991 for a LAL exceedance  
The proposed LCRI adopts the same 90th percentile benchmark for an LAL exceedance 
that the original 1991 LCR used. But EPA has failed to address, let alone provide reasoning or 
analysis to support, this wholesale adoption of the 90th percentile as the benchmark for an LAL 
exceedance/actions to reduce lead levels, or explained how it meets the SDWA mandate to 
“prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible.”77 
i. 
A percentile higher than 90th would better prevent adverse health effects  
EPA should adopt a standard more stringent than the 90th percentile because doing so 
would result in more systems having an “LAL exceedance” and thus having to take immediate 
steps to control lead levels and educate the public. This, naturally, would provide greater health 
benefits.   
Using the 90th percentile to calculate lead levels does not “prevent known or anticipated 
adverse effects on the health of persons.”78 A 90th percentile level allows water systems to “have 
several sample values above the action level and still not trigger system-wide treatment.”79 These 
“several sample values” above the LAL have sometimes constituted EPA-declared emergencies, 
yet did not trigger any actions the water system was required to take to reduce lead in its drinking 
water. These examples provide real-life evidence that the 90th percentile does not prevent known 
adverse health effects and can result in a health emergency being unaddressed.   
For example, in Clarksburg, West Virginia, EPA issued an emergency order finding “an 
imminent and substantial endangerment to the health of all consumers” of an entire water 
system.80 The emergency declaration stemmed from sampling at the homes of three children with 
 
7742 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A).  
78 Id.  
79 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,515. 
80 See In re Clarksburg Water Board, CWA-03-2021-0110DS (U.S. Env’tl Prot. Agency July 14, 2021), available at 
https://yosemite.epa.gov/OA/RHC/EPAAdmin.nsf/Filings/5D20FEB828000B458525871300486662/$File/Clarksbu
rg%20Water%20Board.%20PWS%20Emergency%20Administrative%20Order.%207.14.2021.pdf. 

4-15 
 
alarmingly high blood levels that was conducted outside the LCR.81 Yet, if the sampling had 
occurred within the LCR’s regimen it would not have required any immediate corrective action, 
much less an emergency response under 90th percentile calculation. Using a 90th percentile, 
corrective action is required only if samples from more than 10 percent of sites have lead levels 
greater than 15 ppb.82  The Clarksburg Water Board serves 17,686 people. The Board generally is 
required to sample at least 60 sites.83  At the time of the children’s elevated blood lead levels, the 
Board was on reduced monitoring, thus requiring samples of at least 30 sites.84 Thus, there would 
have been a lead action level exceedance requiring corrective action only if at least 4 samples 
measured greater than 15 ppb.  If, however, the benchmark had been the 95th or 98th percentile, 
those 3 samples under LCR sampling would have constituted a LAL exceedance requiring 
corrective action.85 
Similarly, in Flint, according to a memo from the Acting EPA Regional Administrator 
(RA) for Region 5, the 90th percentile sampling results failed to flag a problem despite 
extremely high lead levels in many homes.86 As the Region 5 memo notes, 
LCR sampling results for Flint were 6 ppb in January 2015 and, during the height of the 
crisis, 11 ppb in July 2015. Even as Flint's lead lines were stripped of protective coating 
from the corrosive Flint River water, the LCR did not reveal a need for action; indeed, the 
data tended to allay concerns rather than indicate that swift action was needed.87 
As the EPA Region 5 RA further points out, a major culprit for this kind of problem in many 
cases is the use of the 90th percentile. The memo goes on to note, 
The LCR' s trigger for water system action is based on a calculated 90th percentile value 
for lead (i.e., 90% of the homes sampled must be at or below the lead AL of 15 ppb). The 
remaining 10% of homes may have elevated levels of lead in their drinking water, but do 
not factor into the LCR calculation. They might average out to 16 ppb (just above the 
action level) -- or they might be 1,000 or 4,000 ppb. There is no action required to be 
taken in response to the highest lead levels found,[88] despite the risk of exposure to 
children consuming this water. In effect, the greatest exposure to and harm from the 
highest lead levels in the system is not visible in the LCR framework.  
As noted, high sporadic lead levels are often the result of particulate lead. Such a particle 
may contain thousands to tens of thousands of ppb lead, which in extreme cases can 
 
81 See id. at 4. 
82 See 40 C.F.R. § 141.80(c). 
83 See 40 CFR § 141.86(c). 
84 See id.  
85 Id.  
86 Memo from Robert A, Kaplan, Acting Regional Administrator, EPA Region 5, to Michael H. Shapiro, Acting 
Assistant Administrator, Office of Water, “Region 5's Experience in Implementation of the Lead and Copper Rule,” 
Dec. 29, 2017. 
87 Id. at 5. 
88 The LCRR added a “find-and-fix” provision in an attempt to address individual tap sampling results above the 
action level, which the LCRI largely retains as “distribution system and site assessment.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,944. 
However, as discussed in section 10(I), infra, the LCRI’s proposed provisions are inadequate to fix this problem and 
should be strengthened.  

4-16 
 
result in acute lead exposure for a child in a single glass of water. Because particulate 
lead release is unpredictable, sample results from the same tap in the same home can 
yield low lead on one day and high lead on another….The majority of lead results at this 
home were low except when a lead particle was released into the water, spiking the lead 
level to 1180 ppb at the same kitchen tap that subsequently yielded very low results (2.69 
ppb and 3.1 ppb ). If the highest result is in the top 10% of sample results (i.e., is outside 
the 90th percentile specified in the LCR), it has no regulatory consequence and can be 
ignored.89 
For these reasons, the 90th percentile approach can mask serious lead contamination problems 
and cause a false sense of security for water systems, states, EPA and most importantly citizens 
who unknowingly may be drinking high levels of lead in their water.  
Ten percent of samples over a whole system could equate to thousands or even hundreds 
of thousands of people exposed to high lead levels without requiring the water system to take any 
steps to abate the issue. In New York City, for example, using the 90th percentile could result in 
no corrective action required even if an extrapolated 800,000 households had lead levels greater 
than 15 ppb in their drinking water. This is despite the fact that, as EPA admits, “any lead and 
copper problems found in the sites selected for sampling represent a wider problem within the 
system.”90 Indeed, Clarksburg is not alone in having extreme LAL exceedances posing immense 
danger to the people living there without triggering any meaningful water system response. Flint, 
Michigan, Benton Harbor, Michigan, Washington, DC, and Newark, New Jersey all had 
incidences of extremely high lead detections and subsequent lead in drinking water crises even 
though there was no resolution of these cities’ lead problems, generally for years after serious 
lead contamination was detected in some homes was detected. And unsurprisingly, the 1991 LCR 
“formula” for requiring more than 10 percent of sampled sites to have LAL higher than 15 ppb 
has resulted in lead poisoning of children as a result of drinking water without their water 
systems having a “lead action level exceedance” requiring corrective action.91 
The 90th percentile calculation also raises environmental justice concerns. The harm of 
lead in drinking water is not spread equally: people of color are more likely to have LSLs and 
elevated levels of lead in tap water, and children of color, especially Black children, are more 
likely to have elevated blood lead levels.92  Moreover, people of low-wealth are most likely to 
 
89 Id. at 13. 
90 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,515. 
91 See, e.g., Mona Hanna-Attisha et al., Elevated Blood Lead Levels in Children Associated with the Flint Drinking 
Water Crisis A Spatial Analysis of Risk and Public Health Response, 106 AM J PUBLIC HEALTH 283, 283–90 
(Feb. 2016); Marc Edwards et al., Elevated Blood Lead in Young Children Due to Lead-Contaminated Drinking 
Water: Washington, DC, 2001-2004, 43 ENVIRON SCI TECHNOL 1628, 1618–23 (Mar. 2009); Mary Jean Brown 
et al., Association Between Children’s Blood Lead Levels, Lead Service Lines, and Water Disinfection, 
Washington, DC, 1998–2006, 111 ENVIRON. RES 67, 67–74 (Jan. 2011); Simoni Triantafyllidou et al., Lead 
Particles in Potable Water, 99 J AM WATER WORKS ASSOC 107, 107–17 (JUN. 2007); Rebecca Renner, Out of 
Plumb: When Water Treatment Causes Lead Contamination, 117 ENVIRON. HEALTH PERSPECT. A542, A542–
A547 (Dec. 2009). 
92 See, Environmental Justice section of these comments, infra section 15. 

4-17 
 
live with drinking water violations and poor response to them.93 These same communities are 
therefore most likely to be where spikes of lead exceeding the lead action level occur, but 
because of the 90th percentile approach, these spikes will not trigger a LAL exceedance. Under 
the 90th percentile scheme, up to 10% of these spikes can occur without requiring the water 
system to take any action at all. This puts the health of environmental justice communities 
disproportionately at risk.   
As explained in Section 4.A.i of our comments, even the proposed LAL of 10 ppb is well 
above a truly health-protective level. If the final LCRI allows ten percent of samples to be higher 
than that already-dangerous lead level before requiring the water system to take any action, 
including simply alerting consumers to the danger, it would unnecessarily endanger people’s 
health.  
ii. 
A percentile higher than 90th is feasible 
Because adopting a more stringent percentile than the existing 90th percentile would 
better protect human health, EPA must demonstrate that a more stringent approach is not 
“feasible” under the SDWA.94 EPA has not done so in the proposed LCRI, and it is unlikely that 
it could. In the 1991 LCR, EPA stated that requiring even the largest systems “to attempt to 
reduce lead levels even when 90 percent of tap samples are below [the 90th percentile] is 
pushing the limits of corrosion control treatment technology.”95 But, as EPA acknowledges, 
OCCT has greatly improved over the past 30 years,96 allowing water systems to reduce lead 
levels more easily.97   
Additionally, in 1991 EPA justified using a 90th percentile value because it is simpler to 
calculate than other measures, such as 95th percentile.98 But this “math complication” 
justification is irrelevant under the SDWA’s requirement that EPA prevent adverse health effects 
“to the extent feasible.”99  
As set forth earlier, the test for whether a treatment technique is “feasible” is whether it is 
achievable “with the use of the best technology, treatment techniques and other means which the 
Administrator finds . . . are available (taking cost into consideration).”100 As interpreted by EPA 
and the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, “feasible” means “technically possible and affordable,”101 
 
93 See Kristi Pullen Fedinick et al., Watered Down Justice (NRDC, Environmental Justice Health Alliance and 
Coming Clean, 2019), https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/watered-down-justice-report.pdf; McDonald YJ, 
Jones NE. Drinking Water Violations and Environmental Justice in the United States, 2011-2015. Am J Public 
Health. 2018 Oct;108(10):1401-1407. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2018.304621. Epub 2018 Aug 23. PMID: 30138072; 
PMCID: PMC6137766; David Switzer, Manuel P. Teodoro, The Color of Drinking Water: Class  Race, Ethnicity, 
and Safe Drinking Water Act Compliance, September, 2017, . AWWA, v. 109, No. 9, pp. 40-45, 
https://doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2017.109.0128.   
94 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
95 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,492. 
96 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,939-40. 
97 See 88 Fed. Reg. 84,939-40.  
98 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,491. 
99 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
100 42 U.S.C.  § 300g-1(b)(4)(D). 
101 City of Portland v. EPA, 507 F.3d 706, 712 (D.C. Cir. 2007). 

4-18 
 
“by large metropolitan or regional public water systems.”102  From available data, it appears that 
a 98th or 95th percentile is feasible. EPA says most systems are already complying with at 90th 
percentile action level of 5 ppb and 10 ppb,103 so at a minimum the agency must complete similar 
analysis for higher percentiles, since EPA’s own analysis shows things have changed a lot since 
1991. 
At a minimum, EPA must assess feasibility at more stringent percentiles. The agency is 
authorized to legally retain the 90th percentile only if it demonstrates that higher percentiles, like 
the 99th, 98th, or 95th percentile, are not feasible.  
 
102 88 Fed. Reg. 84901; see also Sections 2.B, 4.A.ii of our comments. 
103 88 Fed. Reg, at 84940-41, Exhibits 4 & 5 (indicating majority of water systems already meet both a 10 ppb and a 
5 ppb action level).  

 
 
5-1 
 
Section 5: Service Line and Connector Inventories  
 
We support EPA’s proposed deadlines for initial and baseline inventories. Water systems 
have been on notice for over four years that EPA would require them to complete an inventory of 
the lead plumbing in their systems,1 and inventories are a necessary foundation for prompt 
LSLR. Moreover, any water system that ever had an action level exceedance was required to 
have completed a materials survey of their system that identified all lead service lines in its 
service area decades ago under the original 1991 LCR requirements.2 The LCRR required 
submission of initial inventories by January 16, 2024.3 On June 16, 2021, systems were given 
notice they would have an additional nine months, until October 16, 2024, to complete their 
inventories.4 Systems have therefore had ample time and notice to complete their inventories by 
October 16, 2024. We also agree that inventories must be publicly accessible and updated 
annually. Lastly, we agree with EPA that inventories must include connector materials and 
locations.  
 
The inventory requirements should be strengthened in the ways below to protect public 
health and fulfill the public education requirement.  
 
A. 
Initial Inventory and Annual Updates 
 
While we support EPA’s requirement that systems update their inventories annually, we 
believe that the updates should include the following information in addition to that listed in the 
proposed rule: 
 The number of partial LSLRs performed in the prior year, where they 
occurred, and why. 
 Whether the system met the required number and/or percentage of full 
LSLRs in the previous year. (yes/no) 
 The number of customers or homeowners that denied access for a full 
LSLR. 
 The number of abandoned LSLs left in the ground. 
 
Tracking the number of LSLs left in place is necessary because of the potential for 
continuous lead contamination to soil and groundwater.5 For example, a recent series by the Wall 
Street Journal detailed soil contamination from underground and overhead communications 
cables.6 It is reasonable to assume lead pipes would pose a similar threat and therefore must be 
tracked. 
 
1 84 Fed. Reg. at 61,684 (Nov. 13, 2019). 
2 As EPA summarized in the original LCR, “One year after a water system is triggered into the replacement program 
[by an action level exceedance], it is required to submit to the State a revised materials evaluation identifying the 
total number of lead service lines in its distribution system.” 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460, 26,507 (June 7, 1991).  
3 86 Fed. Reg. at 4290-91 (Jan. 15, 2021). 
4 86 Fed. Reg. at 31,947 (June 16, 2021). 
5 This issue was raised to EPA by several groups in September 2023. Comment from Basel Action Network et al. at 
1, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300, Information Request for Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) (Sept. 
22, 2023) available at https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-1914. 
6 Pulliam et al., America is Wrapped in Miles of Toxic Lead Cables, Wall St. J., Jul. 9, 2023, available at 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/lead-cables-telecoms-att-toxic-5b34408b?mod=article_inline. 

 
 
5-2 
 
 
B. 
Public Availability of Inventories 
 
We strongly support the requirement for publicly available inventories and believe 
inventories must also be easily accessible by the public. However, we believe more water 
systems are capable of and should be required to post those inventories; water systems serving 
over 10,000 people should be required to post their inventories and annual updates online.7 
Lowering the threshold from over 50,000 people8 down to 10,000 would capture an additional 
3,535 systems,9 ensuring more widespread public education.10 
 
Another way the LCRI should make LSL and GRR information publicly available is 
through the Multiple Listing Service database, which is run by the National Association of 
Realtors (NAR).11 This database provides housing information to thousands of websites such as 
Zillow, and would provide useful information to prospective property buyers, as well as helping 
to create incentives for property owners including landlords to agree to full LSLR. Water 
system’s LSL inventories should be sent to the NAR for use on the MLS so that homes with 
LSLs or GRRs are clearly identified on the MLS, realtor.com, and other NAR-supported sites for 
rental properties (such as Avail) as well as properties offered for sale. These inventories should 
be searchable by address so that realtors and prospective purchasers and renters can easily 
identify whether listings are served by a LSL or GRR. EPA should encourage states to have 
additional transparency for rentals, akin to what some states require for lead paint. Similarly, any 
abandoned LSL left in the ground should be reported on the MLS. 
 
C. 
Validation Deadlines, Material Identification Deadlines, and Inventory 
Validation Requirements 
 
Prompt identification of materials identified as “lead status unknown” and prompt and 
thorough inventory validation is critical to meeting LSLR deadlines and protecting public health. 
EPA must therefore set shorter deadlines for identifying materials identified as lead status 
unknown and for validating inventories. Finally, EPA must also outline minimum requirements 
for when the inventory validation process reveals misidentified service line materials; this is 
discussed in detail below. 
 
i. 
Deadlines 
 
EPA proposes that all unknown materials must be identified by the deadline for 
mandatory replacements.12 This is far too late. The deadline for identifying all materials 
identified as lead status unknown should be no later than three years after rule promulgation. 
 
7 The proposed LCRI notes several small systems (serving fewer than 10,000 customers) with websites devoted to 
informing their customers about LSLR. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,921. 
8 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,062 (§ 141.84(a)(5)(ii)). 
9 EPA, Safe Drinking Water Information System (SDWIS)  
https://sdwis.epa.gov/ords/sfdw_pub/r/sfdw/sdwis_fed_reports_public/21?clear=RIR (accessed Feb. 2, 2024), 
reporting 4,595 systems serving >10,000 people and 1,060 systems serving >50,000 people. 
10 See sections 8 and 14 for additional comments related to public availability of inventories.  
11 Multiple Listing Network, Multiple Listing Service, https://www.mls.com/ (accessed Feb. 1, 2024). 
12 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,063 (§ 141.84(b)(1)(i)). 

 
 
5-3 
 
This will ensure that systems can meet replacement deadlines if unknown materials are 
determined to be lead or GRR, and that systems remove lines in the most cost effective and 
efficient way possible.   
 
EPA’s proposal of a deadline for inventory validation for non-lead service lines of three 
years prior to the final deadline for mandatory LSLR13 also should be changed to three years 
after the rule is promulgated. This is crucial, as many utilities that have started validation of 
“non-lead” service lines have found out that many of these lines are in fact lead or GRR. For 
example, D.C. Water found that 20 percent of the lines identified as historic copper (aka “non-
lead”) were in fact lead.14 This meant the city needed to replace an estimated additional 8,335 
service lines.15 Similarly, Pittsburgh found during their validation process for a model of LSL 
locations that the model misidentified LSLs as “non-lead” 22 percent of the time.16 As discussed 
further below, the LCRI should allow plenty of time for systems to correct inventory 
inaccuracies identified through the validation process and systems must do so long before the 
final deadline for LSLRs to be able to meet the deadline.  
 
Similarly, systems should be required to validate connectors categorized as “unknown” or 
“never lead” by physical inspection. The LCRI would allow systems to categorize a connector as 
“never lead” via “an evidence-based record, method, or technique” but does not require physical 
inspection.17 As discussed above, reliance solely on these methods results in frequent 
misidentification of materials. Therefore, the LCRI must require physical inspection so systems 
at least verify the connector is not currently lead. Connectors are discussed further in section 
2(D)(i). 
 
ii. 
Validation 
 
The LCRI includes a requirement that non-lead pipes must be entered into a “validation 
pool.” Then, depending on the pool size, ranging from <1,500 non-lead lines to >50,000 non-
lead lines, systems must validate anywhere from 20% of the pool to up to 384 lines, respectively. 
This is based on “the number of service lines necessary to achieve a 95 percent confidence 
level”18 that “the results of this inventory validation are representative of the entire validation 
pool.”19 We urge EPA to instead use a 99.9% confidence level, or at least a 97.5% confidence 
level, as typically used in the public health space.20 Proposed section 141.84(b)(5)(ii)21 should be 
 
13 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,063 (§ 141.84(b)(5)(iv)(A)). 
14 Betanzo & Attal, Independent Verification and Validation of D.C. Water’s Lead Free DC Lead Service Line 
Removal Plan: Final Report p. 14 (Sept. 2022) available at 
https://lims.dccouncil.gov/downloads/LIMS/51294/Introduction/RC24-0221-Introduction.pdf?Id=146215. 
15 Id. 
16 Pittsburgh Water & Sewer Auth., Community Lead Response Advisory Meeting, PowerPoint Presentation, slide 
27 (June 4, 2020). 
17 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,917. 
18 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,935. 
19 LCRI Technical Support Document, at 24-25, EPA-HW-OW-0801-0709.  
20 See, e.g., EPA Office of Pesticide Programs, Choosing a Percentile of Acute Dietary Exposure as a Threshold for 
Regulatory Concern 4 (2000), available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-
07/documents/trac2b054_0.pdf (using the 99.9th percentile of the distribution of estimated acute dietary food 
exposures for calculating a threshold of concern for a pesticide). 
21 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,063. 

 
 
5-4 
 
updated to reflect these higher confidence levels and to increase the number of required 
validations accordingly. EPA should also allow systems to physically verify all service lines in 
their system and not rely on modeling and validation pools if they can demonstrate they have the 
resources to physically verify every service line. 
 
EPA must also establish a maximum allowable error rate for validations and prescribe 
what happens if a water system’s inventory of “non-lead” service lines exceeds that error rate. 
The proposed rule is silent regarding what happens when the inventory validation process reveals 
a problem. The final rule should address this in ways suggested below. An example of a 
validation process problem is a system that reports 70,000 non-lead service lines, and therefore 
must validate only 384 lines, but then finds 15 LSLs or GRRs in the validation pool. Or the 
system finds 40 LSLs or more. The final rule must address this. We recommend that when a 
system validates its inventory of non-lead lines, the maximum allowable error rate should be 
zero or, if EPA concludes a non-zero error rate is necessary, no higher than 0.1% (i.e., at most, 
one out of every one thousand “non-lead” service lines may be misidentified). Non-lead service 
lines are required to be identified by “an evidence-based record, method, or technique,”22 and 
accordingly should have an extremely low error rate (ideally zero). Service lines must be 
designated as “lead status unknown” if a water system has “no documented evidence or evidence 
reliably supporting material categorization.”23 Setting a low allowable error rate would incent 
systems to use only highly reliable methods to classify service lines as “non-lead” and facilitate 
compliance with the LCRI’s intent that service lines of unknown composition must be 
investigated. If the validation process shows that a water system’s inventory of non-lead service 
lines exceeds the 0.1% allowable error rate, the system should be required to reassess its entire 
inventory, including treating previously identified “non-lead” lines as unknown lines, and 
identifying and addressing any faulty source(s) of information. The system must also be subject 
to increased oversight and submit to the State and EPA an updated replacement plan and an 
analysis of why LSLs and/or GRRs were misidentified as non-lead and the steps the system is 
taking to correct its inventory and replacement pool going forward. The LCRI must set a 
maximum allowable error rate and consequences for exceeding it because some states prohibit 
their regulations from being more stringent than federal law, so EPA cannot rely on states to 
address validation problems absent enforceable standards in the LCRI.  
 
Additionally, only non-lead service lines that have been visually inspected should be 
exempt from the validation pool. As discussed above, relying on records review alone is 
insufficient, and so those lines identified as “non-lead” via records review alone must be part of 
the validation pool.  
 
Finally, if a customer believes their service line has been misidentified in the inventory, 
the LCRI requires water systems to offer to inspect the line within 60 days.24 This is insufficient 
and should be changed so that the system must inspect the line within 60 days (if the customer is 
available). 
 
 
22 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,062 (§ 141.84(a)(3)(iii)).  
23 Id. (§ 141.84(a)(3)(iv)).  
24 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,835 (§ 141.84(b)(4)). 

 
 
5-5 
 
D. 
Replacements in Systems Reporting Only Non-LSLs 
 
Finally, we support EPA’s requirement that systems with an inventory of only non-LSLs 
(such as those systems that report that mandatory LSLRs have been completed) must fully 
replace any LSL or GRR within 60 days of discovery.25 EPA should clarify that this requirement 
also applies to systems that have a written statement in lieu of the publicly accessible 
inventory.26  
 
E. 
Responses to EPA’s Specific Requests for Comment 
 
EPA has specifically requested comment on four elements of the inventory requirements.  
 
a. In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a threshold of systems serving greater than 50,000 
persons to host the inventory and plan online, which is the required threshold under the LCRR. 
EPA is seeking comment on the size threshold at which systems must host their publicly 
accessible inventory, inventory summary data, replacement summary data, and service line 
replacement plan online, and whether it should be lowered relative to the LCRR requirements. 
 
It should be lowered to at most 10,000. This is addressed in section 5.C.ii above. 
 
b. In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of 
non-lead service lines in their inventory that were categorized using methods other than records 
review or visual inspection of at least two points along the line. EPA is requesting comment on 
the number of validations required, the proposed 95 percent confidence level approach used to 
develop the number of validations required, the criteria for which methods used to categorize 
non-lead service lines should be included in the validation pool (including whether non-lead 
lines categorized based on records should be subject to validation), and the seven year timeline 
for systems on a 10-year replacement deadline to complete the validation requirements. 
 
Non-lead service lines identified through records review should be included in the 
validation pool. The confidence level used to develop the validation pool should be 99.9 percent, 
or at least 97.5 percent. The confidence level for actual validation should be 99.9 percent 
confidence, or at least 97.5 percent confidence level. This is addressed in section 5.C.ii above. 
The validation requirements should be completed no more than halfway through the mandatory 
replacement time period.  
 
c. Comment on establishing a deadline for systems to identify all unknown service lines 
prior to their service line replacement deadlines. 
 
Systems should identify the materials of unknown service lines at least three years prior 
to the mandatory replacement deadline, or halfway through the time allotted for replacements if 
an extension has been granted. This is addressed in section 5.C.i above. 
 
 
25 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,063 (§ 141.84(b)(1)(ii)). 
26 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,062 (§ 141.84 (a)(6)). 

 
 
5-6 
 
d. Comment on a requirement for systems to update their service line replacement plans 
if there are any changes, such as changes to laws and policies applicable to full service line 
replacement. 
 
Systems should be required to update their service line replacement plans if there are 
changes to laws and policies, and these changes should be required to be approved by the 
primacy agency, to ensure that they are at least as stringent as required by state and EPA 
requirements. This is further addressed in the section on Replacement Plans. 
 

6-1 
 
Section 6: Small System Flexibility 
 
A. 
The LCRI’s Approach to Small System Flexibility 
The LCRI would allow systems serving 3,300 people or fewer, as well as non-transient 
non-community water systems (NTNCWSs) to opt out of the requirement to install or re-
optimize optimal corrosion control treatment (OCCT) after a lead action level (LAL) 
exceedance.1 This reduces the threshold for small system flexibility from water systems serving 
10,000 under the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR).2 With the Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI), systems serving over 3,300 people must do OCCT. Systems serving 
fewer than 3,300 can choose between OCCT, point of use (POU) installation and maintenance, or 
replacement of lead-bearing plumbing.3 Because lead service line replacement (LSLR) is 
required for all systems under the proposed LCRI, it is no longer a compliance option.4 
 
We applaud EPA for requiring full LSLR for all water systems, regardless of size. There 
is no safe level of lead exposure, and no foolproof way to ensure that lead does not leach into 
drinking water from LSLs. There are over 40,000 of these smallest CWSs, and it is vital that 
people are not placed at additional health risk due to the size of their water system.5 Subject to 
our concerns expressed in other sections of these comments regarding exceptions to and 
extensions of the LSLR requirement, this mandate has the potential to be a huge step forward for 
public health and make a measurable impact on lead exposure from drinking water in the 
generations to come.  
 
 
We would support EPA maintaining small system flexibility to use POU devices (and 
maintaining the LSLR mandate) for systems serving up to 10,000 people. We echo EPA’s 
concerns that it is “often difficult for small systems to find operators that have the advanced 
skills to implement and maintain CCT” and to retain operators with advanced CCT skills.6 
Where CCT is done improperly, it does not provide measurable health benefits. For this reason, 
we believe POU devices and removal of lead bearing plumbing are likely to be more health 
protective in most systems serving up to 10,000 people.  
 
We support EPA’s proposal requiring States to approve the small system flexibility 
provision before allowing small systems to adopt a treatment technique other than CCT 
requirements.7 In situations where States want to implement additional protections beyond the 
federal rule, they should have the ability to do so. Some States may have the capability to 
perform CCT for all systems. If they have such technical capacity, they should be able to require 
CCT for water systems of all sizes. We therefore encourage EPA to retain this provision in the 
Final Rule.  
 
 
1 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,945. 
2 86 Fed. Reg. at 4,220. 
3 Id. 
4 Id. 
5 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,941. 
6 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,945. 
7 See id. at 84,946, 85,085 (§ 141.93). 

6-2 
 
In order to adequately protect the health of people whose drinking water comes from 
small systems that can choose to not to CCT, however, we urge EPA to strengthen the proposed 
small system flexibility provision in two ways: 1) EPA should strengthen the requirements for 
POU devices to include robust public education and training so people using the filters obtain 
their maximum benefit;8 and 2) EPA should eliminate the nine-year monitoring waiver because 
“lead free plumbing” still often contains lead.9 Waiting nine years between sampling events 
would be insufficient to protect public health. Additionally, we are concerned that systems 
serving 3,300 people or fewer may receive as many as six additional years to implement all 
treatment techniques, including LSLR, if they demonstrate they “need financial assistance.” In 
order to grant an extension, the SDWA requires the State to make a finding that “granting . . . the 
exemption will not result in an unreasonable risk to health.”10 We urge EPA to state that an 
extension for LSLR will always result in an unreasonable risk to health for the people who rely 
on that small system for their drinking water. Finally, as further discussed in the Multiple 
Exceedances of Lead Action Level section of these comments, we encourage EPA to require all 
systems, including small systems, to provide POU devices or pitchers to all consumers where the 
water system has exceeded the LAL. We do not believe that small systems should be required to 
conduct pipe loop studies or other detailed OCCT demonstrations if they are providing POU 
devices as discussed here, and agree with EPA’s proposal prioritizing LSL and GRR replacement 
over conducting these studies.11 
 
B. 
EPA must strengthen requirements for point of use devices 
 
 
We urge the final LCRI to include strong requirements for systems eligible for small 
system flexibility that choose to install POU devices rather than engaging in CCT or lead bearing 
plumbing replacement. Along with the current requirements, we urge EPA to provide robust 
public education and training materials to inform consumers how to properly use the filters. 
These materials should be provided in multiple languages to reach Limited and No English 
Proficient (LEP/NEP) people. EPA should also provide videos, again in multiple languages, 
demonstrating proper use of the filters. Many POU filters that are supposed to attach to a faucet 
do not fit on many modern faucet models, and even if they should fit, experience in many 
communities including Flint and Newark indicates that without education, many faucet-mounted 
filters are incorrectly installed and maintained, negating any public health benefit and potentially 
causing other unintended problems such as bacterial growth. Water systems should be required to 
implement a strong outreach and education program to inform their customers about POU device 
installation, maintenance and use, and of the availability of educational materials when installing 
and using POU devices. We recommend that water systems partner with local organizations 
already present in the users’ community to ensure thorough delivery of this information in a 
culturally-informed and language-accessible manner.  
 
8 See SDWA § 1412(b)(4)(E)(ii), 42 U.S.C. § 399g-1(b)(4)(E)(ii) (requiring detailed water system steps to 
implement POU technology, discussed below in this section). 
9 See SDWA § 1417, 42 U.S.C, 300g-6(d) (“lead free” plumbing can contain up to 0.2 percent lead when used with 
respect to solder and flux, and up to a weighted average of 0.25 percent lead when used for wetted surfaces of pipes, 
pipe fittings, plumbing fittings, and fixtures.)  
10 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,897. 
11 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,938. 

6-3 
 
 
Flint, Michigan, illustrates the pitfalls of POU devices without proper public education.  
Many people were unsure how to use their filters and were wary of relying on them for drinking 
water.12 A volunteer who went door-to-door speaking with Flint residents about accessing safe 
drinking water provided examples in U.S. District Court testimony of a woman who ran hot 
water through her filter, reducing its effectiveness, because she had never been told otherwise.13 
A man who had a faucet that would not take a filter thought he had no alternatives, until the 
volunteer spoke with him about pitchers.14 In Flint, “the access to the information about what is 
there [was] a very informal network of conversations.”15 This lack of formal, thorough public 
education led to misunderstandings and misinformation, further endangering people’s health.  
 
Similarly, EPA noted that a study of POU filter use in Newark found that “67 of the 265 
total PUR filters were not viable for use in the study due to improper installation and 
maintenance by homeowners. It is therefore important that the City implement a strong education 
and outreach program regarding proper installation and operation of filters to help ensure the 
efficacy of the core flushing and filtering recommendation.”16   
 
We recognize the limits EPA cites on CCT expertise for small systems and support these 
systems having the flexibility to choose POU devices or replacement of lead-bearing plumbing 
instead of CCT.17 To make POU devices as effective as possible, however, EPA must ensure they 
are installed, maintained, and properly used to protect public health. The SDWA requires that if 
EPA lists POU devices as a treatment technology for small systems, 
 
Point-of-entry and point-of-use treatment units shall be owned, controlled and maintained 
by the public water system or by a person under contract with the public water system to 
ensure proper operation and maintenance and compliance with the maximum 
contaminant level or treatment technique and equipped with mechanical warnings to 
ensure that customers are automatically notified of operational problems.18 
 
Until full LSLR is achieved, POU devices provide crucial protections for customers still drinking 
water from LSLs and GRRs. But these protections are only realized with proper implementation, 
maintenance, and use of the filters. As such, we encourage EPA to provide educational materials 
in multiple languages and to bolster its requirements for PWSs that choose to use POU devices 
rather than CCT. These systems should be required to meet strong standards throughout the 
lifecycle of the POUs, and should also be required to provide public education and outreach to 
ensure that POU recipients know how to properly use them. 
 
12 See, Concerned Pastors for Social Action, 217 F. Supp. 3d 960, 974 (E.D. Mich. 2016) (describing witness 
testimony from crisis responders that as many as 52% of homes visited in Flint had residents who had various 
problems installing filters); Roper Test., 97:8-99:10, Sep. 14, 2016; Mot. for Prelim. Inj. Tr., 2:16-cv-10277-DML-
SDD (E.D. Mich. 2016). 
13 Roper testimony, supra note 12,. at 97:16-97:24. 
14 Id. at 98:7-98:10. 
15 Id. at 98:10-98:12. 
16 See EPA, Questions and Answers on Newark Drinking Water, 2019. https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2019-
11/documents/newark_qandas_nov_22.2019.pdf  
17 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,945. 
18 SDWA § 1412(b)(4)(E)(ii), 42 U.S.C. § 399g-1(b)(4)(E)(ii). 

6-4 
 
C. 
EPA should require annual monitoring and eliminate the nine-year 
monitoring waiver 
 
As discussed in the Sampling section 7.C of our comments, we urge EPA to prohibit 
triennial tap monitoring and tap monitoring every nine years. Under the proposed LCRI, systems 
serving fewer than 3,300 people could apply for monitoring waivers which would allow them to 
go as many as nine years between collecting samples. Such a long time between sampling leaves 
water systems without vital data, and leaves people drinking the water at risk of lead exposure, 
potentially for years, with no way of knowing of the risk.  
  
For these reasons, we urge EPA to require annual sampling for all systems, including 
systems serving fewer than 3,300 people. In the alternative, if EPA decides to retain an option for 
triennial sampling, that should apply to systems serving 3,300 people or fewer. Consumers 
deserve to be informed about the risks in their water. We strongly urge EPA to eliminate the 
monitoring waivers for tap monitoring every nine years. The maximum monitoring cycle length 
for all systems under the LCRI should be no more than three years.  
 
D. 
EPA should state that any extension of the LSLR mandate would result in an 
“unreasonable risk to health” 
 
The SDWA allows States to exempt water systems serving 3,300 people or fewer from 
any treatment technique for two-year periods, up to a maximum of six years. Under the LCRI, 
full LSLR counts as a treatment technique.19 This creates the possibility that customers served by 
small systems will continue to be exposed to dangerous lead levels through their drinking water 
for as many as sixteen years following their compliance date (without accounting for other 
exemptions for which these systems may qualify). To grant an exemption, the State must make 
several findings, including that “granting . . . the exemption will not result in an unreasonable 
risk to health.”20  
 
Any extension of the LSLR mandate will result in unreasonable risk to health. As EPA 
has noted, the health effects of lead include both acute and sub-chronic effects even at low doses, 
including decreased IQ values, cases of ADHD in children, lower birth weights in children of 
women of childbearing age, and cases of cardiovascular disease and premature mortality in 
adults.21 EPA’s Economic Analysis for the LCRI (EA) notes that there is no threshold for many 
of these adverse effects such as the impacts of low levels of lead exposure on IQ loss, on low 
birth weight, and other adverse effects. 22 In fact, EPA notes that counterintuitively, often the 
adverse effects of lead are most pronounced when children at lower levels of exposure have 
slight increases in their lead exposure. For example, EPA finds,  
 
19 See, e.g., 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,933 (referencing ”the treatment technique for mandatory service line replacement”). 
20 42 U.S.C. §300g-5(a)(3). 
21 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,994. 
22 USEPA (2023) Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, Report, for example at 
5-41 (no threshold for IQ loss) & 5-47 (no threshold for low birthweight), 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0712  

6-5 
 
 
changes in birth weight associated with a 1 μg/dL [1 microgram of lead per deciliter of 
blood] change in blood lead vary based on the starting blood lead concentration. For 
example, the reduction in birth weight from a change in blood lead from 0 to 2 μg/dL is 
approximately 40 grams and from 8 to 10 μg/dL is approximately 10 grams….[The] 
strongest estimated effects at the lowest levels of exposure, without a lower threshold of 
PbB [blood lead] below which there would be no predicted effect on birth weight.23 
 
In other words, even very low levels of lead exposure pose significant risks, especially for young 
children, and slight increases in exposure linked to modest increases in blood lead levels can 
have serious adverse effects. So any increase in lead exposure from tap water would constitute an 
unreasonable risk to health.  
 
Further, these risks do not fall on all people equally. As discussed in the Environmental 
Justice section 15 of these comments, all too often LSLs disproportionately occur in 
communities of color and low-wealth communities, and blood lead levels are highest among 
Black and other children of color. A study by NRDC found that SDWA violations “were more 
likely in counties with racial, ethnic, and language vulnerability and subpar housing and 
transportation quality.”24 Water systems with violations for 12 consecutive quarters were ”40 
percent higher in counties with the highest racial, ethnic, and language vulnerability compared to 
counties with the lowest racial, ethnic, and language vulnerability.”25 And this risk compounds 
with other risks faced disproportionately by environmental justice communities to create 
cumulative harm to health.26 As EPA recognizes, there is no safe level of lead exposure.27 Any 
level of exposure, especially ongoing for two years, poses an unreasonable risk to health.  
 
EPA has not demonstrated that such extensions are needed for systems serving 3,300 
people or fewer. In fact, EPA cites numerous examples of systems of a variety of sizes achieving 
full LSLR in less than ten years.28 It provides examples of small systems replacing all their LSLs 
in as little as one to two years, and states that only 3.5% of CWSs nationwide are expected to 
have more than 1,000 LSLs and GRR service lines.29 Full replacement of all LSLs is crucial to 
end lead exposure through drinking water for people living in the United States, and the 
Proposed Rule demonstrates that small systems have been able to achieve full LSLR in as little 
as one to two years in the past. Given the immense public health impact of lead exposure, we 
urge EPA to state that systems serving fewer than 3,300 people can achieve LSLR within without 
extensions, and that an extension of LSLR would cause an unreasonable risk to the health of 
those whose drinking water comes from these small water systems.  
 
23 Id, at 5-47, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0712  
24 Kristi Pullen Fedinick, Steve Taylor & Michele Roberts, Watered Down Justice (Sep. 2019), 35, available at 
https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/watered-down-justice-report.pdf.  
25 Id. at 7. 
26 Id. at 8-9. 
27 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,953. 
28 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,912. 
29 Id. 

 
 
7-1 
 
Section 7: Tap Sampling and Monitoring Lead and Copper in Tap Water 
Scientifically robust tap monitoring designed to capture worst case drinking water 
contamination in the highest risk homes is foundational to the proper implementation of the 
LCRI.1 EPA is required under SDWA to use “data collected by accepted methods or best 
available methods” to ensure science adequately informs risk assessment, management, and 
communication decisions.2 
To that end, we support some of EPA’s proposed sampling provisions, such as the 
inclusion of sites with lead or galvanized premise plumbing in Tiers 1-3, taking both first and 
fifth liter samples for lead at homes with LSLs after water has sat stagnant for a minimum of 6 
hours, and using the higher number to calculate the 90th percentile. This is more effective at 
identifying situations where the water is too corrosive.  
At the same time, EPA should strengthen the tap sampling provisions so that the final rule 
complies with the SDWA mandate that water systems use the best available methods for 
collecting data.3 These include removing provisions or waivers for reduced sampling, specifying 
a protocol for free supplemental customer-requested sampling, and requiring all water systems to 
conduct appropriate copper sampling, discussed in more detail below. Strengthened provisions 
will allow systems to promptly detect elevated lead and copper levels and implement appropriate 
treatment techniques where applicable. Appropriate tap monitoring requirements, paired with 
prompt public notifications, will enable individual consumers to make well-informed decisions 
about whether and how to take health-protective action related to lead and copper risks from 
drinking water. 
A. 
Revised Tier Definitions 
We support the proposal to amend the definition for Tier 1 and Tier 2 sites to include sites 
with premise plumbing made of lead, which can be a substantial lead source.4 We also support 
the proposal of adding to Tier 3 sites with galvanized premise plumbing or served by a 
galvanized service line that was ever downstream of a lead service line or lead connector,5 but 
EPA should also require both first- and fifth-liter sampling at all Tier 3 sites, for reasons 
described in section B.ii below. 
 
1 “Targeting monitoring to worst-case conditions will help systems and States evaluate the reductions in contaminant 
levels achieved through treatment and determine when ‘optimal’ treatment is being maintained to the degree most 
protective of public health.” 56 Fed. Reg. at 26514 (1991), Maximum Contaminant Level Goals (MCLGs) and 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper. 
2 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(3)(A)(ii). 
3 Id. 
4 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,073 (§ 141.86(a)(4)(i)-(ii)). 
5 88 Fed. Reg at 85,073 (§ 141.86(a)(4)(iii). 

 
 
7-2 
 
B. 
Sampling protocol requirements have been improved but should be tightened 
i. 
Wide mouth collection bottles 
We agree with the proposal to require wide mouth collection bottles for collecting water 
samples.6 Those bottles allow high water flow for sample collection, which is important because 
low water flow is not representative of typical water use, can decrease the likelihood of 
dislodging any lead particles that may be present, and is unlikely to capture worst-case lead.7 
ii. 
EPA should require both first- and fifth-liter sampling at Tier 3 sites 
We are concerned with the proposal to require fifth liter samples only at sites served by a 
lead service line,8 because first liter only sampling at Tier 3 sites may fail to capture worst-case 
lead scenarios. We acknowledge that first liter tap sampling may be able to capture lead sources 
captured in galvanized premise plumbing or lead particulates that may have been released from 
the service line and trapped in faucet aerators.9 However, while collecting first-liter data to 
characterize lead release and corrosion control effectiveness is important, a study of sampling 
following the implementation of the Michigan LCR found that taking paired first and fifth liter 
samples and picking the highest of the two drove the 90th percentile up.10 Paired samples are 
more likely to collect water in contact with a lead source than an individual sample, because 
sample results can vary from first to fifth liter based on the size of the home, the complexity of 
the premise plumbing system, and the length of the service line.11 There are many systems that 
have previously required or commonly used lead connectors,12 and galvanized service lines may 
contain lead even after the upstream source of lead has been removed.13 To detect lead leaching 
at these Tier 3 sites, EPA should require fifth liter sampling. 
 
6 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,073 (§ 141.86(b)(1)). 
7 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,929 (“wide-mouth bottles [] allow samples to be taken at full flow to decrease the likelihood 
that sampling would miss higher lead levels”); Dec. 29, 2017 memorandum “Region 5’s Experience in 
Implementation of the Lead and Copper Rule” from Robert Kaplan, Acting Regional Administrator, to Michael 
Shapiro, Acting Assistant Administrator at 3. https://engineering.purdue.edu/PlumbingSafety/resources/EPA-
Region5-Lead-Memo-2017-12-29.pdf 
8 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,073 (§ 141.86(b)(1)(ii)). 
9 “Even when LSLs are removed under the Michigan LCR and under the proposed national infrastructure plan, it is 
likely that some of these smaller-magnitude lead sources will remain in homes. In addition to the fifth-liter data, 
continuing to collect first-liter data to characterize lead release and corrosion control effectiveness in the household 
plumbing remains important.” Elin Betanzo, Corwin Rhyan, and Mona Hanna-Attisha, Lessons from the first year of 
compliance sampling under Michigan’s revised Lead and Copper Rule and national Lead and Copper Rule 
implications, AWWA Water Science Vol. 3 Issue 6 (Dec. 2021) at 5. 
https://awwa.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/aws2.1261 
10 Id. 
11 T. Bradley et al., Estimating impacts of LCRR's fifth-liter sampling and find-and-fix requirements on large water 
systems, Envt. Sci. Res. Tech. Vol. 10 (2024) at p.241-249, 
https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2023/ew/d3ew00631j. 
12 https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-11/508 Compliant - Identifying Lead Service Lines_Oct 
2022.pdf; Burgess, Patti Brandt, and Jordan Travis. “Getting the Lead out: Public Water Systems Work to Replace 
Lead-Containing Service Lines.” Traverse City Record-Eagle, 14 Nov. 2021, https://www.record-
eagle.com/news/local_news/getting-the-lead-out-public-water-systems-work-to-replace-lead-containing-service-
lines/article_ecf8a8a8-423e-11ec-926a-e31b015c94f5.html. 
13 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,918. 

 
 
7-3 
 
EPA “acknowledges that particulate lead is challenging to predict and could occur in any 
sample volume.”14 At the same time, if a water system will be collecting a sample at a given site, 
we believe it would be worth the minimal additional effort it would take to collect and analyze an 
additional sample. We further note that a standard two-sample protocol may prevent confusion 
between differing tier-based sampling protocols. The first- and fifth-liter data taken together are 
better at capturing particulate lead release and unpredictable higher lead than the first- or fifth-
liter sample alone.15 We urge EPA to require both first- and fifth- liter samples for tiers 1 
through 3. 
iii. 
Maximum stagnation times 
We share EPA’s concern about over-invalidation of samples with high lead results due to 
long stagnation times,16 and encourage the Agency to go further by explicitly prohibiting water 
systems from invalidating a sample based on stagnation time (as long as it meets the minimum 
six-hour stagnation time). There is precedent for this practice, as EPA’s 2004 LCR guidance 
states “there is no outer limit on standing time.”17 High lead levels may occur where water has 
stagnated due to changes in occupancy or due to intentional low water usage,18 and sampling 
should reflect this common scenario. 
iv. 
Customer-requested supplemental monitoring 
We support EPA’s proposal to require water systems that exceed the LAL to offer to 
sample lead in the tap water of any customer who requests it, and to require such supplemental 
monitoring at sites served by a lead, GRR, or lead status unknown line to capture first and fifth 
liter samples.19 We also support EPA’s proposal to require water systems to offer first and fifth 
liter samples for lead in the tap water of any person served by a lead, GRR, or lead status 
unknown service line to anyone who requests it, regardless whether there has been an LAL 
exceedance.20 We also encourage EPA to require the same for customers at sites that likely have 
lead connectors as designated in required inventories. EPA should clarify that all supplemental 
water-system-conducted sampling must be done at no direct cost to the individual homeowner. 
v. 
Other changes to sampling protocols are needed 
EPA should make several other changes to sampling protocols to ensure accurate and 
robust data collection as required by SDWA. EPA should require samples be taken with high 
water flow (i.e. with tap fully open) and prohibit use of low water flow to fill collection bottles in 
 
14 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,931. 
15 Betanzo et al. AWWA study, supra note 9, at 9. 
16 88 Fed. Reg. at 84931. 
17 See November 23, 2004 EPA Memorandum, Lead and Copper Rule – Clarification of Requirements for Collecting 
Samples and Calculating Compliance, at 4. 
https://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF.cgi/P100NEFJ.PDF?Dockey=P100NEFJ.PDF 
18 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,911. 
19 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,070 (§ 141.85(c)(1)).  
20 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,070 (§ 141.85(c)(2)). 

 
 
7-4 
 
order to capture the worst-case lead scenario.21 EPA should further prohibit any sampling 
instructions, including for supplemental monitoring, that might artificially lower lead-in-water 
levels at the time of sampling, including but not limited to pre-stagnation flushing and removal 
or cleaning of faucet aerators. 
We are also concerned about artificial dilution of 90th percentile values and urge EPA to 
act to prevent this from happening. When a system detects high lead levels in early sample 
collections we are concerned the system may later flood its data with more samples than 
required, at sites where low lead levels are expected, in order avoid a lead action level 
exceedance. Particulate lead can similarly be masked by overcollection of sample data. We 
encourage EPA to take measures to prevent artificial dilution of 90th percentile values, including 
requiring, for example, large systems to provide documentation and explanation for expanded 
sampling in instances where they collect and count towards compliance over 100 samples. If a 
water system collects more tap samples than the minimum number required for its size, the 
system must calculate its 90th percentile by using the minimum required number of 
samples for its size that have the highest measured lead or copper levels. For example, a 
large system with standard monitoring would calculate its 90th percentile for lead using the 100 
tap samples with the highest measured lead concentrations and its 90th percentile for copper 
using the 100 tap samples with the highest measured copper concentrations, regardless of the 
total number of tap samples collected in the monitoring period and despite likely using a 
different set of 100 samples for each calculation. 
In contrast, we are concerned about the limited amount of data collection required in the 
LCRI where a system qualifies for reduced monitoring, and encourage EPA to eliminate the 
reduced number of monitoring sites in Table 2 in section 141.86(d), instead requiring the 
standard number of sites for lead and copper sampling in Table 1 to Paragraph (c)(1).22 
EPA seeks comment about the potential inclusion of samples from lower-priority tiers 
(i.e. Tiers 3-5) that have a higher lead or copper concentration than samples from Tier 1 or 2 sites 
for calculating the 90th percentile in systems that do not have a sufficient number of samples 
from Tier 1 and 2 sites. We support this proposal, but again recommend sampling both first and 
fifth liters at Tier 3 sites, and taking the higher of the two samples, because at sites served by 
galvanized service lines, a paired sample will more likely detect elevated lead levels than a single 
sample. 
vi. 
Make sampling data publicly available 
The final rule should, in addition to requiring water systems to report all sampling data to 
EPA as discussed in section 14.A of our comments, require water systems of over 10,000 
 
21 “On average, Pb concentrations detected in water at high flow without stagnation were at least three to four times 
higher than in first draw samples collected at low flow with stagnation, demonstrating a new “worst case” lead 
release scenario, contrary to the original regulatory assumption that stagnant, first draw samples contain the highest 
lead concentrations.” Clark, B., S. Masters, and M. Edwards, Profile Sampling to Characterize Particulate Lead 
Risks in Potable Water. Environmental Science & Technology 48(12):6836-6843 (2014) 
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/es501342j; see also Masters, S., J. Parks, A. Atassi, and M. Edwards., Inherent 
Variability in Lead and Copper Collected During Standardized Sampling. Environmental Monitoring and 
Assessment 188(3):177 (2016). https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10661-016-5182-x. 
22 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,075 (Table 2 to Paragraph (d)(1)); 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,074 (Table 1 to Paragraph (c)(1)). 

 
 
7-5 
 
customers to make all sampling data publicly available online. It should be presented in a format 
that is understandable to the general public (including mapped results), and should include 
supplemental monitoring data. Water systems should be required to include a link to the 
monitoring data in any public notification, public education materials, their CCR, and on the 
water system website. The monitoring results may be anonymized,23 but they should still indicate 
the street or the close proximity from which the sample was taken along with the location’s 
sampling tier. The map would allow the public to understand the general areas of their system 
where the tests were taken. The monitoring data should also be posted to an accessible web-
based portal maintained by EPA, as discussed in section 14.B. 
C. 
EPA must prohibit triennial and nine-year reduced tap monitoring periods 
We call on EPA to prohibit extensions that allow triennial tap monitoring and tap 
monitoring every nine years. For example, water systems that demonstrate a 90th percentile lead 
level below 0.005 mg/L (5 ppb) and 90th percentile copper level below 0.65 mg/L may reduce to 
triennial monitoring, while small water systems may apply for monitoring waivers which would 
allow them to go up to nine years between collecting samples.24 
Triennial tap monitoring and tap monitoring every nine years must be strictly prohibited 
because the LCR requires routine tap monitoring to assess the effectiveness of corrosion control 
treatment and to ensure that any inadvertent rise in lead or copper is promptly detected. Planned 
and unplanned changes to source water, corrosion control treatment, treatment changes to 
address other contaminants (such as those triggered by microbial and disinfection byproduct 
issues or PFAS contamination), altered plant operations, and changes or disruptions in the 
distribution system (such as caused by construction or altered use, volume, and flow patterns) 
may have impacts on lead and copper levels at the tap that are highly variable, and not always 
predictable, especially with regard to lead particulate contamination.25 These changes can result 
in lead-in-water elevations even in water systems that meet the LCR lead action level and have 
corrosion control treatment that is deemed “optimized.”26 Allowing water systems to reduce LCR 
compliance sampling to once every three or nine years and target a reduced number of an already 
very small number of required sampling sites can leave water systems and consumers entirely in 
the dark about active-but-missed or future-and-unexpected lead-in-water contamination. 
Moreover, it leaves water systems without statistically robust data, which are necessary for 
understanding the causes of lead-in-water problems and for effectively addressing elevated lead 
levels. Health risks from sampling delays compound as it takes months or years for treatment 
techniques to be implemented after a LAL exceedance is detected. For these reasons, we urge 
EPA to prohibit triennial and every-nine-year sampling for all systems. Tap sampling should 
occur in all systems at least annually.  
 
23 Owner/occupant information redacted, with a code unique to each home making possible comparisons between 
sampling pools from one sampling round to the next. 
24 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,075, 85,076 (sections 141.86(d)(2)(ii)-(iii) and 141.86(g)). 
25 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,911. 
26 Id. Note also that, independent of the factors causing elevated lead levels described above, the proposed LCRI 
could lead to the absurd result of water systems continuing to use ineffective CCT for decades. See section 10.E.ii 
(noting reasons why systems with CCT should have an ongoing duty to re-optimize CCT after action level 
exceedances). 

 
 
7-6 
 
D. 
Copper monitoring is not adequately considered in the proposed LCRI 
We support EPA’s proposal to require water systems to provide consumer notice of an 
individual’s copper sampling results and an explanation of the health effects of copper.27 
However, we are concerned EPA is not considering copper adequately in the current testing 
regime. Although copper release from plumbing goes down over time, newly-installed copper 
pipes may release large amounts of dissolved copper.28 EPA’s tap sampling requirements are 
designed to maximize the chances of detecting lead problems, but EPA must fix the tap sampling 
requirements to adequately protect against elevated copper levels as well. At elevated levels, 
copper exposure has been linked to adverse health effects,29 Copper exposure is a particular risk 
for people with Wilson’s Disease, which is a small but very vulnerable subpopulation (1 in 
30,000 people or more have both recessive genes and full-blown Wilsons Disease,30 and about 1 
percent of the population is estimated to be heterozygous for the Wilson’s disease recessive gene 
and may have more limited adverse effects from copper exposure.31).  These and other 
susceptible subpopulations who are more vulnerable to copper exposure must be considered 
under SDWA.32 
We encourage EPA to require that all systems conduct copper tap sampling from a pool of 
highest-risk homes. A NDWAC working group recommended separate sampling requirements 
for lead and copper, due to the lack of overlap between the highest-risk sites for lead and highest-
risk sites for copper.33 Copper sampling should be done from a pool of sites separate from the 
sites where lead sampling is conducted, and should consist of first-liter samples at a statistically 
valid sample pool of the highest-risk sites focused on sites that have verified, recently-installed 
(within the last five years) copper premise plumbing.  
We also encourage EPA to require water systems to inform their users when a system 
exceeds the copper action level. Currently there is no requirement for water systems to inform 
the public when they have exceeded the copper action level. Most point of use filters that are 
 
27 88 Fed. Reg. at 85070-71 (sections 141.85(d)(1), (d)(3)(ii)). 
28 I. Vargas et al., Copper Corrosion and Biocorrosion Events in Premise Plumbing, Materials, Vol. 10(9) section 6.1 
Conceptual Model During Stagnation (2017) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5615691/; M. 
Edwards et al., Alkalinity, pH, and copper corrosion by-product release (1996) Journal - American Water Works 
Association, 88: 81-94.https://awwa.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.1551-8833.1996.tb06521.x; Montana 
State University Extension Water Quality Program, Copper https://waterquality.montana.edu/well-
ed/interpreting_results/fs_copper.html. 
29 National Research Council (US) Committee on Copper in Drinking Water. Copper in Drinking Water. Washington 
(DC): National Academies Press (US); 2000. 5, Health Effects of Excess Copper. Available from: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK225400/. 
30 See ibid, and Yale Medicine, Wilson’s Disease, https://www.yalemedicine.org/conditions/wilson-
disease#:~:text=Wilson%20disease%20is%20rare.,is%20associated%20with%20Wilson%20disease. 
31 See National Academies, supra note 29 (1 percent to possibly as high as 2 percent of the population may be 
heterozygotes carriers of mutations in the Wilson gene. They can have “subclinical abnormalities in copper 
metabolism at typical levels of dietary copper intake. Therefore, if ingestion of copper is substantially increased, 
heterozygotes might develop copper-induced liver disease.”); See also National Research Council (US) Committee 
on Copper in Drinking Water. Copper in Drinking Water. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2000. 
4, Disorders of Copper Homeostasis. Available from:  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK225409/  
32 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(3)(c)(i)(V) & (ii). 
33 See Report of the Lead and Copper Rule Working Group to the National Drinking Water Advisory Council (Aug. 
25, 2015) at 37 https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016-01/documents/ndwaclcrwgfinalreportaug2015.pdf;  

 
 
7-7 
 
certified to remove lead are not certified to remove copper, although there is evidence that they 
can be effective at doing so.34 As such, EPA should require that copper exceedance notifications 
encourage people to take precautions, including but not limited to using point of use filters. 
Further attention to risks of elevated copper may also serve as an incentive for manufacturers to 
get their filters certified for copper removal.  
E. 
EPA must address confusing messaging regarding sampling and public 
education 
Public notifications, public education materials, and CCRs should be changed to ensure 
that consumers do not come away with the impression that a non-detect (or non-quantified) 
sampling result from a single moment in time is a general guarantee of the safety of the water at 
their tap. EPA asserts that sampling provisions are meant to help determine the effectiveness of a 
water system’s corrosion control techniques and help determine if water systems are required to 
conduct LSLR and public education.35 However, there is some internal inconsistency in the rule, 
as the proposed language for the public education materials conveys that sampling results are an 
indication of the safety of an individual household’s water, rather than the general effectiveness 
of corrosion control throughout the system. As described in our November 2023 letter to EPA,36 
EPA’s claim that standard water testing will reveal if there is lead in one’s water contradicts the 
science of lead in water, generates vast underestimations of the prevalence of lead-contaminated 
water, misleads consumers into thinking a non-detect (or non-quantified) lead reading means 
their water is safe (without recognizing variability in lead levels and the fact that a reading only 
captures one moment in time), and can cultivate in consumers the erroneous impression that 
precautionary measures such as lead service line replacement are both a nuisance and financial 
waste. As such, we encourage EPA to require public notifications, public education materials, 
and CCRs to make clear that there is potential risk from lead in water even where there is no 
LAL exceedance or where an individual tap monitoring result does not detect lead or detects 
relatively low levels of lead. Providing this important information will allow individuals to make 
informed decisions on how best to mitigate risk. 
F. 
Responses to EPA’s requests for comment on tap sampling for lead and 
copper 
1. Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of the proposed sites should be 
included in Tier 3, if additional sites should be included, or if some should be included in a 
different, lower priority tier, such as Tier 4. Specifically, comment on whether sites served by 
galvanized service lines or containing galvanized premise plumbing that are identified as ever 
 
34 Bosscher, Valerie et al. “POU water filters effectively reduce lead in drinking water: a demonstration field study in 
flint, Michigan.” Journal of environmental science and health. Part A, Toxic/hazardous substances & environmental 
engineering vol. 54,5 (2019) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7402230/. 
35 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,880; 84,929 (“Tap sampling under the rule is not intended to represent typical consumption; 
rather, it is intended to determine the effectiveness of CCT and to determine if actions are needed to reduce lead 
levels.”). 
36 Campaign for Lead Free Water et al. letter to Radhika Fox, Assistant Administrator for Water, EPA (Nov. 20, 
2023), 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/58a8b106e6f2e14f1955ecab/t/655c0ce837183b5aa5dfc15e/1700531433426/E
PA+Communications+re+lead+in+water+-+Coalition+letter+11.20.23F.pdf 

 
 
7-8 
 
being downstream of an LSL or lead connector should be included in the same tier as other sites 
with a current lead connector (e.g., copper service line downstream of a lead connector).  
This is addressed in section A. above. 
2. Comment and available data, such as modeling or sampling data, that inform lead corrosion 
rates over time.  
We recognize that EPA asserts sampling provisions are meant to help determine the 
effectiveness of a water system’s corrosion control techniques. This section includes suggestions 
on how to improve sampling protocol so that data accurately captures worst-case lead scenarios 
and identifies situations where the water is too corrosive. The CCT section 10.C. points to areas 
where the LCRI’s provisions regarding the conduct of CCT studies should be strengthened, and 
explains why EPA should create incentives to address the identified shortages of CCT experts.  
3. Comment on the applicability of alternate sampling protocols to assess CCT performance, 
increase customer participation, and other relevant factors.  
We encourage EPA to require a standard sampling protocol for all sites, including requiring 
paired first- and fifth-liter samples at Tiers 1 through 3. See section B. above. To increase 
customer participation, particularly with regard to renters who may not receive CCRs or other 
written materials sent only to those with water system accounts, we encourage EPA to require 
annual public outreach activities of all systems and to strengthen the enhanced public outreach 
requirements for systems with a LAL exceedance or that fail to meet the required SLR rate. See 
Public Education and Outreach section 8.E. 
4. Comment on the proposed updated definition of wide-mouth bottles that is “bottles that are 
one liter in volume with a mouth, whose outer diameter measures at least 55 mm wide,” and 
specifically on the availability of qualifying bottles.  
We agree with the proposed updated definition. This is addressed in section B.ii. above. 
5. Comment and any relevant data on the number and tiering of samples used to calculate the 
90th percentile lead and/or copper levels for systems with LSLs for purposes of assessing CCT 
efficacy. Specifically, whether samples from non-LSL sites that have higher lead concentrations 
than samples from LSL sites should be included and whether these higher values should replace 
lower values from LSL sites in the 90th percentile calculation.  
If a water system collects more tap samples than the minimum number required for its size, the 
system must calculate its 90th percentile by using the minimum required number of samples for 
its size that have the highest measured lead or copper levels. This is addressed in further detail in 
section B.v. above. Also, as discussed in section D. above, the copper sampling pool should 
target sites with the highest copper risks—homes with new copper premise plumbing—rather 
than piggybacking on the lead sampling pool sites.   

 
 
7-9 
 
6. Comment on whether State authority to specify sampling locations when a system is 
conducting reduced monitoring should apply regardless of the number of taps meeting sample 
site criteria.  
This is not addressed. 

8-1 
 
Section 8: Public Education and Outreach, Public Notification, and CCRs 
Providing individuals with complete and accurate information about their drinking water 
enables the success of the LCRI, as people aware of contaminant risks in their water better 
understand the need for treatment techniques and are more likely to engage in preventive action. 
The proposed LCRI includes some improvements over the LCRR, but needs significant changes 
to make the public education treatment technique accurate and effective, and in compliance with 
SDWA’s mandate to “prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to 
the extent feasible.”1 
Public education, as EPA notes, is a “cornerstone” treatment technique that is supposed 
to advance the public health protective goals of SDWA and the LCR by covering any ground that 
the other three treatment techniques leave open.2 If communities receive robust, complete, and 
accurate public education, consumers can be better equipped to prevent adverse health effects 
from exposure to lead in their drinking water. Consumers provided with complete information 
about the risks of lead in drinking water can immediately take preventive action such as 
installing point-of-use filters.3 The instantaneous health-protective benefit of such actions stands 
in stark contrast to the multiple years it takes for water systems to optimize corrosion control 
treatment or complete lead service line replacements. 
There are many circumstances where public education is the sole or principal treatment 
technique protecting public health. For example, if a water system without lead service lines and 
without corrosion control treatment has an action level exceedance, public education and 
outreach is the only treatment technique proposed in the LCRI to protect public health during the 
multi-year period when the system is studying and implementing corrosion control and source 
water treatments. Or, for a similar water system with existing source water and corrosion control 
treatments that has an action level exceedance, public education and outreach is the principal 
treatment technique to protect public health while the system reoptimizes the other treatment 
techniques.4 Similarly, public education is the only treatment technique EPA proposes to protect 
children at school or day care. 
It is imperative that public notice, CCRs, and public education provisions provide people 
with complete, accurate, and timely information to decide for themselves what risks and 
precautions they want to take. We support the improvements to the mandatory lead health effects 
language in public notification and public education materials, the expansion of options for 
compliance with public outreach requirements, the requirement to offer to sample taps for lead 
upon request from any customer with a lead, GRR, or unknown service line, and the requirement 
for delivery of lead and copper tap sampling results within 3 days. 
 
1 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
2 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,946. 
3 We note that some consumers may lack the time or resources to purchase their own filters and further highlight the 
need for utilities to provide these free of charge in particular circumstances, as discussed in section I.A below. 
4 As discussed in the action level section of our comments, we strongly urge EPA to at a minimum require water 
systems to provide free POU devices, along with outreach and education, to all households served by systems that 
have an action level exceedance. 

8-2 
 
However, to satisfy SDWA’s mandate to “prevent known or anticipated adverse effects 
on the health of persons to the extent feasible,”5 additional changes are needed to make public 
education and notification materials more accurate and outreach more effective. It is certainly 
feasible for water systems to provide accurate information to the public. CCRs, public 
notifications, and public education materials should include language that is clear about the 
possibility of lead exposure from drinking water even when the system as a whole is in 
compliance, and ensure individuals understand there are steps they can take immediately to 
protect themselves.6 We therefore suggest EPA clarify or expand certain requirements, including 
modifying the language in public education materials and right-to-know reports encouraging 
filter use, bolstering the public outreach requirements, and ensuring water systems provide filters 
at no direct cost to consumers and clarifying public education materials to reflect that 
requirement, discussed in more detail below. 
A. 
Public education and public notification materials must include clear, accurate, and 
robust information regarding risks of lead exposure at individual taps 
i. 
Content changes needed for public education and public notification materials 
We support several of EPA’s proposals to improve the contents of public education and 
public notification materials, but some changes should be made to strengthen them. For example, 
we support including the requirements to include information about replacing GRR service lines 
in addition to LSLs, how to access the service line inventory, how a consumer may check their 
service line for lead, and how consumers can notify the water system if they think their service 
line material classification is incorrect.7 We generally support EPA’s changes to the lead health 
effects language which make clear that there is no safe level of lead in drinking water and that 
there are numerous adverse effects linked to lead exposure for children as well as adults.8 We 
recommend, however, that the mandatory language in proposed section 141.85(a)(1)(ii) go 
beyond stating, “[c]ontact your health care provider for more information about your risks.” It 
should also include a weblink to an EPA summary of health effects, and the EPA drinking water 
hotline number to provide consumers more information. Most health care professionals, to whom 
the proposed language directs consumers, have a relatively low amount of knowledge of the 
 
5 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
6 We note we and others have discussed many of these changes in previous correspondence with EPA and 
incorporate their recommendations and observations here. See, e.g., Campaign for Lead Free Water et al. letter to 
Radhika Fox, Assistant Administrator for Water, EPA (Nov. 20, 2023), 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/58a8b106e6f2e14f1955ecab/t/655c0ce837183b5aa5dfc15e/1700531433426/E
PA+Communications+re+lead+in+water+-+Coalition+letter+11.20.23F.pdf; Natural Resources Defense Council et 
al., Comments on the Proposed Consumer Confidence Report Rule Revisions (May 22, 2023),  
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0113; Campaign for Lead Free Water, Comments 
on EPA’s Proposed “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Consumer Confidence Report Rule Revisions” 
(May 22, 2023), https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0080.; 
7 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,069 (§ 141.85(a)(1)(vi)). 
8 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,069 (§ 141.85(a)(1)(ii)). 

8-3 
 
impacts of drinking water contaminants,9 and this is particularly likely to be true about low-level 
lead exposure typical of drinking water. 
We support EPA’s proposal to include an explanation that using ANSI-accredited filters 
reduces lead levels in drinking water.10 However, we strongly encourage EPA to edit proposed 
section 141.85(a)(iii)(B) to explain that lead may be found in water even when there is no LAL 
exceedance, and lead levels may be temporarily elevated after a replacement or disturbance. This 
section should explain that because lead-bearing premise plumbing is ubiquitous, lead levels in 
drinking water can vary seasonally and over time, and therefore sampling results at a single point 
of time, or a system’s overall compliance with the LCRI, may not provide the full picture of lead 
risk at an individual tap. Providing this information to consumers can serve as a catalyst for 
consumers to take health-protective action, especially for those receiving a notification of tap 
sampling results pursuant to section 141.85(d)(3), discussed in more detail below. EPA 
acknowledges that consumers should be aware of the risks from lead exposure regardless of lead 
levels in the system and ways to reduce exposure to lead.11 
While it is an improvement that the proposed health effects language explicitly states 
there is no safe level of lead in water, the fact that the lead action level is not zero means that 
even tap sample data indicating lead levels below the action level at a large number of locations 
throughout a PWS can obscure a situation in which some customers are being exposed to 
unacceptably high levels of lead. Even with the most effective CCT possible and an ongoing 
LSL replacement program, there are ordinary conditions that can accelerate lead release (e.g., the 
presence of lead-bearing solder and lead-containing premise plumbing, which is very common;12 
increases in water temperature; physical disturbances of LSLs or GRR lines caused by water- 
and non-water related utility work;13 or prolonged periods of no or low water usage14 resulting 
from lack of or changing occupancy). Washington, DC, Milwaukee, WI, and Portland, OR, are 
prominent examples of large water systems that meet the LAL based on 90th percentile values, 
 
9 See, e.g., ATSDR, What Role Do Primary Health Care Providers Have in Detecting, Treating, and Preventing 
Disease Resulting from Toxic Exposures? https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/csem/exposure-history/Health-Care-Providers-
Role.htm (“A recent report about U.S. medical schools disclosed that graduating students received inadequate 
instruction in environmental health [citation omitted]. A recent national online survey of American Congress of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) fellows showed that among 2,514 survey responses, 50% reported that 
they rarely take an environmental health history; less than 20% reported routinely asking about environmental 
exposures commonly found in pregnant women in the United States; and only 1 in 15 reported any training on the 
topic. [citation omitted] Practicing primary care physicians report the need for environmental medicine education to 
better recognize, diagnose, and treat patients in their clinical practice with environmental related illness [citation 
omitted].”) One recent example is a survey of Minnesota physicians, which found 43 percent were uncomfortable 
discussing drinking water quality from wells and only one third said they had any training on the issue. Casey 
Johnshoy et al, 2023, “Safe Water from the Kitchen Faucet: A Family Physician’s Role.” Minnesota Family 
Physician Magazine, Spring 2023, at 22. https://bluetoad.com/publication/?m=44741&i=788465&p=1&ver=html5. 
10 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,068 (§ 141.85(a)(1)(iv)(A)). 
11 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,952. 
12 Adele Peters, Yes, we should remove lead pipes, but clean drinking water is still no guarantee (fastcompany.com) 
(Dec. 12, 2023) FASTCOMPANY, https://www.fastcompany.com/90991083/yes-we-should-remove-lead-pipes-
but-ensuring-clean-drinking-water-requires-more-work.  
13 In most jurisdictions this work occurs daily and can dislodge and release lead particles. Del Toral, M. A. et al. 
2013. Detection and Evaluation of Elevated Lead Release from Service Lines: A Field Study. ES&T 47(16): 9300–
07, https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-10/documents/lead-service-lines-study-20130723.pdf.  
14 Arnold, R., and M. Edwards. 2012. Potential Reversal and the Effects of Flow Pattern on Galvanic 
Corrosion of Lead. ES&T 46(20):10941-47. 

8-4 
 
yet have extensive sampling data showing widespread measurable lead in tap samples, including 
individual samples with lead levels substantially higher than the lead action level.15 
It is therefore also important that public notification and education materials recommend, 
under section 141.85(a)(iv)(A), that all consumers served by lead, GRR, or unknown service 
lines, particularly those who are at elevated risk such as pregnant people, young children, and 
adults with high blood pressure or cardiovascular disease, use a filter certified to reduce lead and 
continue to do so for at least half a year after the line has been replaced.16 Materials under 
proposed section 141.85(a)(iv)(A) should additionally recommend those who have lead-
containing premise plumbing or fixtures use a filter until and unless the plumbing is removed. 
EPA raises a concern that such a recommendation may cause a reduction in confidence in tap 
water, however, there is evidence that providing filters and explaining their efficacy increases 
confidence in and use of tap water.17 As discussed at length in our earlier comments on the 
Consumer Confidence Report Rule proposal,18 which we incorporate here by reference, EPA 
should be careful to ensure that water utilities do not represent that meeting the LAL 
systemwide, or having a single non-detect tap sample result, is a guarantee that a particular 
individual tap is “safe.” This is especially important because many homes that have lead-
containing premise plumbing will still face lead-in-water risks even after all lead service lines 
have been replaced. 
EPA is additionally proposing to “require water systems with multiple action level 
exceedances to make filters certified to reduce lead and replacement cartridges, along with 
instructions for their use, available to all consumers.”19 As discussed in more detail in Section 
4.C., to reduce barriers to access based on cost, we strongly encourage EPA to require water 
systems to pay for and provide these filters and replacement cartridges after any single LAL 
exceedance. Proposed section 141.85(a)(1)(iv)(A) should be amended to require, where 
applicable, public education materials to explain that filters and replacement cartridges will be 
provided at no cost to the consumer, along with information about how consumers will and/or 
can obtain filters.  EPA should make clear that “all consumers” may receive these filters, 
including renters who have landlords who pay water bills and therefore may not have a customer 
account with the water system. 
 
15 See Campaign for Lead Free Water (June 24, 2021), The EPA Lead and Copper Rule is an Optical Illusion — 
campaign for lead free water, https://www.campaignforleadfreewater.org/our-blog/2021/6/22/the-epa-lead-and-
copper-rule-lcr-as-optical-illusion; Milwaukee’s LCR compliance sampling data from 2023, 2020, and 2017 (highest 
lead reading was 130 ppb in two different sampling rounds); 
https://www.oregonlive.com/portland/2016/04/lead_in_the_water_why_portland.html 
16 “The weight of evidence indicates that PLSLR often causes tap water Pb levels to significantly increase for a 
period of days to weeks, or even several months.” 2011 SAB evaluation at page 2, 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-09/documents/sab_evaluation_partial_lead_service_lines_epa-sab-11-
015.pdf.  
17 Claudia Santillán-Vázquez et al. (2022), How providing a low-cost water filter pitcher led Latino parents to 
reduce sugar-sweetened beverages and increase their water intake: explanatory qualitative results from the Water 
Up!@Home intervention trial,  https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35983682/.  
18 Comment submitted by Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) et al., May 22, 2023,  
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0113.  
19 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,955. 

8-5 
 
We note also that installation and maintenance can be a large barrier to the effective use 
of filters.20 To ensure public health is adequately protected by filters, proposed section 
141.85(a)(1)(iv) should be amended to require water systems to provide instructional videos, or a 
link to EPA-provided videos, that instruct users how to properly install, use and maintain filters 
and change filter cartridges. 
ii. 
Translation assistance 
We support EPA’s proposal to provide templates of public education materials in 
multiple languages to assist water systems, which we believe will greatly aid water systems in 
completing the requirement to provide public education materials in appropriate languages under 
proposed section 141.85(b)(1).21 EPA is seeking information and data about when a system 
provides translated materials, what resources are used to translate materials (e.g., State resources, 
community organizations), and what barriers water systems may face in providing accurate 
translated materials. EPA is also requesting comment on whether to require that States, as a 
condition of primacy for the LCRI, provide translation support if water systems, not 
independently subject to Title VI, are unable to do so.22 We note that many communities will 
have no way to find out if their water is safe if public education materials are only in English, 
and that it is important for these translated materials to have quality control (i.e., for a proficient 
translator to do the translation, rather than feeding materials through automated computer 
translations). The Limited English Proficient (LEP) access requirements under Title VI apply to 
all states receiving federal funds.23 Recipients of such funds must “take reasonable steps to 
ensure meaningful access to their programs and activities by LEP persons,”24 and must “provide 
individuals with disabilities an equal opportunity to participate”25 in such programs. Compliance 
with this requirement can be proven by: 
(a) [providing] “written translations of vital documents for each eligible LEP language 
group that constitutes five percent or includes 1,000 members, whichever is less, of the 
population of persons eligible to be served or likely to be affected or encountered. 
Translation of other documents, if needed, can be provided orally; or 
(b) If there are fewer than 50 persons in a language group that reaches the five percent 
trigger in (a), the recipient does not translate vital written materials but provides written 
 
20 Pls. Post-Hearing Brief in support of Mot. For a Prelim. Injunction, Concerned Pastors for Social Action v. Khouri 
(E.D. Mich 16-cv-10277, Sept. 2016) at 8-10 https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/plaintiff-post-hearing-brief-
iso-prelim-inj-flint-20160922.pdf; see also Jason Hanna, Flint water crisis: Deliver bottles to homes, judge rules, 
CNN (Nov. 11, 2016) https://www.cnn.com/2016/11/11/health/michigan-flint-water-crisis/index.html (“a filter’s 
presence in a home doesn’t necessarily mean it’s working. The leader of a nonprofit group that helps residents install 
them testified that the process is difficult, and that as many as 52% of the more than 400 homes that the group 
visited has some type of problem with the filters.”) 
21 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,954. 
22 Id.  
23 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000d, 2000d–1. 
24 Guidance to Environmental Protection Agency Financial Assistance Recipients Regarding Title VI Prohibition 
Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Limited English Proficient Persons, 69 Fed. Reg. 35,062, 35,063 
(June 25, 2004). 
25 Id. 

8-6 
 
notice in the primary language of the LEP language group of the right to receive 
competent oral interpretation of those written materials, free of cost.”26 
As such, EPA should require states to provide translation assistance to water systems. 
B. 
Notification of individual tap monitoring results 
i. 
Speed and manner of notification 
We are encouraged by the proposed requirement that water systems “provide the 
consumer notice as soon as practicable but no later than three calendar days after the water 
system learns of [lead] tap monitoring results,” regardless of whether the results exceed the 
LAL.27 However, we encourage EPA to adopt a 24-hour notification requirement. EPA notes that 
many water systems can issue notices within even shorter timeframes than three days,28 and that 
water systems have been complying with the Tier 1 24-hour notice requirement for situations 
besides a lead action level exceedance since 2002.29 If water systems are capable of complying 
with a statutory requirement for 24-hour notification of action level exceedances, then they are 
also capable of complying with a requirement to notify customers of all other sampling results 
within the same time frame, with accommodations for staffing shortages or holidays. Even short-
term lead action level exceedances and lead in water exposures have the potential to have serious 
adverse effects on human health,30 so SDWA requires that notifications be made at the fastest 
speed feasible in order to avoid related health impacts.  
In addition to supporting the proposal to require consumer notices of lead tap sampling 
results to be delivered “as soon as practicable,” we also support the proposal that water systems 
that choose to deliver notices of testing results by phone must follow up with a written notice 
within 3 days.31 
ii. 
Supplemental customer-initiated tap monitoring 
We support the proposal to require systems that exceed the LAL to offer tap monitoring 
to all customers who request it,32 and to offer tap monitoring for all customers with LSLs, GRRs, 
or unknown service lines who request it regardless of whether there has been an LAL 
exceedance.33 It must be clarified, however, that this sampling should be done at no charge to the 
individual consumer; it is not the consumer’s fault the system is exceeding an action level, and 
they should not be required to pay to see whether their tap water has high lead levels. We also 
support the proposal to require notification of supplemental monitoring results “as soon as 
 
26 Id. at 35,610. 
27 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,071 (§ 141.85(d)(2)). 
28 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,949 (“water systems have a long history of demonstrated ability to provide consumer notices 
within an even shorter time frame of 24 hours in other contexts”). 
29 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,965. 
30 88 Fed. Red. 84,964-65 (citing 86 Fed. Reg. 4239-30). 
31 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,071. Note the proposed section 141.85(d)(2) says 3 days; however, the preamble appears to 
include a typo which lists 30 days, 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,949. 
32 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,070 (§ 141.85(c)(1)) 
33 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,070 (§ 141.85(c)(2)) 

8-7 
 
practicable,” in accordance with the requirements of paragraphs 141.85(d)(2)–(4).34 These 
supplemental monitoring and notification provisions will provide people with more information 
about the quality of their drinking water and allow them to better assess potential health-
protective precautions that are right for them. 
iii. 
Content requirements 
As described above, while we support some of the changes to the mandatory health 
effects language proposed in paragraph (a), some additional information should be required for 
public notifications. Proposed section 141.85(d)(3) should require that tap monitoring result 
notifications state that filters may be helpful even in non-detect cases because one-time sampling 
does not provide complete information about the quality of one’s water. Lead levels can vary 
greatly depending on location within a water system and over time.35 Consumers should not 
receive the mistaken impression that a single non-detect result (much less a result with detectable 
lead that is below the action level) is an absolute assurance of safety at an individual tap. 
C. 
Other public notification requirements 
i. 
Notification of service line material 
We support EPA’s proposal to require the same notification content for both LSLs and 
GRR service lines, and to require service line material notices to include content including a 
statement about the proposed requirement for offering to sample the tap of any customer with an 
LSL, GRR, or unknown service line.36 We encourage EPA to also require systems to notify 
consumers if they are served by a known lead connector, which are common in some 
jurisdictions. We also support the proposed requirement for water systems to provide this 
notification no later than 30 days of completion of the baseline inventory and to repeat the 
notification within 30 days of the deadline for each annual update to the service line inventory 
until there is no longer a lead, GRR, or lead status unknown service connection.37 We appreciate 
that EPA is considering additional public education requirements to further encourage swift 
service line replacement, and to that end, we encourage EPA to increase the frequency of 
notification of service line materials from annual to once every six months for water systems that 
have lead, GRR, or unknown service lines five years after the compliance date.38 
ii. 
Notification of a service line disturbance 
We support the proposal to add disturbances due to LSL inventorying efforts to the list of 
disturbances requiring notification.39 We support the proposal to require water systems to 
 
34 88 Fed. Reg. 85,071 (§ 141.85(c)(3)). 
35 88 Fed. Reg. 84,906 (emphasizing that levels of lead in tap water are highly variable “due to many factors 
including the amount of lead and copper in the resident’s plumbing or in the PWS’s distribution system . . .  
temperature, age of plumbing components, chemical and physical characteristics of distributed water, and the length 
of time water is in contact with those materials”) (quoting 56 Fed. Reg. 26,514, 26,473 (1991), Maximum 
Contaminant Level Goals and National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper 
36 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,071 (§ 141.85(e)(1), (3)) 
37 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,071 (§ 141.85(e)(2)). 
38 88 Fed Reg. at 85,037 (public education request for comment #8). 
39 88 Fed, Reg. at 84,948, 85,071 (§ 141.85(g)(1)). 

8-8 
 
provide persons at the service connection with ANSI-certified pitcher filters or point of use 
devices where a disturbance occurs as a result of the replacement of an inline water meter, water 
meter setter, or connector, in addition to the requirement to provide certified filters following 
partial or full service line replacements as required under section 141.84(h)(iii).40 We also 
support the requirement in proposed section 141.85(g)(ii)41 to provide instructions for “a flushing 
procedure to remove particulate lead” in specified circumstances, however, this provision should 
be broadened to require “a flushing and aerator-cleaning procedure to remove particulate lead” 
because lead particles can collect in faucet aerators and flushing will be ineffective if aerators are 
not properly cleaned as part of the procedure.  
D. 
Copper action level exceedance public notifications 
The LCRI should include a provision for public notification after a copper action level 
exceedance. Pursuant to SDWA’s mandate for treatment techniques to “prevent known or 
anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible,”42 the public education 
provisions should reflect the need to publicly share information regarding elevated copper levels. 
There are vulnerable subgroups adversely affected by copper AL exceedances such as people 
with Wilson’s Disease. Consumers need to be notified of elevated copper levels so they may take 
precautions to avoid excessive exposure. In addition to improving monitoring requirements for 
copper (described in sampling section 7.D), EPA should provide for public notification and 
education for copper. 
E. 
Public outreach requirements should be expanded so that activities are required of 
all water systems and enhanced for systems with action level exceedances 
Outreach requirements under the public education provisions must be strengthened. We 
appreciate the streamlined nature of EPA’s proposal to require public education to be repeated 
with the same frequency after every lead action level exceedance, and to allow systems to 
combine required outreach activities to meet some of the proposed public education 
requirements.43 However, the list of compliant outreach activities should be clarified and the 
number of required outreach activities increased. We further encourage EPA to require all water 
systems to conduct public outreach activities because any home can have highly dangerous lead 
levels without there being a LAL exceedance. More detailed comments on the public outreach 
requirements are below.44 
 
40 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,071 (§ 141.85(g)(2)). 
41 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,071.  
42 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
43 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,947. 
44 While our comments demonstrate that all water systems should have baseline public education requirements 
independent of any triggering event, as a general principle we also agree that enhanced public education 
requirements should be triggered by tap sampling results that exceed a specified threshold. In our CCT section, we 
have proposed alternative triggers for CCT requirements that are feasible and would be more health protective. We 
agree that using the same trigger levels for CCT and for enhanced public education is logical and would help to 
simplify the rule, and we recommend that the trigger be 5 ppb. However, if EPA is to continue tying enhanced 
public education requirements to an LAL of 10 ppb, we still believe the rule can be strengthened; to that end, we 
have included suggestions in these comments. 

8-9 
 
i. 
Outreach activities required of systems with a LAL exceedance 
We agree with EPA’s proposal to require systems to conduct public education activities 
after every tap sampling period in which a LAL exceedance occurred, regardless of whether the 
LAL exceedance was consecutive.45 If EPA rejects our proposal to require public education 
activities independent of a LAL exceedance (see below) and retains a triggering condition for 
discontinuing public education activities, we agree with EPA’s proposal to clarify that the 
calculated 90th percentile level at or below the lead action level must be based on the minimum 
number of required samples under section 141.86 for the system to be able to discontinue public 
education.46 
It is imperative that systems quickly conduct public education activities under section 
141.85(b)(2) after an LAL exceedance is detected. We believe that it will be feasible for systems 
to conduct the public education activities within a shorter period of time than the 60 days 
proposed.47 Systems can and should conduct these activities within 30 days. EPA should also 
shorten its proposal for allowing States to grant deadline extensions to no later than 90 days, 
rather than 180 days,48 after the end of the tap sampling period in which the LAL exceedance 
occurred. We encourage EPA to provide template/sample public education materials which may 
be modified by individual jurisdictions, to help expedite the process of developing public 
education materials. 
We also support the requirement for additional outreach by systems that have three LAL 
exceedances over a rolling five-year period.49  
However, some of the listed options under section 141.85(j)(4) are weak in isolation (e.g. 
holding a town hall meeting with no requirements for publicity, timing, or attendance).50 EPA 
should require that water systems, including small systems, utilize methods noted to be most 
likely to elicit responses. 
EPA notes that “face-to-face contact is particularly effective for engaging smaller 
communities,” and also notes that “direct customer and/or consumer contact and partnering with 
community-based organizations [are] particularly effective methods of communicating about 
LSLR.”51 EPA’s SALT risk communication framework says to make risk communication 
actionable, the agency must “1) [] put the risk into context and 2) [] provide meaningful and 
achievable action steps that can help reduce stress and make risk-reducing behavior change more 
possible.”52 EPA fails to effectively communicate risk and enable risk-reducing behavior if it 
 
45 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,069 (§ 141.85(b)(2)). 
46 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,950, 85,073 (§ 141.85(b)(6)). In addition, as described further in sampling section 7.B.5, when 
a system finds that its early samples during the compliance period would trigger an action level exceedance, it 
should not be allowed to start additional sampling in an effort to dilute the results of the early sampling. 
47 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,951. 
48 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,951; 85,070 (§ 141.85(b)(7)(iii)). 
49 88 Red. Reg. at 85,072 (§ 141.85(j)). 
50 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,072-73 (§ 141.85(j)(4)). 
51 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,948. See also LSLR Collaborative, Effectiveness of Anticipated Communication Options, 
https://www.lslr-collaborative.org/effectiveness-of-anticipated-communications-options.html. 
52 EPA, The SALT Framework, https://www.epa.gov/risk-communication/salt-framework. 

8-10 
 
does not require maximally effective outreach techniques such as face-to-face communication 
and multiple channels of outreach.53 
Therefore, under section 141.85(j), EPA should require water systems that have multiple 
LAL exceedances to conduct, in addition to the baseline requirements for single LAL 
exceedances, at least two additional outreach activities: at least one involving face-to-face 
contact (including options such as door to door canvassing or working with a community group 
at a well-publicized event), and one additional activity from the list. We also recommend that the 
town hall meeting and community event compliance options be strengthened with additional 
requirements for publicity, scheduling at a time and place outside of standard work hours and 
most likely to be conducive to attendance, and providing both in-person and virtual attendance 
options. 
Compliance options should similarly be strengthened for the additional outreach activities 
required of systems with three LAL exceedances in a rolling five-year period to require at least 
two additional outreach activities, including at least one that involves face-to-face contact. 
ii. 
Required outreach activities for systems failing to meet the SLR replacement 
rate 
We support EPA’s proposal to require additional outreach activities for systems that fail 
to meet the mandatory SLR rate to conduct annual public education, as well as the expanded 
range of options for compliance.54  
Compliance options should similarly be strengthened for the additional outreach activities 
required of systems that fail to meet the mandatory SLR rate to require at least two additional 
outreach activities, including at least one that involves face-to-face contact. 
iii. 
Outreach activities must prioritize environmental justice communities 
Outreach activities must account for inequitably distributed health risks associated with 
LSLs. We note that an EPA case study found that block groups with LSLs often have higher 
percentages of low-income residents, renters who may have unresponsive landlords, and people 
of color compared to block groups without LSLs, and that the top quartile of block groups with 
the highest number of LSLs had a notably larger percentage of Black residents than the service 
area as a whole.55 An analysis of nationwide SDWA violations from 2016 to 2019 found that as 
people of color, low-income people, non-native English speakers, and crowded conditions and/or 
sparse access to transportation increased, the rate of drinking water violations also increased.56 
SDWA requires that treatment techniques such as public education must account for the greater 
risks faced by these subpopulations “identified as likely to be at greater risk of adverse health 
 
53 We note also that multiple channels of outreach may be needed to effectively communicate lead-in-water risks for 
renters, because written education materials simply mailed to or targeted to landlords who pay water bills at their 
respective properties may fail to reach renters who lack an account with a water system. 
54 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,072 (§ 141.85(h)). 
55 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,043–44. 
56 NRDC, Environmental Justice Health Alliance for Chemical Policy Reform, & Coming Clean, Watered Down 
Justice, at 4 (2020), https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/watered-down-justice-report.pdf.  

8-11 
 
effects due to exposure to contaminants in drinking water than the general population.”57 Just as 
EPA is proposing to require systems to prioritize service line replacements for communities 
disproportionately impacted by lead and to create a communication strategy to inform both 
residential and non-residential customers and consumers about the service line replacement 
program,58 EPA should similarly require systems conducting outreach activities to prioritize 
environmental justice communities and ensure public education activities effectively engage 
those most at risk of exposure to lead in drinking water. 
iv. 
EPA should require annual outreach activities of all systems, independent of 
90th percentile performance 
Requiring public education only when there is a LAL exceedance is not sufficient to 
protect health “to the extent feasible,”59 and EPA should therefore make the public outreach 
requirement more robust. Any home could have highly dangerous lead levels without there being 
an LAL exceedance. EPA and water systems run the risk that critical information about lead in 
water may fail to reach large swathes of populations when public education is not required. As 
described in the sampling comments section 7.C, under the proposed LCRI some systems with 
reduced monitoring waivers may go three to nine years without sampling. In these cases, the 
only information consumers may receive about potential lead in water risks is from 
unidirectional written communications such as CCRs. Relying solely on CCRs for public 
education and outreach is inadequate because they are sent infrequently, may be sent only to the 
water account holder and not to all tenants, and are likely to be read only by consumers who are 
already sensitized to the problem of lead in water. Several studies have documented the severe 
limitations of CCRs, while others have concluded that face-to-face communication as well as 
regular outreach and outreach through local grassroots organizations are far more successful at 
delivering desired messaging than written materials.60 The public education treatment technique 
will not protect health “to the extent feasible” if it only applies to systems that have an LAL 
exceedance or that delay service line replacements. 
As such, the LCRI should require all systems with lead service lines or connectors to 
conduct public education outreach activities at least annually. This can be achieved by requiring 
 
57 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(3)(c)(i)(V) & (ii). 
58 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064 (§ 141.84(c)(iii),(v), (vii)); this is discussed further in the Replacement Plan section of our 
comments. 
59 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
60 See Griffin and Dunwoody, The relation of communication to risk judgment and preventive behavior related to 
lead in tap water, Health Communication (2000), http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10938908; Meyer-Emerick, 
Are we answering the right questions? Improving CCR communication, AWWA Journal (2004),  
https://awwa.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.1551-8833.2004.tb10682.x;  
AWWA, Strategies to Obtain Customer Acceptance of Complete Lead Service Line Replacement (2005), 
https://www.awwa.org/Portals/0/AWWA/Government/StrategiesforLSLs.pdf?ver=2013-03-29-132027-193; Blette, 
Drinking water public right-to-know requirements in the United States, J. Water Health (2008),  
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18401128; Roy et al., An evaluation of the readability of drinking water 
quality reports: a national assessment, J. Water Health (2015),  
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26322750; EPA,  
Recommendations for Improving the Washington DC Water and Sewer Authority Lead in Drinking Water Public 
Education Program (2004), http://archive.epa.gov/region03/dclead/web/html/pep_recommendations.html. 

8-12 
 
systems to conduct the same activities as required after multiple LAL exceedances under section 
141.85(j). In addition, or alternatively, we echo the recommendation61 for water systems to: 
1. Develop, update, and post online a comprehensive database of local stakeholders; 
2. Create a taskforce that draws from this database and places heavy emphasis on broad 
representation from low-income neighborhoods, neighborhoods with a high 
concentration of LSLs, and parent-to-be/parent groups; 
3. In partnership with such a taskforce, develop a locally appropriate, long-term, and 
multimedia public education program that meets well-defined EPA requirements; and 
4. Hold at least one annual meeting with all stakeholders, including any other interested 
members of the public and PWS staff, to go over such matters as the mechanics of lead 
in water, health risks of exposure, the LCR, key messaging for consumers, and generate 
new ideas for improved community outreach and involvement. 
Whichever formulation of annual public outreach activities EPA requires of water systems 
should remain in effect until all LSLs in a system have been replaced. 
Relatedly, we disagree with EPA’s proposal to include a provision for States to allow 
water systems to discontinue some or all of the proposed public education and filter requirements 
early if certain actions are taken.62 As described above, public education will not protect public 
health “to the extent feasible” if individuals are not provided information about the risks of lead 
exposure independent of a system’s 90th percentile levels, which is critical for the prospects of 
engaging in health-protective action. 
F. 
“Consumer Confidence Report” requirements are insufficient, misleading, and 
should be changed 
As discussed in our earlier comments on the agency’s proposed Consumer Confidence 
Report (CCR) proposed rule,63 right-to-know reports should do more to inform readers about 
possible sources of lead in their water and what they can do to protect themselves from exposure. 
EPA’s own guidelines for effective risk communication stress that messaging must explain 
clearly “the situation, the risks, and the remedies.”64 While we generally support the changes to 
the required lead informational statement65 and to the mandatory health effects language,66 with 
the caveats noted earlier, the final LCRI should require disclosure in CCRs that lead in water is 
common regardless of whether a building’s service line contains lead because lead premise 
 
61 Parents for Nontoxic Alternatives, Letter to NDWAC (Oct. 2015), p. 10, 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/58a8b106e6f2e14f1955ecab/t/59c807fe2aeba5f5e8ed64ca/1506281471589/nd
waclcrstatementofdissent.pdf.  
62 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,956. 
63 Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) et al., Comment on Consumer Confidence Report Rule Revisions 
(May 22, 2023),  https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0113. 
64 EPA, Risk Communication in Action (Aug. 2007, p. 17, http://nepis.epa.gov/Adobe/PDF/60000IOS.pdf 
65 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,961-62.  
66 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,963 

8-13 
 
plumbing is ubiquitous, and discuss who must bear the cost of measures that involve purchasing 
materials or hiring professional services. 
We believe that “consumer confidence reports” currently prioritize “consumer 
confidence” over the public’s right to know relevant, complete, and accurate information about 
their drinking water. Foundational consumer right-to-know principles require the provision of 
best available, peer-reviewed science to enable educated decision-making. Water user confidence 
in the quality of drinking water, while desirable, should not be the CCR’s overriding objective.  
EPA faces serious environmental justice and equity concerns if the agency does not 
require improved disclosures in the CCR. Even if nine percent of homes served by a water 
system have very high levels of lead, the LCR’s public education requirement will not be 
triggered.  It is therefore especially important that the right-to-know reports contain necessary 
information to enable individuals to take health-protective action if they choose. As described in 
comments to the most recent revisions of the CCR rule,67 the reports currently are a tool for 
public manipulation, downplaying, masking, or omitting information, and leaving readers with 
the false impression that their tap water is safe when in reality they may face a continuous risk of 
exposure. Users are not likely to take protective measures if the CCR represents that the water is 
safe for consumption without acknowledging that water from individual taps may have elevated 
lead levels even if the system as a whole is “in compliance” with the LCR. 
Without information about how to determine whether plumbing is lead-bearing, the 
required informational statement advises consumers with such plumbing to have their water 
tested if they wish. This message fails to convey the fact that a one-time test may be misleading. 
Indeed, elsewhere in the LCRI’s preamble, EPA acknowledges bluntly that “[t]ap sampling is 
not intended to assess exposure to lead and copper in drinking water,”68 which directly 
contradicts EPA’s advice to have water tested to evaluate potential exposure and health risks. 
Unfortunately, the CCR foregrounds technical terms, concepts, and measurements when the vast 
majority of consumers do not know what the LCR monitoring requirement is or what “ppb,” 
“MCLG,” “LAL,” and “90th percentile” mean. When consumers lack this information, they are 
unable to make sense of the data provided and assess a) the significance of 90th percentile values 
above or below the LAL, and b) what potential health risks from lead in water they might 
personally face. 
To convey more accurate messages in CCRs, we echo the example of a standardized lead 
informational statement we proposed in our May 2023 comments to EPA regarding the proposed 
CCR rule:69 
 A warning: there is no safe level of exposure to lead. Lead is a pervasive contaminant in 
drinking water because it is in lead service lines and also often in solder, plumbing, and 
in fixtures, all of which are common even in homes and other buildings without lead 
 
67 Campaign for Lead Free Water, Comments on EPA’s Proposed “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: 
Consumer Confidence Report Rule Revisions” (May 22, 2023), https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-
OW-2022-0260-0080. 
68 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,929.  
69 Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) et al., Comment (May 22, 2023), p. 16,  
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0260-0113. 

8-14 
 
service lines. Lead exposure is associated with brain damage, impaired intellectual 
development, ADHD, high blood pressure, cardiovascular disease, kidney disease, 
miscarriage, and reproductive problems in men and women. We encourage you to take 
steps to protect yourself from lead regardless of the reported levels by: always using cold 
water that has been filtered with filters certified to remove lead; following filter 
manufacturers’ installation and maintenance instructions; not boiling water without 
filtering it; not mixing unfiltered tap water with baby formula; and cleaning sink aerators 
regularly. 
We further call on EPA to require water systems to include a link in the CCR to an EPA online 
portal where compliance data should be posted.70 Providing these foundational pieces of 
information to consumers about the quality of drinking water will help consumers make 
informed decisions about how best to protect themselves from lead-in-water risks. 
G. 
Responses to EPA’s requests for comment about public education and outreach 
issues 
1. The proposed determination that the public education treatment technique is feasible and 
prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible. 
Additional changes are needed to make public education and notification materials more accurate 
and outreach more effective and to prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of 
persons to the extent feasible. These changes are addressed throughout our public education 
comments. 
2. Comment and supporting data on the capacity of water systems to conduct some or all of the 
required public education activities in 30 days, or another period of time that is less than 30 or 
60 days, after the end of the tap sampling period in which a systemwide lead action level 
exceedance occurs. 
We believe that it will be feasible for systems to conduct the public education activities within 30 
days. See section E.i. for more details. 
3. Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water systems are capable 
of providing consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three calendar days of 
obtaining those results, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or copper action level, 
or if a longer time frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 calendar 
days).  
We encourage EPA to adopt a 24-hour notification requirement for all individual tap sampling 
results. This is discussed in section B.i above. 
4. Whether the proposed requirement for water systems to offer lead sampling to consumers with 
LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines in the notice of service line material is 
effective at reducing adverse health effects. EPA is also requesting comment on the requirement 
 
70 For more details on this request, see the Transparency and Compliance discussion (section 14) of our comments. 

8-15 
 
for water systems to deliver consumer-initiated test results within three days of obtaining those 
results.  
We support the proposal to require systems that exceed the LAL to offer tap monitoring to all 
customers who request it, and to offer tap monitoring for all customers with LSLs, GRR, or 
unknown service lines who request it regardless of whether there has been an LAL exceedance. 
This is discussed in section B.ii above. 
5. Whether the types and timing of outreach activities proposed for systems failing to meet the 
mandatory service line replacement rate are appropriate and whether other activities should be 
considered.  
We support EPA’s proposal to require additional outreach activities for systems that fail to meet 
the mandatory SLR rate to conduct annual public education but encourage EPA to strengthen the 
requirements for outreach activities. This is discussed in section E.i and E.ii above. 
6. Whether EPA should require systems to annually notify consumers if they are served by a lead 
connector, in addition to notifications for sites with lead, GRR, or lead status unknown service 
lines.  
We encourage EPA to increase the frequency of notification of service line materials from 
annual to once every six months for water systems that have lead, GRR, or unknown service 
lines beginning five years after the compliance date. See section C.i above. 
7. Whether EPA should require water systems to provide filters to consumers when there is a 
disturbance resulting from replacement of a water main.  
Yes. This is addressed in section C.ii above. 
8. Whether EPA should require additional public education requirements to further encourage 
swift service line replacement faster than the 10-year replacement deadline. For example, should 
water systems that have LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines five years after the 
compliance date for the LCRI be required to increase the frequency of the notification of service 
line materials from annual to once every six months?  
Yes. This is addressed in section C.i above. 
9. EPA is seeking information and data on when a system provides translated materials to 
consumers with limited English proficiency, what resources are used to translate materials (e.g., 
State resources, community organizations), and what barriers water systems may face in 
providing accurate translated materials.  
While not directly addressed in these comments, we highlight the legal requirement and 
environmental justice implications of ensuring that public materials are made available. See 
section A.ii. 

8-16 
 
10. Whether the Agency should require States, as a condition of primacy, to provide translation 
support to water systems that are unable to do so for public education materials to consumers 
with limited English proficiency.  
Yes. See section A.ii above, as well as the discussion of primacy within section 2.D.iii. 
11. EPA is also requesting comment on additional ways to streamline public education and 
associated certification requirements (e.g., combine deadlines for systems to conduct public 
education or submit information to the State).  
This is not addressed in our comments. 
H. 
Conclusion 
In summary, in order for EPA’s public education regulations to comply with the SDWA 
mandate to prevent adverse health effects “to the extent feasible,” EPA must require that 
consumers receive complete and accurate information from water systems about their drinking 
water quality, and ensure that consumers are not misled to believe their drinking water is safe 
when it is not. Providing incomplete information to consumers will fail to comply with SDWA’s 
mandate to prevent adverse health effects to the extent feasible. EPA should: 
 Require that CCRs, public education, and public notification materials emphasize that 
individuals can immediately take health-protective action by using certified lead-reducing 
filters, rather than waiting years for source water treatment, corrosion control treatment, 
and lead service line replacement to be implemented; 
 Ensure that individuals understand the possibility of elevated lead levels even when a 
single tap monitoring result does not detect lead or when a system is “in compliance,” 
due to factors including the ubiquity of lead-containing interior plumbing and the 
unpredictability of lead releases; and 
 Provide frequent, robust, multi-media, and systemwide public education and outreach. 
 

 
 
9-1 
 
Section 9: Schools and Child Care Facilities 
The LCRI’s provisions relating to lead in schools and child care facilities fall woefully 
short of protecting babies and children. Considering the history1 of the LCR, this is likely a once-
in-a-generation update, or at the least, a once-in-a-decade update, and therefore, the only chance 
to protect generations of children. EPA must take strong action to protect these vulnerable 
subgroups that will be doomed to shoulder the burden of lead exposure their entire lives. Such 
action is entirely absent from the current proposal. EPA states it lacks authority over schools and 
child care facilities, and points to joint efforts with other agencies to work to protect our 
youngest residents.2 The reality is that many, if not all, of these joint efforts have resulted in little 
to no action, leaving millions of infants and children exposed to lead via drinking water.3  
Millions of the country’s youngest children attend day care each work day, often 
spending the entire work day there.4  School-aged children spend at least six hours per day at 
school, with a large percentage of children participating in pre- or post-school activities at the 
school.5 Almost 15 million children participate in the school breakfast program before school, 
further extending their time there. 6 This is all to say that children spend a lot of their waking 
hours in child care facilities or schools, often a majority of their waking hours during the work 
week, and consume water and formula or other food made with water that is not tested for lead.  
The LCRI does nothing to remedy this situation, despite the fact that lead exposure is 
particularly harmful to infants and children. Infants and children’s bodies and brains are 
undergoing rapid development and more easily absorb lead than adults.7  
 
1 EPA, Lead and Copper Rule, available at https://www.epa.gov/dwreginfo/lead-and-copper-rule (last visited Feb. 
8. 2024).  
2 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,957. 
3 For example, EPA specifically mentions a letter the agency sent with DHHS to try to protect children from lead in 
drinking water. However, EPA and DHHS do not even require lead testing and remediation in Head Start facilities, 
which look after some of our country’s youngest children, ranging from birth to age five. See 88 Fed. Reg. 84,957, 
wherein EPA and DHHS abdicate their responsibility to protect children to state governments, and U.S Dept. of 
Health & Human Services, Head Start Services, available at https://www.acf.hhs.gov/ohs/about/head-start, (last 
visited Feb 2, 2024), describing the Head Start Program. Neither has EPA persuaded USDA to define “potable 
water” that is required to be available in schools and child cares to meet the American Academy of Pediatrics’ 
recommendation that lead levels in school water not exceed 1 ppb. Schools and child cares that are funded by the 
National School Lunch Program and breakfast program are explicitly required under The Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids 
Act of 2010, Pub. L. No. 111-296, 124 Stat. 3183, at 3216 & 3227 (Dec. 13, 2010), codified at 42 U.S.C. 
1758(a)(2)(A)(i) & 1766(u)(2), to make “potable” water available to children funded under these programs. The 
USDA memorandum providing guidance on the implementation of this provision does not require schools or child 
cares to address lead in their water or even to meet EPA drinking water standards. USDA, SP 28-2011-Revised 3 
(July 12, 2011), available at https://fns-prod.azureedge.us/sites/default/files/cn/SP28-2011osr.pdf#page=3.  
4 Lynda Laughlin, Who’s Minding the Kids? Child Care Arrangements: Spring 2011, U.S. Dept of Commerce 2, 6 
(April 2013), available at https://www2.census.gov/library/publications/2013/demo/p70-135.pdf.  
5 Id. at 12.  
6 USDA, The School Breakfast Program, (Nov. 2017), available at https://fns-
prod.azureedge.us/sites/default/files/resource-files/SBPfactsheet.pdf. 
7Alan R. Abelsohn & Margaret Sanborn, Lead and children, 56 Can. Fam. Physician 531 (Jun. 2010) available at 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2902938/#:~:text=Children%20are%20more%20vulnerable%20tha
n,by%20concurrent%20iron%20or%20calcium. 

 
 
9-2 
 
Lead exposure, even at low levels, can result in many life-long cognitive and motor 
deficits including memory and attention problems, lower IQ, and reduced reading and math 
skills.8 It is no surprise that the CDC, AAP, and WHO all state there is no safe level of lead9 and 
the AAP recommends that water in schools does not exceed 1ppb.10 
EPA states that the proposed school and child care facility provisions are part of the 
LCRI’s public education treatment technique;11 however, the proposed rule will have little, if 
any, positive effect on public health or public education. The proposal outlines a voluntary, one-
time five-year testing program that would generate little useful data and even less remediation, 
because remediation is not required. The result is that children, a vulnerable subgroup that must 
be considered in setting standards under the SDWA,12 will be left unprotected in the places 
where some spend a majority of their waking hours. This complete lack of protection is not only 
unacceptable from a public health standpoint, it does not comply with the SDWA. Additionally, 
the proposal is very likely to do more harm than good by creating a false sense of security and 
generating incomplete information.  
The proposed provisions for lead in drinking water in schools and day care facilities 
(together, “facilities”) fall short for several reasons. The slow, voluntary, one-time testing 
program requires very little actual testing if a facility opts in; only five water samples would be 
drawn at schools, and only two at child care facilities. Some of these facilities over a hundred 
drinking water outlets; the “required” testing would amount to a small percentage. Even EPA 
admits this amount of testing falls far short of what is needed to protect children.13 Further, water 
systems need only reach out to 20 percent of facilities in their service area every year to inform 
them they are eligible for testing, meaning twenty percent of facilities can’t even opt-in until year 
five. Finally, even if a facility does opt-in, the proposal essentially requires no further action; 
there is no requirement that parents, guardians, or employees ever see the test results, and no 
remediation is required. This is true even if a facility finds it has outlets testing above 10 or 15 
ppb. EPA also has eliminated any citation to a level of lead in school tap water that should 
trigger any action, ignoring the American Academy of Pediatrics recommended maximum level 
in schools of 1 ppb. While it is our strongly held view that the best approach is to simply install 
filtration stations in schools and child cares (”filter first”) without first testing, we note that even 
the very weak 1991 LCR recommended that school ”water fountains and/or outlets be taken out 
 
8 Id.  
9 CDC, Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention, Blood Lead Reference Value, (Dec. 2022), available at 
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/data/blood-lead-reference -
value.htm?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fnceh%2Flead%2Facclpp%2Fblood_lead_levels.
htm Bruce P. Lanphear, et al., Prevention of Childhood Lead Toxicity. Pediatrics (July 2016),  
https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/138/1/e20161493/52600/Prevention-of-Childhood-Lead-
Toxicity?autologincheck=redirected; World Health Organization, Lead Poisoning, (Aug. 2023), 
:https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/lead-poisoning-and-health. 
10 Lanphear, et al. supra note 9. 
11 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,956. 
12 See 40 C.F.R. § § 141.205 (a)(4) and 141.154(a), regarding public notice requirements describing vulnerable 
subpopulations. 
13 88 Fed. Reg. 84,957; EPA, 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water 
in Schools and Child Care Facilities, available at  https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/3ts-
reducing-lead-drinking-water (last visited Feb. 2, 2024). 

 
 
9-3 
 
of service if the lead level exceeded 0.020 mg/L [i.e. 20 ppb].”14 This is a high number and does 
not recommend filters be installed without first testing, but at least it is a recommendation for 
specific remedial action when a specific lead level is exceeded in schools. By proposing clearly 
inadequate voluntary testing, failing to require public disclosure of test results to students, 
parents or staff, failing to recommend or require POU filters, and not even stating lead level that 
should trigger any specific action, EPA’s proposal does a disservice to students and their 
families. 
The vulnerability of infants and children and the unique exposure risks presented by 
plumbing and water usage patterns in schools and child cares necessitates a different approach 
than the one used for lead in residential areas. Providing filtered drinking water to children in 
these facilities is the most health protective and cost-effective action15 and is well within EPA’s 
authority under the SDWA and the Lead and Copper Rule.  Therefore, in place of the proposed 
voluntary and potentially misleading testing regime, EPA should instead require public water 
systems to choose between:  
a) 
Installing certified lead-removing point-of-use filtration16 stations at schools and 
child care centers that will ensure lead removal or  
b) 
Conducting robust ongoing monitoring including the testing of every outlet that 
may be used for drinking water or cooking at least every 6 months, with specific 
recommendations for replacement or removal of outlets from service if they test 
over 1 pbb.17  
These options18 are discussed further in sections 9.A-B and C.iii. below.  
Additionally, the small percentage19 of schools that are regulated as non-transient non-
community water systems (NTNCWSs) should be required to install POU filtration and not 
given the option to test and remediate. 
 
14 LCR, 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,479. 
15 NRDC, Michigan Filter First Cost Estimate, (2020), available at https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/media-
uploads/michigan-filter-first-cost-estimate-202001.pdf. 
16 In this section when “filtration” is used, it specifically means certified lead-removing filters.  
17 If EPA determines that 1 ppb is too low, the maximum EPA should allow is 5 ppb. 
18 Requiring systems to choose between these two options is a logical outgrowth of the proposed rule, as EPA has 
specifically requested comment on the frequency and number of samples water systems must take, and on waivers 
related to filtration programs. A final rule is a logical outgrowth if “affected parties should have anticipated that the 
relevant modification was possible.” Allina Health Services v. Sebelius, 746 F.3d 1102, 1107 (D.C. Cir. 2014) 
(quoting CSX Transp., Inc. v. Surface Transp. Bd., 584 F.3d 1076, 1080 (D.C. Cir. 2009)). If the final rule is 
“reasonably foreseeable,” it is considered a logical outgrowth. Owner-Operator Indep. Drivers Ass’n, Inc. v. Fed. 
Motor Carrier Safety Admin., 494 F.3d 188, 210 (D.C. Cir. 2007) (quoting Long Island Care at Home, Ltd. v. Coke, 
551 U.S. 158, 161 (2007)).  
19 Lead Service Line Replacement Collaborative, Child Care Facilities and Schools, (accessed Feb. 5, 2024) 
available at https://www.lslr-collaborative.org/child-care-and-
schools.html#:~:text=%E2%80%8B%E2%80%8BUnder%20the%20Safe,drinking%20water%20at%20their%20site
. (stating about 10 percent of schools run their own water system).  
 

 
 
9-4 
 
A. The Filter First approach is the best way to protect children 
EPA recognizes that “children under the age of six are at the greatest risk of adverse 
health effects due to lead exposure” Drinking water testing in schools and child care facilities 
consistently shows that lead is prevalent in these places.20 Data from areas with mandatory 
testing programs demonstrate that lead is present in the drinking water in schools and child care 
facilities, and often at alarmingly high levels. For example, New York City found that 82 percent 
of its public schools had lead levels above 15 ppb.21 California found that a quarter of the day 
care facilities that tested had results above the state’s level of 5 ppb, with nine sites testing over 
1,000 ppb.22 In Pennsylvania, over 70 percent of schools that tested had at least one outlet over 5 
ppb.23 These are just a few examples of what has been proven time and again.24 In contrast, post-
filtration testing shows that certified filters effectively remove lead when the filter is properly 
installed and maintained.25 Further testing generally is not necessary (particularly an extremely 
limited voluntary program), and since it provides for so few one-time tests, it is in fact harmful. 
It is likely to overlook lead contamination and to provide a false sense of security, and only 
delays prompt action to protect children.  
In place of its limited voluntary testing regime, EPA should instead incentivize water 
systems to work with local schools and child cares to immediately install filters at kitchen 
faucets and designated hydration stations. Minimal testing26 should then be conducted at these 
filtered drinking water outlets to ensure that the filters are working properly. This will ensure that 
children are immediately protected from the harms of lead in drinking water. EPA should 
incentivize systems to take the filter first approach which systems can do in collaboration with 
schools and child cares in their service area. Alternatively, water systems must conduct robust 
testing with full public disclosure of test results and remediation and remediation in schools and 
child cares. 
 
20 See, for example, Joan Leary Matthews, NRDC, School Drinking Water Gets an F for Lead, (Mar. 2018), 
available at https://www.nrdc.org/bio/joan-leary-matthews/school-drinking-water-gets-f-lead (finding a lead 
exceedance in 82% of New York schools); CDPHE, Test & Fix Water for Kids Lead Testing Results, available at 
https://lookerstudio.google.com/u/0/reporting/49a0278f-2304-4ffb-baa7-6a3891abca07/page/z9o2C (Colorado 
school and child care sampling data with over 16,000 samples above 1 ppb); Environmental Working Group, 1 in 4 
California child care centers found to have alarming levels of lead in drinking water, putting babies and children at 
risk, (May 11, 2023) available at https://www.ewg.org/news-insights/news-release/2023/05/1-4-california-child-
care-centers-found-have-alarming-levels (discussing data showing one-quarter of daycares tested found lead above 
the state action level of 5 ppb, and 183 sites above 50 ppb); and Indiana Lead Sampling Program for Public 
Schools, (Dec. 2018) available at https://www.in.gov/ifa/files/2017-2018-summary-of-enrollment.pdf. (showing 
62% of schools that tested had at least 1 fixture with lead over 15 ppb). 
21 Matthews, supra note 20. 
22 Environmental Working Group, supra note 20. 
23 Women for a Healthy Environment, State of Environmental Health in Pennsylvania Schools 30, (2021) available 
at http://womenforahealthyenvironment.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/SOSreport20212.pdf. 
24 See, for example, Environment America, Lead in Schools’ Water Map (July 26, 2022) available at 
https://environmentamerica.org/resources/lead-in-schools-water/ (last visited Feb. 4, 2024). 
25 See Dept. of General Services, Water Sampling Results for DC Public Schools, available at 
https://dgs.dc.gov/page/water-sampling-results-dc-public-schools (accessed Feb. 4, 2024) (demonstrating filters 
consistently produce water with <1 ppb lead). 
26 Testing should be done per manufacturer’s requirements, when a filter indicates it is no longer functioning 
properly, or at least once annually. 

 
 
9-5 
 
Additionally, EPA cannot rely on the LCRI’s LSLR requirements to protect children in 
schools or larger day care facilities as these locations are generally not served by LSLs.27 
Tellingly, EPA‘s proposed rule does not even require water systems to prioritize schools or child 
care facilities if a LSLs or GRRSLs is present. This omission must be remedied and, and together 
with the LCRI‘s almost non-existent school and child care provisions, it appears as though EPA 
has neglected to meaningfully consider children and its obligations under the SDWA. By relying 
on a one-time, five-year voluntary testing program, EPA is not protecting this vulnerable 
subgroup to the extent feasible. 
B. EPA’s authority to require installation of filters 
EPA must use its authority, granted via the SDWA, to require water systems to take 
action in schools and child care facilities as it is the only way to protect children. The SDWA 
requires the “prevent[ion of] known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to the 
extent feasible”28 and grants EPA the authority to regulate public water systems to achieve this.29 
The adverse health effects of lead exposure via drinking water, discussed above, are well-
documented and easily and consistently prevented by installing filters on all outlets used for 
drinking and cooking. The installation and maintenance of water filters is feasible, as 
demonstrated by several places that have required POU filters in schools and child care facilities. 
For example, Washington, D.C. has had a filter first program in place since 2018,30 Michigan 
recently passed filter first legislation applying to both schools31 and child care facilities,32 and in 
2022 Philadelphia passed filter first legislation.33 
Further, EPA has consistently required systems to conduct certain activities on private 
residences including the installation, maintenance, and monitoring of POU devices.34  Indeed, 
Congress has explicitly required EPA to consider and list POU devices that can be used, subject 
to certain safeguards, as an available technology for small systems to comply with drinking 
water standards.35 The filter first approach outlined in the first option above almost directly 
mirrors the program laid out for small system compliance. Such activities are not limited to small 
 
27 While small schools and child care facilities may be served by a LSL, lead service lines are soft and often small in 
diameter, meaning they cannot provide the water flow needed in larger buildings. 
28 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
29 42 U.S.C. § 300g. 
30 Council of the District of Columbia, § 38–825.01a. Prevention of lead in drinking water in schools, available at 
https://code.dccouncil.gov/us/dc/council/code/sections/38-825.01a. 
31 Michigan Legislature, House Bill 4341 (2023), available at http://legislature.mi.gov/doc.aspx?2023-HB-4341.  
32 Michigan Legislature, House Bill 4342 (2023), available at http://legislature.mi.gov/doc.aspx?2023-HB-4342.  
33 City Council of Philadelphia, Bill No. 220221-A01, (2022), available at 
https://phila.legistar.com/LegislationDetail.aspx?ID=5521749&GUID=9D91F31C-7792-49A7-A3FB-
0515F7A4AFE3&Options=ID%7CText%7C&Search=220221. 
34 40 C.F.R. § 141.93(a)(3). 
35 See SDWA § 1412(b)(4)(E)(ii)(III), 42 U.S.C. 300g-1(b)(4)(E)(ii)(III), (In issuing an MCL or treatment technique, 
EPA shall list technologies available to small systems that can meet the standard for small systems, including, 
“point-of-entry or point-of-use treatment units. Point-of-entry and point-of-use treatment units shall be owned, 
controlled and maintained by the public water system or by a person under contract with the public water system to 
ensure proper operation and maintenance and compliance with the maximum contaminant level or treatment 
technique and equipped with mechanical warnings to ensure that customers are automatically notified of operational 
problems.”) 

 
 
9-6 
 
water systems; EPA has consistently required water systems to conduct various activities on 
property not owned or operated by the water system in order to protect public health. For 
example, water systems have been required to test drinking water for lead in residences at the tap 
for more than three decades.36 
EPA should require systems to choose between the two options suggested above, and 
should incentivize the first option, the installation of point of use devices in schools and child 
care facilities. The proposed rule as it stands will likely do nothing to protect children in the 
places that37 
Unique requirements and a lower “action level” for schools and child care centers are 
warranted because of the unique problems presented by such facilities. EPA recognizes that 
“…larger buildings, such as schools and child care facilities, can have a higher potential for 
elevated lead levels due to complex plumbing arrangements, the presence of lead in premise 
plumbing, and inconsistent water use patterns that can result in long stagnation times.”38 The fact 
that a vulnerable group is served by plumbing systems that have a higher potential for elevated 
lead dictates that EPA take an approach that is different from what the agency requires for 
residential consumers (limited, tiered testing); EPA must require that water systems install filters 
or conduct robust sampling followed by remediation. This is also consistent with EPA‘s 
treatment of small water systems; because of the unique circumstances faced by some small 
water systems, the LCRI retains their ability to ”select the most appropriate compliance 
technology to reduce the lead risks to their consumers” including the installation of point of use 
filters.39 
Finally, for the small percentage of schools that are regulated as NTNCWSs, EPA must 
require systems to install filters and conduct periodic sampling (and of course remove any lead 
service line), as opposed to allowing systems to choose between options. 
C.  The proposed rule does not protect children 
The proposed rule includes a testing scheme that is not even effective as a “test and tell” 
strategy, as it will not identify the range of lead in water nor the extent to which taps throughout 
school buildings and child care facilities have lead in the water. This is because the one-off, five-
year voluntary program requires so little testing, with only two outlets being tested at child care 
facilities and five tested in schools. Finally, the “tell” part of the test and tell strategy is 
completely absent. The LCRI does not require that parents, guardians, or employees ever get 
notification of testing, testing results, or action level exceedances, nor does it require systems to 
inform the public where testing has and has not occurred. Each of these is discussed in turn 
below. 
 
36 LCR. 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460 at 26555 (June 7, 1991), adopting 40 C.F.R. § 141.86 (requiring at-the-tap sampling).  
37 EPA, EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-1622, Public Comment and Response Document for the Final Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions 293 (Jan. 15, 2021) available at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-
1622 (stating children spend a large portion of their day in schools and child care facilities). 
38 88 Fed. Reg. 84,957. This is also why the other elements of the LCRI are unlikely to protect children outside of 
their homes, as these facilities are unlikely to be served by a LSL, as discussed above. 
39 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,945. 

 
 
9-7 
 
EPA’s guidelines outline the various ways the LCRI fails to protect kids. The 3T’s for 
Reducing Lead in Drinking Water in Schools states that “[a]t a minimum, every outlet that is 
regularly used for cooking and drinking should be sampled.40” While test and tell is not what 
EPA should incentivize, this guideline demonstrates the chasm between what the Agency 
recognizes is needed to protect kids and what is outlined in the LCRI. The 3T’s further advises 
schools to take immediate remediation steps like shutting off problematic outlets, followed by 
control measures like installing filters.41 Finally, the 3T’s states schools should “make sure [...] 
communication materials include:... The results of the sampling program and plans for correcting 
any identified problems.42” The LCRI requires systems to distribute the 3T’s or similar EPA 
guidance to facilities and this will have little effect. Because the 3T’s guidance is not mandatory, 
school sampling programs across the country produce results on a daily basis that do not follow 
the guidance, or conveniently skip elements of it. Relying on guidance, rather than requirements, 
for the actual protection of children’s health is not an effective strategy and does not “prevent 
known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible” as required 
by the SDWA.43  
i. 
The program is voluntary 
The first pitfall of the proposed rule’s school and child care provisions is that the program 
is entirely voluntary. Experience in several states demonstrates that voluntary testing programs 
yield dismal participation rates.44 For example, Colorado’s voluntary testing program resulted in 
 
40 EPA, 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water in Schools: Revised Technical Guidance, 24 (2007), available at 
https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-
09/documents/toolkit_leadschools_guide_3ts_leadschools.pdf. Even the title of EPA’s guidance, “Training, Testing, 
and Taking Action.” demonstrates the gap between the 3T’s the LCRI.  
41 EPA, 3Ts for Reducing Lead in Drinking Water in Schools and Child Care Facilities: A Training, Testing, and 
Taking Action Approach, Revised Manual, 42-43 (2018), available at 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-07/epa-3ts-guidance-document-english.pdf. 
42 Id. at 11. 
43 SDWA § 1412(b)(7)(A), 42 U.S.C, 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
44 In FL, less than 10% of schools have participated in its voluntary testing program. Environment America and U.S. 
Public Interest Research Group, Get the Lead Out: Grading the states on protecting kids’ drinking water at school 
(Feb. 2023), at 33. Available at https://publicinterestnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/AME-GTLO-Report-
Feb23-1.2.pdf. In Georgia, “[o]f the more than 2,200 Georgia public schools, only 91 have signed up since August 
of 2021. Only 118 of approximately 3,100 child care centers and 1,500 family child care learning homes have signed 
up.” Ross Williams, Georgia Recorder, Vast majority of GA day care centers, public schools skip state program to 
test for lead in water (July 25, 2023) available at 
https://georgiarecorder.com/2023/07/25/vast-majority-of-ga-day-care-centers-public-schools-skip-state-program-to-
test-for-lead-in-water/. In Iowa, only 51 buildings in seven districts tested under its 2022 voluntary school testing 
program. Iowa Dept. Of Natural Resources, State of Iowa Public Drinking Water Program 2022 Annual Compliance 
Report Appendix C (June 2023), available at 
 https://www.iowadnr.gov/Portals/idnr/uploads/water/wse/Iowa%20ACR%20Full%20Report.pdf. In Kansas, only 
239 out of 1,305 schools tested their drinking water, Get the Lead Out, supra note 44, at 35. 
In Kentucky, only 26 schools and child care facilities participated in its voluntary program. Team Kentucky Energy 
and Environment Cabinet, Kentucky's Lead in Drinking Water Reduction Program, available at 
 https://www.arcgis.com/apps/dashboards/8806517e55eb4c6bbe8b6d9eee379daa.  
In Arkansas, only 64 facilities have tested since 2021. There are over 1,500 child cares alone in the state. Email 
between Corinne Bell, Kathy McFarland, and Tim Cain (Jan. 26, 2024). Information on Arkansas’s program is 
available at https://dese.ade.arkansas.gov/Offices/learning-services/school-health-services/lead-testing-
opportunity#:~:text=Unfortunately%2C%20in%20many%20cases%20exposure,their%20drinking%20water%20for
%20lead.   

 
 
9-8 
 
a mere 67 schools participating over a three-year period; 1,530 schools were eligible. While 
Colorado’s program sought to prioritize schools in disproportionately impacted communities, 
only three such schools participated.45 Similarly, in Ohio, only fourteen percent of schools 
participated in the state’s voluntary testing program.46 The list goes on. In Arkansas, only 64 
schools and child cares have participated in their voluntary testing program since 2021;47 
Arkansas has 1,058 schools and over 1,500 child care centers.48 This is just a snapshot of what is 
happening across the country. There is no reason to believe that the voluntary testing program in 
the proposed rule will lead to different results. EPA should reasonably expect the rule to garner 
similarly dismal participation rates meaning very little testing data will be generated.49 
EPA states a hope that the proposed rule would allow for (not require) baseline sampling 
that would be “supplemented by state efforts.”50 EPA’s reliance on the states to supplement the 
meagre voluntary sampling efforts in the proposed rule is misplaced. This optimistic reliance on 
states has created a patchwork of protections and left the vast majority of children completely 
unprotected. A review of states’ school drinking water testing and remediation laws and policies 
found that over half of the United States is failing to protect children, with only three states even 
earning a grade of ‘B’ for their efforts—and no state earned a ‘A’.51 This means that in just a few 
places, there are some protections for children, and nearly everyone else is left to fend for 
themselves. Further, this reliance on states ignores the reality that many states currently have ”no 
stricter than federal requirements” laws in place. This does not result in the protections of 
vulnerable populations from lead exposure, as required by the SDWA. 
ii. 
The testing will not demonstrate that water is safe 
If a school or child care facility does opt-in to the voluntary testing, the requirements, to 
collect five samples and two samples one time, respectively, are not sufficient to determine 
whether water is safe for children to consume. Lead in water is highly variable; school sampling 
data sets show that even when the exact same faucet is used in multiple rooms, individual sample 
results can vary widely.52 A faucet that tests low today may test high in a repeat sample. For 
these reasons, there is no such thing as a “representative tap” in a school or child care facility, 
and while individual samples can flag a lead problem, they cannot be used the other way 
 
45 Colorado has identified 1,579 disproportionately impacted block groups. CDPHE, Disproportionately Impacted 
Communities, GIS Data Layer (accessed Feb. 2, 2024) available at 
https://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=7d0cf560b11e41f0a4d323c4e6c90e0b#data. 
46 Get the Lead Out supra, n. 44, at 39  (Feb. 2023) available at https://publicinterestnetwork.org/wp-
content/uploads/2023/02/AME-GTLO-Report-Feb23-1.2.pdf.  
47 Supra n. 44. 
48 A search for ”preschool” centers on the Arkansas Dept. of Human Services website turns up over 1,500 facilities. 
Arkansas Dept. of Human Services, Find Providers, (accessed Feb. 2, 2024), available at 
https://ardhslicensing.my.site.com/elicensing/s/search-provider/find-providers?language=en_US&tab=CC. 
49 This is particularly important because the LCRI relies on the public education treatment technique for schools and 
child care facilities, and very little education can happen if there is very little data. 
50 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,958. 
51 See generally, Get the Lead Out, supra, note 44. 
52 See Elin Betanzo, Safe Water Engineering, Filter First to Provide Safe School Drinking Water, PowerPoint 
Presentation (Oct. 27, 2022) available at https://pirg.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/Filter-First-Presentation-
CoPirg-2.pdf. 

 
 
9-9 
 
around—to declare a tap safe. Additionally, a single 250 mL sample, as required in the proposed 
rule, cannot identify if the lead source is the fixture or upstream. 
iii. 
Testing once in a five-year period is inadequate 
The frequency of testing is also inadequate. Water systems must contact only 20 percent 
of the facilities in their service area every year to inquire whether they want testing, and after 
five years, the voluntary testing program essentially ends. This five-year rotation means that if 
your six-week-old enters day care or your three-year-old enters pre-kindergarten in one of the 
unlucky facilities that isn’t contacted until year five, you will never know what water or formula 
your child was drinking while out of the home.  
If EPA is to allow an option for water systems to sample water instead of installing point 
of use devices, sampling must occur at all schools and child care facilities every year, at least 
twice a year, with prompt filter installation for sources testing at or above 1 pbb.53 Testing once 
in a five-year period and then never again is insufficient to protect children, particularly the most 
vulnerable of the subgroup, children who are less than six years old. 
iv. 
The testing and notification requirements do not support public 
education 
EPA states that the school and child care provisions are part of the public education 
treatment technique, but the LCRI fails to educate the public for three main reasons.54 First, there 
will be very little information generated because the program is voluntary and testing is 
extremely limited, and any information that is gathered will be unreliable. Both of these issues 
are discussed above. Third, there is no actual requirement to disseminate information to the 
public.  
The proposed rule also has no true public notification requirement, and this must be 
changed so the final rule does. Under the proposed rule, water systems must send test results to 
the facility, the state, and the state and local health departments. Perplexingly and alarmingly for 
a section deemed to be about public notification, there is no requirement that parents, guardians, 
employees, or children ever receive notice that water testing even occurred or the results of that 
testing. The only provision related to public notice requirement is a minimal requirement that 
CCRs contain a statement that schools and child care facilities are eligible for testing and 
interested persons should contact those facilities if they want additional information.  
Not only does the LCRI’s proposal fail to educate the public, the voluntary testing regime 
may in fact mislead the public, as children, parents, guardians, and employees are left with a 
false sense of security that the water is being tested and schools are acting on the results of that 
testing. Relying on data from the proposed testing regime is akin to pulling one encyclopedia 
book from a shelf, reading one line in one entry, and declaring that you know and understand the 
 
53 There have been instances of schools “remediating” leaded sources by simply shutting off the source or applying 
signage it is not to be used for drinking. Both can result in inadequate drinking water supply at the facility. Applying 
signage still allows the source to be used, particularly by children who are not yet able to read.  
54 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,956. 

 
 
9-10 
 
contents of Encyclopedia Britannica. This is the opposite of education and is in fact misleading 
and potentially dangerous. 
Even if EPA’s testing regime was robust enough to generate reliable data, the LCRI’s 
CCR requirement does not constitute public education. The final rule must mandate that, at the 
very least, affected persons including parents, guardians, and employees receive notification of 
test results above 1 ppb55 as soon as they are available. This could be done either via the 
system’s website, direct mail, and/or by working with the tested facilities themselves. The final 
rule must also require that the CCRs and system websites maintain a list detailing which 
facilities tested, which refused testing, which were unresponsive, and which will be contacted at 
a later date for testing. All of a state’s school and child care testing data must be made available 
online so that the public can track progress and see the results for schools or day care facilities in 
their area.  
v. 
There is no remediation requirement 
One of the biggest problems with the proposed rule is that it does nothing to protect 
children if lead is found in a facility’s drinking water. Indeed, as mentioned in the previous 
paragraph, the proposed rule allows testing results to be hidden from the very people it affects—
children and employees—and parents of those children. the prevalence of lead in drinking water 
in schools and daycares is alarming. Yet, the current proposed rule requires no action to fix such 
a problem once it is revealed. This is a major failure of the proposed rule. 
vi. 
The provisions will create or exacerbate environmental justice issues 
Experience at the state level shows that those facilities that can afford to remediate are 
the most likely to enlist in a voluntary testing program such as the one in the draft rule.56 The 
reason is obvious: who wants to uncover a problem that won’t be fixed? We know that few states 
will enact more stringent requirements than those in the LCRI, as very few have in the past. We 
also know that within a state there will be varying degrees of participation in a voluntary 
program. This results in different drinking water protections based on where one lives, 
undoubtedly with less protections in place for infants and children in low-income areas.  
Low income children and children of color are not only the most likely to be left behind 
by the EPA’s voluntary testing program, they are the most susceptible to the effects of increased 
lead exposure at school or day care. Low-income children57 and children of color58 are more 
likely to have additional lead exposures and higher blood lead levels to begin with. Children of 
 
55 Or 5 ppb if EPA does not accept the 1 ppb limit. 
56 As described above, Colorado’s voluntary testing program saw the participation of only three schools from 
disproportionately impacted areas, even with the state prioritizing outreach and testing in such schools. 
57 Hauptman et al., Individual- and Community-Level Factors Associated With Detectable and Elevated Blood Lead 
Levels in US Children, 175 JAMA Pediatrics 1252, (Sept. 27, 2021), available at 
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapediatrics/article-abstract/2784260. 
58 Lynch and Meier, The intersectional effect of poverty, home ownership, and racial/ethnic composition on mean 
childhood blood lead levels in Milwaukee County neighborhoods, PLOS ONE (Jun. 19, 2020), available at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0234995.  

 
 
9-11 
 
color are more likely to live in a home served by a lead service line59 and so are more likely to be 
exposed to lead in drinking water at home. Being a person of color60 and low income61 are both 
risk factors for lead exposure generally as well as elevated blood lead levels. 
The proposed rule will undoubtedly compound these well-documented environmental 
justice problems. Some states and regions will continue to do the bare minimum under the 
proposed rule, meaning no testing will take place, while schools and day cares in wealthy areas 
with access to remediation funds will take action. Some, if not most, of the babies and children in 
the communities where no action will be taken already have elevated blood lead levels and a 
high risk of lead exposure. EPA can and must protect these children by enacting a national 
regulation that requires water systems provide filtered water or robust testing and remediation. 
This is the only way to ensure equal protection of all children, particularly the most vulnerable. 
vii. 
Conclusion 
For all of the reasons discussed above, EPA must change the LCRI in order to protect our 
youngest residents from life-long harm. Specifically, EPA must require water systems to either 
install filters and regularly test and maintain them to ensure their functionality or conduct a 
minimum of semiannual testing and installation of filters on any outlet testing above 1 ppb. For 
schools regulated as NTNCWSs, EPA should require the former option, installation of filters 
with regular testing and maintenance. 
D. Waivers and Exemptions 
EPA is correct to allow states to grant waivers62 to schools and child care facilities that 
already have a state or locally-required filter first program in place. Such waivers should be 
limited to facilities that 1) have point of use filters on all drinking and cooking water sources, 
2) test those filters at least annually to ensure that the water provided measures less than 1 ppb of 
lead, and 3) maintain the filters. 
EPA should not provide the proposed exemption for schools and child care facilities built 
after January 1, 2014, and facilities that revamped their plumbing after that date. 63 This is 
because of the likelihood of elevated lead levels in schools generally, as noted by EPA, and 
children’s vulnerability to lead exposure. Plumbing installed after January 1, 2014 still contains 
lead, and the increased stagnation times common in schools and child care centers mean children 
are likely to be exposed to lead in drinking water even in these newer buildings. 
 
59 Justin Williams and Tara Jagadeesh, Metro Planning Council, Data Points: the environmental injustice of lead 
lines in Illinois, (Nov. 10, 2020), available at https://www.metroplanning.org/news/9960/Data-Points-the-
environmental-injustice-of-lead-lines-in-Illinois.  
60 Abt Associates, Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, 6, Prepared for 
Jessica Gorges, USEPA, (Oct. 22, 2019), available at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPAHQ-OW-2017-
0300-0008, stating “[n]on-white race has been identified as a risk factor for elevated blood lead levels in numerous 
studies.” 
61 Marshall et al., Association of lead-exposure risk and family income with childhood brain outcomes, 26 Nature 
Medicine 91, (Jan. 13, 2020) available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6980739/. 
62 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,085. 
63 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,083 (§ 141.92 (a)(1)). 

 
 
9-12 
 
E. Definition of Child Care Facility 
We support EPA’s proposed definition of a child care facility. All licensed child care 
facilities should be included in any testing program, including licensed child care homes. Several 
million infants and young children and their parents rely on child care homes;64  while not all of 
these home child care providers are licensed, some states do license home child care facilities 
and it is important to protect these young children. Some of these home care facilities watch over 
infants, who if formula-fed, can receive 40 percent to 60 percent of their exposure to lead from 
drinking water, primarily tap water used to reconstitute formula.65 It’s vital that EPA’s definition 
of a child care facility be as broad as possible to protect as many children and infants as possible. 
F. Responses to EPA’s Specific Requests for Comment 
EPA has specifically requested comment on five elements of the school and child care 
facility provisions. Each is listed below along with a response, or wherein the above comments a 
response has already been given. 
1. Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or to sample more 
frequently in schools and child care facilities.  
EPA’s proposed sampling program is wholly inadequate and should be replaced by a 
requirement that water systems install filters then conduct testing or conduct robust testing with 
installation of filters for outlets testing above 1 ppb. This is addressed throughout, but specifically 
in the introduction to this section. EPA should require twice a year sampling of every outlet in a 
school or child care center used for drinking, cooking or other human consumption, or if a system 
works with the facility to install a filtration station, should test it once annually to ensure it is 
working correctly.  
2. The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community water systems from 
the requirement for lead sampling in schools and child care facilities during the five-year 
period after the LCRI compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after January 
1, 2021 but prior to the LCRI compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the 
waiver requirements of § 141.92(h). 
We support a cutoff date of January 1, 2021 for a waiver for facilities with filter first 
programs. 
3. Whether or not to allow States to waive the requirements of § 141.92 for CWSs in schools 
and child care facilities that use and maintain filters certified to reduce lead, and if so, 
 
64 The National Survey of Early Care and Education found that there are three million children aged 0-5 years in 
child care homes. National Association for Family Child Care, Family Child Care Research and Data, (accessed 
Feb. 2, 2024), available at https://nafcc.org/our-work/public-policy-and-advocacy/research-resources/family-child-
care-research-data/. 
65 EPA, Basic Information about Lead in Drinking Water, (accessed Feb. 2, 2024), available at 
https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/basic-information-about-lead-drinking-water.  
 

 
 
9-13 
 
whether the waiver should only be allowed where schools and child care facilities are 
required by State or local law to install POU devices and maintain them. 
The waiver should be limited to schools and child care facilities that are required by state 
or local law or school district requirements to install and maintain POU devices. These laws or 
requirements must be verified to meet certain minimum standards, including those contained in 
Michigan’s filter first laws. EPA should also issue filter first guidance with public input. This is 
addressed in greater detail in section 4 above. 
4.  The minimum requirements for States to provide a waiver (e.g., should the waiver be 
limited to locations where the filter use is required by State or local law; should the 
waiver be limited to locations where State or local law requires periodic sampling or 
testing to ensure proper filter use). 
Waivers should be limited to places where certified POU filters are installed, maintained 
properly, and tested at least once a year. This is addressed in greater detail in section 4 above. 
5.  Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and child care facility sampling 
results publicly available, and if so, how frequently and in what manner. 
EPA should require that all sampling results are made publicly available and disseminated 
by the water system in a manner calculated to reach parents and staff so that interested parties can 
identify the facility and related test results. Results above 1 ppb must be made available to 
parents, guardians, and employees. This is discussed further in section C.iv. above. 

10-1 
 
Section 10: The LCRI’s CCT and WQP Provisions Must Be Strengthened 
Corrosion control treatment (CCT) is an essential treatment technique in the LCRI 
because, as EPA concluded in the 1991 LCR, “most of the lead and copper found in drinking 
water is caused by corrosion of materials containing lead and copper in the distribution system 
and in the plumbing systems of privately owned buildings.”1 Corrosion control treatments are 
“technically and economically feasible” and “generally available for use,” and “effective CCT 
reduces lead and copper from leaching into drinking water.”2 We support EPA’s conclusion that 
CCT is feasible, available, and can be effective at reducing lead and copper levels at the tap 
when implemented properly.  
CCT also has weaknesses as a treatment technique, particularly in the short- to medium-
term after an action level exceedance. As EPA recognizes, thorough CCT studies may last for 
multiple years and implementation of CCT may take additional years.3 CCT science is complex, 
and optimized CCT (OCCT) may be unique to each water system, such that attaining OCCT may 
require several rounds of iterative adjustments. Accordingly, as discussed elsewhere in these 
comments, after a lead action level exceedance, the best and most health-protective treatment 
technique is for a water system immediately to begin delivering point-of-use filters and 
replacement cartridges certified to remove lead (and/or copper, if applicable) to all customers at 
no direct cost to the customer on an ongoing basis. Filters provide immediate health protection 
and, along with robust, accurate public education, help fill the multi-year gap between an action 
level exceedance and implementation of effective, optimized CCT.  
If EPA adopted a filtration-focused initial response to action level exceedances, CCT 
would still be important. Effective, optimized CCT would likely be the best and most economical 
long-term solution for most water systems. But, under this alternative approach, EPA could 
afford to give water systems and states more flexibility and breathing room to do careful, 
thoughtful CCT studies and, as needed, iterative optimization of CCT, because public health 
would be protected by filters while CCT is being optimized. Designed properly, a filter-focused 
response to action level exceedances could also better align incentives for water systems by 
relieving a water system of the duty to provide filters only when the system’s tap sampling 
results show the system has optimized CCT. To be truly health protective, such an approach 
would need to adopt our recommendations, set forth elsewhere in these comments, for: (a) more 
robust tap sampling protocols,4 (b) a more rigorous method for calculating action level 
exceedances, including a lower action level, a higher percentile, and procedures that require 
water systems to use their highest measured tap sampling results in the calculations,5 (c) more 
thorough and accurate public education and outreach requirements,6 and (d) a stricter standard 
for determining when a water system has optimized CCT.7 However, we recognize that EPA has 
not chosen this alternative filter-focused approach to action level exceedances in the proposed 
LCRI. The remainder of this section generally assumes that EPA will maintain the regulatory 
 
1 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,936 (quoting 56 Fed. Reg. at 26,479).  
2 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,937. 
3 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,937. 
4 Supra section 7. 
5 Supra sections 4 and 7. 
6 Supra section 8.  
7 Infra section 10(B). 

10-2 
 
approach in the proposed LCRI, in which CCT is a central pillar of the response to action level 
exceedances and must be implemented both quickly and effectively to protect public health, such 
that detailed requirements for CCT studies and implementation are needed.  
In the LCRI, EPA is proposing various changes to CCT requirements. Some we support, 
including streamlining the rule to eliminate the LCRR’s use of a lead trigger level for CCT 
requirements. However, many of EPA’s proposed CCT changes weaken the rule, for example, by 
creating several new exceptions that allow water systems to avoid studying and installing CCT or 
re-optimized CCT. Many of these changes are purportedly justified by other elements of the 
LCRI that are stronger, such as the mandatory LSLR requirements and improved tap sampling 
procedures.8 The fact that EPA is proposing to strengthen other aspects of the rule is not a 
reasonable or sufficient rationale for weakening and even backsliding on CCT requirements. For 
example, water systems without LSLs (as defined in the rule to exclude lead connectors) and 
GRRs generally will have no new obligations to remove LSLs, lead connectors, and GRRs, but 
will be allowed to take advantage of some of the weaker CCT requirements. Improved tap 
sampling is a particularly inadequate reason for weakening CCT requirements because tap 
sampling on its own does nothing to improve the safety of drinking water. The fact that more 
systems are likely to have action level exceedances under the LCRI, in part due to improved tap 
sampling, is a reason to require more robust CCT to address the hazardous conditions revealed 
by the sampling, not a reason to weaken or backslide on CCT requirements. 
In addition, the LCRI as proposed would perpetuate and exacerbate the confusing web of 
interrelated regulatory provisions that address CCT requirements. There is a better approach. The 
LCRI’s CCT provisions should be strengthened and simplified in at least the following ways: 
 Eliminate the multiple exceptions that allow water systems to avoid studying and 
implementing CCT and re-optimized CCT in proposed section 141.81; 
 Clarify the definition of OCCT in proposed section 141.2 and modify provisions that are 
inconsistent with the definition of OCCT in proposed sections 141.81(a) and (b); 
 Strengthen CCT studies by requiring testing of orthophosphate over a wider range of 
concentrations, adding transparency requirements, and making other improvements in 
proposed section 141.82(c); 
 Modify the procedures for designating OCCT for small and medium systems in proposed 
sections 141.81(d) and (e); 
 Strengthen the CCT requirements that apply to wholesale and consecutive water systems; 
 Expand water quality parameter monitoring requirements and require transparency for 
water quality parameter monitoring data; 
 Strengthen the distribution system and site assessment requirements (formerly “find-and-
fix”) in proposed section 141.82(g) by adding requirements to provide a free filter and, if 
 
8 See generally 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,937-39.  

10-3 
 
applicable, fully replace the LSL at no expense to the homeowner, if an individual tap 
monitoring sample exceeds the lead action level; 
 Create support and incentives to train CCT experts and share CCT expertise; 
 Reduce the lead practical quantitation limit (PQL) to a lower value consistent with 
current science and laboratory methods 
These necessary changes are discussed in greater detail below.  
A. § 141.81(f): The five-year deferral of CCT actions fails to protect public health to 
the extent feasible, will not achieve EPA’s stated goals, and must be eliminated or 
modified 
In proposed section 141.81(f), EPA proposes “to allow a system with a lead action level 
exceedance to defer installing or reoptimizing OCCT if the system can replace 100 percent of its 
LSLs and GRR service lines within five years of the date the system first exceeds the lead action 
level.”9 As proposed, this section fails to protect public health to the extent feasible, will not 
achieve EPA’s stated goals, would backslide from the previous regulations in violation of SDWA 
section 1412(b)(9),10 and should be either eliminated or modified to provide a much more 
targeted incentive for accelerated LSLRs.  
i. 
EPA’s rationales for allowing a five-year deferral of CCT actions 
EPA provides several justifications for proposed section 141.81(f). Primarily, EPA argues 
that it will spare water systems from conducting “costly and time-consuming” CCT studies and 
implementing the identified OCCT “when the identified treatment would not be tailored for the 
system’s long-term distribution system conditions without LSLs.”11 EPA contends that 
“[f]ollowing 100 percent service line replacement, a study evaluating OCCT on current 
conditions in the system would be more appropriate,” and that systems would have to have “no 
LSL, GRR, or unknown service lines remaining at the end of the five-year period” to be eligible 
for this deferral of OCCT.12 EPA asserts that “[s]ystems would need to ensure they have access to 
replace all lead and GRR service lines in their inventories, and have identified all unknown 
service lines in their inventory” in order to take advantage of this incentive.13 Elsewhere, EPA 
contends that “[t]o take advantage of this proposed pathway, systems are incentivized to find 
ways to obtain access to each lead and GRR service line to replace 100% of lead and GRR 
service lines within five years.”14 Unfortunately, these preamble assertions are not reflected in, 
and are contradicted by, the actual proposed regulatory text.  
 
9 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,937.  
10 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(9).  
11 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,937. 
12 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,938.  
13 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,938. 
14 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,922.  

10-4 
 
ii. 
Water systems taking advantage of the five-year CCT deferral would not 
actually be required to replace 100% of LSLs and GRRs 
The proposed regulatory text of section 141.81(f) is inconsistent with EPA’s rationales for 
this provision, because it does not actually require water systems to replace 100% of LSLs and 
GRRs within five years. Proposed sections 141.81(f)(1)(i)(A) and (B) require systems taking 
advantage of the five-year OCCT deferral to complete “the service line replacement 
requirements under § 141.84(d) within five years” of a triggering event (an action level or PQL 
exceedance).15 Proposed sections 141.81(f)(2) and (3) also refer to the “service line replacement 
requirements under § 141.84(d).”16 As discussed in more detail in Section 2(D)(iv) of these 
comments, proposed section 141.84(d) does not actually require 100% replacement of LSLs and 
GRRs. Instead, proposed section 141.84(d) requires replacement only of LSLs and GRRs “under 
the control of the water system,” it allows water systems to require property owners to pay for 
the costs to replace the private side of a LSL or GRR, and it excuses water systems from 
replacing any LSL or GRR for which the property owner does not consent to the replacement 
after a “reasonable effort.”17 As a result, a water system could theoretically complete its LSLR 
requirements under proposed section 141.84(d) and not remove a single LSL or GRR, for 
example, if all property owners refused to pay for the private-side replacements. More likely, as 
discussed earlier in these comments, water systems completing the LSLR requirements of 
proposed section 141.84(d) will successfully replace some LSLs and GRRs but will leave in 
place an unknown, and potentially substantial number of LSLs and GRRs. Systems also are 
likely to leave in place any lead connectors that would not be included in the definition of lead 
service line. And, as discussed in section 2 of these comments, the LSLs, GRRs, and lead 
connectors left in place are likely to be disproportionately located in lower-wealth communities 
and communities of color.  
The five-year deferral of OCCT in proposed section 141.81(f) is nonsensical in the 
absence of an enforceable requirement to replace all LSLs and GRRs without any exceptions or 
conditions. Unless EPA changes the definition of service lines under the control of water 
systems, as recommended elsewhere in these comments, there is a high likelihood that some 
LSLs, GRRs, and lead connectors will remain in place in a water system after the proposed 
section 141.84(d) LSLR program is completed. Thus, a CCT study using LSLs is likely to be 
necessary and highly relevant to designing and implementing OCCT even after the section 
141.84(d) LSLR program is complete, and EPA’s primary rationale for proposed section 
141.81(f) lacks merit. Instead of sparing water systems from conducting a necessary CCT study 
using LSLs and implementing OCCT, the effect of proposed section 141.81(f) is likely to be a 
delay of the exact same CCT study by up to five years, subjecting consumers to non-optimized 
or non-existent CCT for up to an extra five years. Relatedly, as proposed, there is nothing in 
section 141.81(f) that “incentivize[s]” water systems “to find ways to obtain access to each lead 
and GRR service line to replace 100% of lead and GRR service lines within five years.”18 By 
incorporating the LSLR requirements of proposed section 141.84(d), including the section 
141.84(d) exceptions that allow systems to leave LSLs and GRRs in place, proposed section 
 
15 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,058.  
16 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,058. 
17 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,064.  
18 Contra 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,922.  

10-5 
 
141.81(f) provides no additional incentive for water systems to get access to all LSLs and GRRs. 
In fact, proposed section 141.81(f) may incentivize systems to do the minimal outreach required 
under proposed section 141.84(d), and to do it in a rushed and ineffective manner that leads to 
fewer LSLRs, in order to meet the five-year deadline in proposed section 141.81(f).  
Even assuming that water systems will make their best efforts to obtain access and 
replace all LSLs and GRRs within five years, the structure of proposed section 141.81(f) means 
that a system’s success in achieving 100% LSLR within five years cannot be known until the end 
of the five-year period. Even if a system meets the requirement to replace 20% of its LSLs and 
GRRs per year in the first few years, there is no way to guarantee that the system will complete 
100% of LSLRs by the end of year five. As a result, a system might leave up to 20% (or more) of 
its LSLs and GRRs in service—potentially totaling hundreds or thousands or tens of thousands 
of service lines—and that outcome would not be knowable until the end of year five. Thus, even 
for water systems that have the best intentions, there is no mechanism to prevent proposed 
section 141.81(f) from creating a situation where a water system that exceeded the lead action 
level will delay CCT actions by five years only to have to undertake the exact same CCT actions 
it would have been required to take at the time of the original lead action level exceedance. That 
subjects water consumers to non-optimized CCT for up to an extra five years and the only 
“benefit” would be delaying CCT study costs for the water system.  
iii. 
The five-year deferral fails to protect public health to the extent feasible in 
multiple ways 
The conceptual design of proposed section 141.81(f) is flawed in several other ways as 
well.  
a. Implementing OCCT does not always require five years 
The five-year CCT deferral in proposed section 141.81(f) is based on EPA’s assumption 
that selecting and implementing OCCT generally requires about five years,19 but that assumption 
is inconsistent with the proposed LCRI text. For example, proposed sections 141.81(d) and (e) 
would allow some water systems to recommend OCCT and allow states to specify OCCT for 
such systems without requiring a CCT study in some circumstances.20 As EPA states, “EPA is 
proposing changes to expedite when States can approve CCT re-optimization treatment changes 
for systems” based on a water system’s “past CCT study results” so as to “expedite treatment 
changes” and “allow[] the benefits of treatment modification to be realized sooner.”21 For 
systems that can re-optimize CCT or implement CCT without a CCT study, the five-year delay of 
CCT in proposed section 141.81(f) is illogical and serves only to delay health-protective CCT 
changes that could be feasibly implemented in less than five years.  
 
19 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,937.  
20 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,057-58 (proposed §§ 141.81(d)(1)(iii)-(iv), (d)(2); 141.81(e)(1)(iii), (e)(2)). The LCRR 
also allows for faster selection and implementation of CCT in some circumstances. 86 Fed. Reg. at 4285-86. 
21 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,938.  

10-6 
 
b. The five-year deferral of OCCT fails to account for the widely varying 
numbers of LSLs and GRRs in water systems, even in systems of similar 
size 
Proposed section 141.81(f)’s five-year deferral of CCT actions does not account for the 
widely varying numbers of LSLs and GRRs in water systems, even in systems serving similarly 
sized populations. As a result, it needlessly would allow water systems to defer CCT actions for 
five years even if the water system has the resources to complete LSLRs much faster. If proposed 
section 141.81(f) is retained, it should be amended to include a minimum annual LSL 
replacement rate to help ensure that systems complete LSLRs as quickly as possible and defer 
CCT actions for the shortest period possible.   
In Exhibit 1 on pages 3 to 6 of EPA’s LCRI Technical Support Document, EPA collected 
multiple examples of cities with similar population sizes that had total numbers of LSLs and 
GRRs that vary by an order of magnitude or more. For example, among large systems, 
Washington, D.C., had 28,000 LSLs and GRRs, which is two orders of magnitude more than the 
slightly larger (by population) city of Tucson, which had only 600 LSLs or GRRs. Among 
medium-size systems, Bloomfield, NJ, had 500 LSLs or GRRs compared to 5,000 in Battle 
Creek, MI, despite similar population sizes.22 Overall, EPA estimates that the vast majority of 
water systems nationwide—about 96.5 percent—have fewer than 1,000 LSLs and GRRs and 
provides examples of multiple systems of varying sizes that were able to replace all LSLs in one 
or two years.23  
The failure of proposed section 141.81(f) to account for these differences is problematic 
because it would allow some water systems to defer CCT actions for five years even when they 
have the resources to complete LSLRs in fewer than five years. Even at a 20% annual 
replacement rate, many water systems with low quantities of LSLs and GRRs would be required 
to replace comparatively few service lines per year, despite the water systems having similar 
resources to systems that would be required to replace an order of magnitude more service lines 
per year. That would allow some water systems to defer CCT actions for five years even if the 
system has the resources to replace all of its LSLs and GRRs in fewer than five years. Using one 
of the above examples, if a water system serving a city similar to Battle Creek would have to 
replace 1,000 LSLs per year to take advantage of proposed section 141.81(f), a water system 
serving a similarly sized city that has one-tenth as many LSLs and GRRs should be required to 
conduct replacements at a similar rate and replace all of its LSLs and GRRs within one year. To 
address this problem, the rate of required LSLRs in proposed section 141.81(f) should be at least 
20% of all LSLs and GRRs in the system or at least 500 LSLRs per year, whichever is higher, 
and States should have authority to require a faster rate if the State deems it feasible. This would 
ensure that all systems replace LSLs and GRRs at a reasonable, expeditious, and feasible rate. 
For example, Newark, New Jersey, was able to replace about 100 LSLs per day once its LSLR 
 
22 Other examples of cities with similar populations and vastly differing numbers of LSLs and GRRs from Exhibit 1 
in the LCRI Technical Support Document include: Sioux Falls, SD (198,524 people, 230 LSLs/GRRs) and York, PA 
(197,177 people, 2,300 LSLs/GRRs); Quincy, MA (101,636 people, 285 LSLs/GRRs) and Flint, MI (98,310 people, 
12,035 LSLs/GRRs); and Framingham, MA (72,362 people, 184 LSLs/GRRs) and Madison, WI (71,160 people, 
8,000 LSLs/GRRs).  
23 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,912.  

10-7 
 
program was fully operational,24 so a minimum rate of 500 LSLRs per year would be equivalent 
to the rate that Newark achieved per week. Exhibit 1 on pages 3 to 6 of EPA’s LCRI Technical 
Support Document provides many more examples of water systems of various sizes that 
successfully replaced at least 500 LSLs per year, including Cincinnati, OH; Washington, DC; 
Pittsburgh, PA; Trenton, NJ; Aurora, IL; Kalamazoo, MI; Lansing, MI; Flint, MI; Madison, WI; 
Galesburg, IL; and Stoughton, WI. At least two other systems with fewer than 500 total LSLs—
Mayville, WI, and Village of Montgomery, IL—completed all of their replacements in a single 
year. These results show that a minimum annual replacement rate of 500 LSLs per year is 
feasible.  
c. Proposed section 141.81(f) lacks necessary criteria for determining which 
systems are eligible to defer CCT actions 
As written, proposed section 141.81(f) applies to systems with LSLs or GRRs “that can 
complete the service line replacement program within five years”, but it contains no criteria for 
determining whether it is reasonable to expect that a system “can complete” the LSLR program 
in five years.25 The first milestone is replacement of 20% of LSLs and GRRs after the first year.26 
It appears that systems can self-select into the five-year CCT deferral, and there is no opportunity 
to enforce non-compliance until after the first year. This would allow all water systems to defer 
CCT actions for at least one year, regardless of whether a system can comply with the 
requirements of proposed section 141.81(f). For example, the proposal does not require water 
systems to demonstrate that they have funding or access to replace LSLs and GRRs within five 
years, not even for removal of those service lines that would have to be replaced in the first year 
to comply with proposed section 141.81(f). If a system does not have access and funding lined 
up for the first year of LSLRs, it is implausible that the system will be able to comply with 
proposed section 141.81(f). But, as written, there is nothing to stop such a system from 
attempting (and failing) to comply with proposed section 141.81(f) and deferring CCT actions 
for at least one year. Without more stringent criteria for water systems to be eligible for the five-
year CCT deferral, proposed section 141.81(f) is likely to function as a de facto delay of at least 
one year for all systems that would otherwise be required to take CCT actions under proposed 
section 141.81(a), (d), and (e). Such a result would not protect health to the extent feasible, but 
rather would increase risk for a water system’s consumers.  
d. Proposed section 141.81(f) unduly and unreasonably delays feasible 
public health protections that could otherwise be achieved through 
OCCT  
Proposed section 141.81(f) is also flawed because it fails to adequately protect public 
health using feasible CCT during the five-year LSLR period and during the subsequent five-year 
period in which a water system would have to implement or re-optimize CCT (unless it is 
deemed to have OCCT). Notably, proposed section 141.81(f) applies only to systems that are 
required to implement or re-optimize CCT because the system exceeded an action level or, for 
large systems, the lead PQL. Thus, it applies only to systems for which CCT is not deemed 
optimized (as defined by EPA in proposed section 141.81(b)) and for which there is a credible 
 
24 See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,914.  
25 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,057 (proposed § 141.81(f)).  
26 Id. (proposed § 141.81(f)(1)(ii), (3)).  

10-8 
 
risk of harm from elevated lead and/or copper levels. If CCT is not optimized, consumers are not 
only at risk from LSLs and GRRs, but also at risk from lead and copper leaching from premise 
plumbing, fixtures, and lead connectors.27 Proposed section 141.81(f) unreasonably delays 
feasible improvements to CCT that would benefit all water consumers, including those whose 
sources of lead exposure from premise plumbing and/or lead connectors are not addressed fully 
by the five-year LSLR program.  
By delaying CCT improvements for five years, proposed section 141.81(f) risks exposing 
vulnerable children to inadequately treated drinking water for most of the period when the 
children are most vulnerable to lead exposure. For example, consider a tenant living in a rental 
property served by an LSL who comes home with a formula-fed newborn child at the same time 
the water system announces a lead action-level exceedance. Under proposed section 141.81(f), 
the water system could defer taking any steps to optimize CCT until the child is five years old 
and, if a subsequent CCT study and implementation process lasts for five years (consistent with 
EPA’s assumptions), defer implementation of optimized CCT until the child is ten years old. 
Given the permitted five-year time frame for full LSLR, the water system could also defer 
attempting to replace the child’s LSL until the child is at least four years old (while providing 
water with inadequate CCT that entire time) and then, if the landlord refuses to pay for the LSLR 
or refuses access, not replace the LSL. As a result, for most or all of the years when the child is 
most vulnerable to the effects of lead poisoning, the proposed LCRI would allow the water 
system to deliver water without optimized CCT via LSLs, increasing the risk that the child will 
be exposed to unsafe amounts of lead in drinking water. Similarly, a child growing up in a 
household without an LSL, whose lead exposure is primarily from a lead connector and/or 
premise plumbing, would have to wait up to ten years for optimized CCT. In either scenario, the 
effect of proposed section 141.81(f) is to unduly delay implementation of OCCT by five years, 
which risks unnecessarily exposing an entire cohort of children to unsafe levels of lead in 
drinking water and fails to protect public health to the extent feasible.  
As discussed elsewhere in these comments, we strongly urge EPA to require water 
systems to deliver filters to all customers following any action level exceedance. However, if 
EPA does not accept that proposal and if proposed section 141.81(f) is retained, at a minimum 
this provision should be strengthened to require that systems provide effective point-of-use filters 
certified to remove lead to all households (or at least to all locations with an LSL, GRR or 
unknown service line) during the five-year delay period and during any subsequent CCT study 
and implementation.  
iv. 
If it is retained, proposed section 141.81(f) should be narrowed to defer only 
CCT studies focused on LSLs 
EPA’s primary rationale for proposed section 141.81(f) is “to allow systems to avoid the 
costly and time-consuming process of conducting a harvested LSL pipe loop CCT study and 
installing the corresponding OCCT when the identified treatment would not be tailored for the 
system’s long-term distribution system conditions without LSLs.”28 This purpose could be 
 
27 See generally 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,897 (“Lead can enter drinking water when plumbing materials that contain lead 
corrode, especially where the water is highly acidic or has a low mineral content that corrodes pipes and fixtures. 
The most common sources of lead in drinking water are lead pipes, faucets, and fixtures.”) 
28 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,937.  

10-9 
 
achieved by narrowly exempting water systems from conducting a harvested LSL pipe loop CCT 
study and requiring water systems that take advantage of proposed section 141.81(f) to pursue 
CCT actions focused on the anticipated distribution system conditions without LSLs and GRRs. 
Specifically, water systems utilizing proposed section 141.81(f) could be treated as systems 
without LSLs for purposes of proposed sections 141.81(d) and (e) and could be required to 
initiate or reoptimize CCT based on analyses that assume no LSLs or GRRs in the distribution 
system (e.g., pipe loop studies conducted on other materials in the system). However, if the water 
system fails to remove 100% of LSLs, GRRs, and lead connectors within five years—with no 
exceptions for access, control, funding, or any other reasons—the full provisions of proposed 
sections 141.81(d) and (e) should apply, including the requirements for a harvested LSL pipe 
loop CCT study (plus a requirement for immediate delivery of filters to all LSL and GRR houses 
until all LSLs and GRRs are gone, if not already required).  
This narrower approach would better achieve EPA’s stated purposes for proposed section 
141.81(f) and better protect public health. It would allow water systems to conduct less costly 
CCT studies in the near term, would not delay the results of those CCT studies and 
implementation of OCCT, and would create an incentive for water systems to actually remove 
100% of LSLs, GRRs, and lead connectors in order to avoid the costs of having to do a harvested 
LSL pipe loop CCT study.  
This narrower approach would be similar to the way that Denver, Colorado, is balancing 
lead service line replacements and corrosion control. Denver is working to replace all lead 
service lines at no direct cost to the customer, providing free water filters to all customers 
suspected of having a lead service line until six months after the service line is replaced, and 
optimizing corrosion control based on the non-lead distribution system that will remain in place 
after the LSLR program is complete.29 Notably, Denver Water has been able to pay for this multi-
faceted approach to lead reduction using a fairly typical suite of funding sources available to 
water systems, including federal funding, water rates, bonds, and other revenue sources.30  
v. 
Recommendations regarding proposed section 141.81(f) 
For all of these reasons, proposed section 141.81(f) is misguided, backslides from the 
CCT requirements in the LCR and LCRR, and should be removed from the LCRI. It fails to 
protect public health to the extent feasible, will not generate the benefits that EPA attributes to it, 
and creates perverse incentives and mechanisms for water systems to do less to solve the 
problem of lead in drinking water.  
 
29 See U.S. EPA, Region 8, In re: Denver Water, Colorado, Variance under SDWA section 1415(a)(3) (Nov. 30, 
2022), available at https://www.denverwater.org/sites/default/files/variance-order-2022.pdf.  
30 See Denver Water, Lead Reduction Program, Resource Materials, Federal Funding, 
https://www.denverwater.org/your-water/water-quality/lead/multimedia (accessed Jan. 31, 2024). We note that 
continuing to provide filters for at least six months, or longer, after an LSLR is essential to protect public health 
because lead can accumulate in scales in plumbing downstream of the LSL and those downstream scales can 
continue to be a source of lead after the LSL is removed. See Schock, M. R., et al., Importance of Pipe Deposits to 
Lead and Copper Rule Compliance. Journal AWWA (2014), 106(7), E336-E349, 
https://doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2014.106.0064. 

10-10 
 
If proposed section 141.81(f) is retained, it must be narrowed and strengthened in at least 
the following ways: 
a. Instead of exempting water systems from proposed section 141.81(d) or (e), 
proposed section 141.81(f) should allow a water system with LSLs or GRRs 
to be treated as if it does not have LSLs or GRRs for purposes of sections 
141.81(d) or (e). Water systems should not be exempted from sections 
141.81(d) or (e) entirely, and CCT improvements should be implemented as 
soon as possible.   
 
b. A water system that seeks to use proposed section 141.81(f) should be 
required to demonstrate to the State, and the State should certify, that the 
water system: 
i. 
has the necessary control and access (legal and physical) to replace all 
LSLs and GRRs in its system, and 
ii. 
has funding available immediately to complete at least the 20% of 
LSLRs required in the first year, and  
iii. 
has a credible, likely-to-succeed plan for obtaining funding for all five 
years of the LSLR program. 
 
c. The rate of required LSLRs should be at least 20% of all LSLs and GRRs in 
the system or at least 500 LSLRs per year, whichever is higher, and States 
should have authority to require a faster rate if the State deems it feasible.  
 
d. If EPA rejects our recommendation to require water systems to distribute 
filters after all lead action level exceedances (see section 4 of our comments 
for more detail), filter distribution should be required for any water system 
deferring CCT actions under proposed section 141.81(f). Specifically, such 
water systems should be required to deliver point-of-use filters certified to 
remove lead to all consumers, or at least to all consumers served by an LSL or 
GRR, at no cost to the consumer. This filter provision requirement should 
apply at least until the LSL or GRR is removed, at which time all 
requirements following service line replacements should apply.   
B. §§ 141.2, 141.81(a), (b): The LCRI’s definition of OCCT should be clarified and 
provisions inconsistent with the OCCT definition should be modified 
The LCRI would define “[o]ptimal corrosion control treatment (OCCT)” as “the 
corrosion control treatment that minimizes the lead and copper concentrations at users’ taps 
while ensuring that the treatment does not cause the water system to violate any national primary 
drinking water regulations,”31 but this should be modified in the final rule.  Due to the differing 
chemistries of lead and copper, it is generally not possible to “minimize” lead and copper 
 
31 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,054 (§ 141.2).  

10-11 
 
concentrations simultaneously,32 nor should that be the LCRI’s goal. The MCLG and action level 
for copper is appropriately set at 1.3 mg/L, and this provides a reasonable target for copper 
concentrations at users’ taps. By contrast, the MCLG for lead is zero, and lead concentrations 
should be as low as possible. The definition of OCCT should be modified to say that OCCT is 
“the corrosion control treatment that minimizes lead concentrations at users’ taps and meets the 
copper MCLG at users’ taps . . . .” This change would ensure that OCCT protects public health to 
the extent feasible by keeping copper levels within a safe range and minimizing lead levels as 
much as possible.  
In addition, the last phrase of the OCCT definition should be modified to “. . . while 
ensuring that the whole system maintains simultaneous compliance with all national primary 
drinking water regulations” to ensure that water systems place equal priority on all national 
primary drinking water regulations, including the LCRI. Lead crises in the past, including in 
Washington, DC, have been exacerbated by water systems selecting treatment options that 
prioritize compliance with MCLs over compliance with the LCR. This proposed change to the 
OCCT definition could help to clarify that systems must balance water treatments to attain 
compliance with all national primary drinking water regulations, including treatment technique-
based regulations such as the LCRI.  
The LCRI’s provisions for “deeming” a water system to have OCCT are inconsistent with 
its definition of OCCT and must be changed. Specifically, proposed section 141.81(b)(1) would 
allow medium water systems without CCT and all small water systems to be “deemed to have 
OCCT” if the system does not exceed the lead action level during two consecutive six-month tap 
monitoring periods.33 Not exceeding the lead action level is not synonymous with minimizing 
lead concentrations at users’ taps. This provision does not comply with SDWA’s requirement to 
protect health to the extent feasible because there may be feasible CCT options that would 
minimize lead concentrations to levels substantially lower than the action level. Compliance with 
the lead action level is measured using the 90th percentile lead sampling result. The LCRI’s 
proposed provision for deeming small and some medium water systems to have OCCT means 
that such a water system could have compliance sample results with any conceivable lead value 
in 10 percent of its samples and still be considered to have OCCT. Nothing could be further from 
the truth. Nevertheless, we recognize that there is a need for some reasonable threshold to 
determine if a system has OCCT. For all water systems, that threshold should be provided by 
proposed section 141.81(b)(3), which deems a water system to have OCCT if its 90th percentile 
tap sampling results do not exceed the copper action level and are at or below the practical 
quantitation limit (PQL) for lead. Proposed section 141.81(b)(1) and all cross-references to it 
should be deleted from the LCRI, and proposed section 141.81(b)(3) should provide the sole 
basis for deeming a system to have OCCT.  
 
32 See, e.g., Michael R. Schock, et al., Effect of pH, DIC, Orthophosphate and Sulfate on Drinking Water 
Cuprosolvency, EPA Office of Research and Development, EPA/600/R-95/085 (June 1995), 
https://cfpub.epa.gov/si/si_public_record_report.cfm?dirEntryId=23251&Lab=NRMRL (“Indeed, a response that 
effectively controls lead corrosion might exacerbate copper corrosion.”); Donna M. Dodrill, Marc Edwards, 
Corrosion control on the basis of utility experience, Journal AWWA, 87:7, 74-85 (July 1995), 
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1551-8833.1995.tb06395.x.  
33 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,056.  

10-12 
 
The LCRI’s provisions that allow a system with CCT to re-optimize CCT only once if 
certain conditions are met are also in conflict with the LCRI’s definition of OCCT. Proposed 
section 141.81(a) would allow water systems with CCT to be excused from completing the re-
optimization steps in proposed section 141.81(d) if the system has re-optimized CCT once after 
the LCRI’s compliance date, is meeting its State-designated water quality parameters, and 
continues to operate and maintain CCT.34 Functionally, these provisions would mean that a water 
system that repeatedly or even perpetually violates an action level would be treated as having 
OCCT, and conflates the concept of OCCT with meeting State-designated water quality 
parameters. These provisions are highly problematic, should be modified in the final LCRI, and 
are addressed in more detail below in part 10(E)(ii) of these comments.  
C. § 141.82(c): The LCRI’s provisions regarding the conduct of CCT studies should be 
strengthened 
There are multiple opportunities to strengthen the LCRI’s CCT study requirements to 
help ensure that CCT studies identify feasible and effective OCCT. EPA should make at least the 
following seven modifications.  
i. 
CCT studies should be required to test more orthophosphate concentrations 
Proposed sections 141.82(c)(1)(iii)-(iv) and 141.82(c)(2)(iii)-(iv) require CCT studies to 
evaluate the addition of an orthophosphate-based corrosion inhibitor at a concentration sufficient 
to maintain two specified orthophosphate residual concentrations (as PO4) in all test samples: 1 
mg/L and 3 mg/L.35 These concentrations may be useful as a starting point, but there is no 
scientific basis for limiting CCT studies and OCCT to only two potential concentrations of 
orthophosphate. Based on myriad, system-specific water chemistry factors, the optimal 
orthophosphate concentration for a particular water system may be higher or lower than this 
range of 1-3 mg/L. The factors include pH, alkalinity, calcium and aluminum levels, TOC, and 
others.36  
As EPA noted in the LCRR, “[t]he high-end dose in the corrosion control study of 3 mg/L 
as PO4 is at the low end of the typical range used in the United Kingdom where 95 percent of 
public water supplies are dosed with orthophosphate.”37 For example, in north west England, by 
2005 orthophosphate treatment “was applied to 98% of the region, [with] 75% dosed at 2.0 mg 
P/L, 18% at 1.5 mg as P/L, [and] 5% at 1.0 mg P/L.”38 As discussed in the LCRR, an 
orthophosphate concentration of 1.0 mg/L as P is equivalent to 3.0 mg/L as PO4,39 so the vast 
majority of north west England is treated with a dose of 6.0 or 4.5 mg/L as PO4. As another 
 
34 Id. (§ 141.81(a)(1)(i)(A)-(C), (2)(i)(A)-(C), (3)(i)(A)-(C)).  
35 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,059.  
36 See, e.g., Michael R. Schock & Darren A. Lytle, Ch. 20 Internal Corrosion and Deposition Control, in Am. Water 
Works Ass’n, Water Quality & Treatment, 20.1, 20.54 – 20.63 & fig. 20-23 (corrected) (6th ed. 2010).  
37 86 Fed. Reg. 4198, 4210 (Jan. 15, 2021) (citing Hayes and Hydes, 2010). 
38 P.T. Cardew, Measuring the benefit of orthophosphate treatment on lead in drinking water, 07.1 J. of Water & 
Health 123, 123 & figs. 4, 5 (2009). See also C.R. Hayes, et al., Experience in Wales (UK) of the optimization of 
ortho-phosphate dosing for controlling lead in drinking water, 06.02 J. of Water & Health 177, 181 (2008) (finding 
that, in Wales, “[t]he average dose of ortho-phosphate needed to achieve the [Drinking Water Inspectorate] criterion 
ranged from 0.6 to 1.5 mg/L (P) with an average of 0.9 mg/L (P) across the 39 dosing schemes.”).  
39 86 Fed. Reg. at 4210.  

10-13 
 
example, the 2021 CCT study for Flint, Michigan, ultimately found that the “lowest total lead 
levels were at an orthophosphate dose of 4.0 mg/L PO4,” and recommended that Flint continue to 
use an orthophosphate dosage of about 3.5 mg/L (as PO4), both above the range required by the 
LCRI.40  
Instead of evaluating only two fixed, arbitrary orthophosphate doses, a water system 
should determine the optimal orthophosphate concentration for itself by finding the 
orthophosphate concentration above which the lead response flattens out and there is a clear 
point of diminishing additional corrosion control benefits (while ensuring that the overall 
treatment also allows the system to meet all other national primary drinking water standards). In 
testing various orthophosphate dosages, water systems also may need to adjust other water 
quality parameters, such as by removing hardness or changing away from aluminum-containing 
coagulant chemicals that can consume some of the phosphate.  
Proposed sections 141.82(c)(1)(ii) and (c)(2)(ii), which require systems to evaluate “[t]he 
addition of an orthophosphate- or a silicate-based corrosion inhibitor at a concentration sufficient 
to maintain an effective corrosion inhibitor residual concentration in all test samples” are not 
sufficient, for at least two reasons. First, a water system can comply with these provisions by 
testing only a silicate-based corrosion inhibitor. Recent research shows that silicate-based 
corrosion treatments do not really work for minimizing lead releases and any benefits are due to 
elevation of pH from the silicate chemicals.41 Second, these provisions are vague and require 
only that the tested chemical achieve an “effective” corrosion inhibitor residual concentration. 
Without clearer requirements to test multiple dosages and a clearer requirement that the 
“effective” dose must minimize lead concentrations (consistent with the OCCT definition), these 
provisions are inadequate to ensure that systems conduct sufficiently rigorous, thorough studies 
to determine OCCT.  
These sections should be modified as follows. First, proposed section 141.82(c)(1), which 
specifies CCT study requirements for systems without CCT, should explicitly allow and 
encourage systems to test orthophosphate concentrations above, below, or between the required 
concentrations of 1 and 3 mg/L (as PO4). Second, proposed section 141.82(c)(2), which specifies 
CCT study requirements for systems with CCT that are required to re-optimize CCT, should 
require systems to iteratively test higher orthophosphate concentrations in increments no larger 
than 1 mg/L (as PO4), until the system finds the concentration above which additional 
 
40 Cornwell Engineering Group, Corrosion Control Study Pipe Loop Study Expanded Executive Summary, Prepared 
for City of Flint, at 18 (Jan. 18, 2021), available at https://www.michigan.gov/-
/media/Project/Websites/flintwater/documents/2021/Executive-Summary-Flint-Pipe-Loops-dated-
011821.pdf?rev=97a478f748dc47068b257e601d70937e.  
41 See, e.g., Bofu Li et al., Effectiveness of Sodium Silicates for Lead Corrosion Control: A Critical Review of 
Current Data, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. (2021) 8, 11, 932–939, 
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.estlett.1c00671 (“We find that silicate treatment generally accompanied higher 
lead release than the equivalent (pH-matched) system without sodium silicate (0.5–21.5 times higher). Moreover, 
silicate treatment was inferior to orthophosphate treatment; sodium silicate accompanied 1.0–65 times more lead 
release than the equivalent orthophosphate-treated system. Sodium silicate’s positive effect on pH, then, appears to 
be the main driver of lead release control.”); Bofu Li et al., Controlling lead release due to uniform and galvanic 
corrosion — An evaluation of silicate-based inhibitors, J. of Hazardous Materials, (2021) Vol. 407, 124707, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124707 (“Independent of pH, silicates did not consistently mitigate lead 
release due to either uniform or galvanic corrosion.”).  

10-14 
 
orthophosphate provides diminishing additional corrosion control benefits or until the system 
determines that orthophosphate is not an effective CCT due to its particular water chemistry and 
characteristics.42 It is appropriate to require systems to test a broader range of orthophosphate 
concentrations, and to do so in a more rigorous, iterative fashion when a system is re-optimizing 
CCT because the need to re-optimize CCT indicates that a system has not achieved optimal CCT 
despite having conducted an earlier CCT study. Going forward, any initial CCT study compliant 
with the LCRI will include the required testing of orthophosphate resulting in residual 
concentrations of 1 and 3 mg/L (as PO4). Thus, a re-optimization study must consider a broader 
range of orthophosphate concentrations to try to find a truly optimal dosage for the system, rather 
than repeating the same study with the same limitations that would be likely to reach the same 
inadequate outcome as the original CCT study.  
ii. 
CCT studies should measure additional water quality parameters that are 
necessary for determining OCCT 
Proposed section 141.82(c)(4)43 lists water quality parameters that must be measured 
before and after evaluating a corrosion control treatment, and it specifically requires measuring 
only lead, copper, pH, alkalinity, orthophosphate, and silicate. In addition to those analytes, the 
list of required water quality parameters for CCT studies should be expanded to include:  
a. Dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) 
b. Hardness (calcium and magnesium) 
c. Dissolved oxygen 
d. pH 
e. Silica 
f. Oxidation-reduction potential 
g. Ammonia, chloride, and sulfate 
h. Natural organic matter (NOM) 
i. Iron, aluminum, and manganese. 
Including these additional water quality parameters will provide essential data for interpreting 
the results of CCT studies and appropriately selecting OCCT.44 For example, a synthesis of 
research on control of lead in drinking water, authored by EPA experts, shows that lead solubility 
varies substantially based on pH and dissolved inorganic carbon, and that “considerably higher 
dosages of orthophosphate are needed in waters with higher carbonate contents.”45  
 
42 Personal comms. with Michael Schock and Elin Betanzo.  
43 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,059.  
44 See generally Michael R. Schock & Darren A. Lytle, Ch. 20 Internal Corrosion and Deposition Control, in Am. 
Water Works Ass’n, Water Quality & Treatment, 20.1, 20.54 – 20.63 (6th ed. 2010) (discussing how various water 
quality parameters affect lead solubility and corrosion control treatments). 
45 Michael R. Schock & Darren A. Lytle, Ch. 20 Internal Corrosion and Deposition Control, in Am. Water Works 
Ass’n, Water Quality & Treatment, 20.1, 20.55 – 20.56 & figs. 20-21, 20-22, 20-23 (corrected) (6th ed. 2010). 

10-15 
 
iii. 
Only CCT studies compliant with the LCRI should be used for determining 
OCCT 
Proposed section 141.82(c)(3) allows water systems to evaluate corrosion control 
treatments using “analyses based on documented analogous treatments with similar size systems 
that have similar water chemistry and similar distribution system configurations.”46 Relatedly, 
proposed section 141.81(d)(1)(iv) contemplates that systems required to re-optimize CCT may 
rely on the system’s past corrosion control treatment study results. We recognize and support the 
desire to allow water systems and States to select and implement OCCT based on existing, 
reliable CCT studies, if such studies are available. However, these provisions create a risk that 
water systems will rely on inaccurate, outdated studies and that CCT mistakes from the past will 
be perpetuated. In any circumstance in which a water system or a State is permitted to rely on a 
preexisting CCT study, the LCRI should stipulate that the preexisting study must have complied 
with the LCRI’s requirements for CCT studies. One way to achieve this would be to allow water 
systems and States to use only “reliable” preexisting CCT studies, and to define a “reliable CCT 
study” as one that complies with the LCRI’s requirements for CCT studies. In addition, there 
may be circumstances in which it is protective of public health for a water system and State to 
rely on a prior CCT study to select and implement changes to the system’s CCT, such as to 
increase the dose of orthophosphate if the prior study suggests that may be effective. However, a 
preexisting CCT study should not excuse a water system from any requirements to complete a 
new CCT study unless the CCT study complies with the LCRI’s requirements and there is no 
reason to believe that the water chemistry in the water system has changed substantially after 
completion of the preexisting CCT study.  
iv. 
The LCRI should include transparency requirements for all CCT studies 
At a minimum, all water systems carrying out a CCT study should be required to (1) hold 
at least one public meeting to provide information and receive feedback during the CCT study, 
and (2) to make the final CCT study publicly available in electronic form on the internet. These 
requirements would facilitate information sharing between water systems and would make it 
easier for some water systems to evaluate CCT using “analyses based on documented analogous 
treatments with similar size systems that have similar water chemistry and similar distribution 
system configurations.”47 Transparency requirements also would allow consumers to better 
understand their water systems’ CCT studies and results and would allow independent technical 
experts to evaluate and provide feedback on CCT studies, which would likely lead to better CCT 
studies and more effective OCCT.  
v. 
Metal coupon studies should be eliminated 
The LCRR’s limitations on metal coupon studies were an improvement on the 1991 LCR, 
but did not go far enough. Proposed section 141.82(c)(3) should be modified to eliminate the 
option of using metal coupon tests alone as CCT studies. Metal coupon studies on their own do 
not provide sufficiently reliable and accurate information to determine OCCT.  
 
46 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,059.  
47 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,059/3 (§ 141.82(c)(3)).  

10-16 
 
Coupon studies do not consider the potential impact of water quality changes on the 
release of existing lead scales. Modifying the pH from the level the premise plumbing and 
distribution system have been exposed to for many years or even decades cannot be simulated by 
fresh coupons because they do not contain the scales that naturally build up over time under 
prevailing conditions. While pH and other water quality parameters impact lead solubility, it also 
impacts the stability of the scale and chlorine in the distribution system. As a result, in some 
water systems, water quality changes such as lowering the pH have caused particulate lead 
spikes from the destabilization or solubilization of the existing pipe scales that will remain in 
LSLs, brass and galvanized plumbing. This is why coupon studies are not adequate for 
quantifying lead release and changes that can result from a change in CCT.48   
The purpose of a lead coupon is to reflect the effectiveness of corrosion inhibitors on new 
lead pipes. Brass, galvanized, and copper-with-lead-solder coupons would reflect lead release 
from new premise plumbing materials. But none of them would represent the current state of 
these materials in the distribution system. EPA has previously expressed concerns about 
conducting CCT studies that assume a coupon would reflect distribution system conditions.49 In 
short, coupon studies are unlikely to reveal much that could not be deduced by an experienced 
CCT expert based on water system chemistry and existing scientific literature.  
vi. 
The LCRI should account for lead dioxide (PbO2) scales as a possible CCT 
and as a possible impediment to safe orthophosphate use 
In water systems that do not currently use phosphate-based CCT, lead dioxide (PbO2) 
scales may be acting to control lead release.50 Scientific research, and the experience of cities 
such as Newark, demonstrates that adding phosphate to such a system, or a part of a system with 
extensive PbO2 scales, can destabilize these scales resulting in high lead-in-drinking-water levels 
that may last for months to years and can include the release of Pb(II) phosphate nanoparticles 
that can pass through point-of-use filters.51 In the LCRI, or in accompanying guidance, EPA 
should publicize the risks of trying to convert to phosphate-based treatment in a system with 
extensive PbO2 scales and clarify that water systems and States may determine that adjusting 
water chemistry to maintain PbO2 scales is an effective, acceptable OCCT. In particular, for 
 
48 Letter from Candice Bauer, Manager, Ground Water and Drinking Water Branch, U.S. EPA Region 5, to Eric 
Oswald, Director, Drinking Water and Env’t Health Div., MI Dep’t of Env’t, Great Lakes, & Energy, at 2 (Nov. 23, 
2021), https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-12/mi_benton-harbor_cct-study-plan-feedback_ltr_2021-
11-23.pdf. 
49 See generally id.  
50 See, e.g., Michael R. Schock & Darren A. Lytle, Ch. 20 Internal Corrosion and Deposition Control, in Am. Water 
Works Ass’n, Water Quality & Treatment, 20.1, 20.55 (6th ed. 2010) (“Low lead levels at modest to high DIC were 
also found to be attributable to the discovery that many of these moderate- to high-alkalinity water systems are 
likely protected by PbO2 deposits . . . .”).  
51 See, e.g., Lytle, D. A. et al., Lead Particle Size Fractionation and Identification in Newark, New Jersey's Drinking 
Water, Environ Sci Technol (2020), 54(21), 13672-13679, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.0c03797, 
manuscript available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7702024/pdf/nihms-1645231.pdf; Michael 
K. DeSantis, et al., Orthophosphate Interactions with Destabilized PbO2 Scales, Env’t Sci. & Tech. (2020) 54 (22), 
14302-14311, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/acs.est.0c03027; Glen R. Boyd, et al., Effects of Changing 
disinfectants on lead and copper release, Journal AWWA (Nov. 2008) 100:11, 75-87, 
https://awwa.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.1551-8833.2008.tb09775.x; Darren A Lytle & Michael R. 
Schock, Formation of Pb(IV) oxides in chlorinated water, Journal AWWA (Nov. 2005) 97:11, 102-114, 
https://awwa.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.1551-8833.2005.tb07523.x.  

10-17 
 
chlorinating systems, the LCRI should add evaluation of PbO2 scale and pH adjustment as a 
corrosion control treatment option, and such systems should be required to evaluate the 
effectiveness of chlorination to maintain PbO2 scale before switching to orthophosphate. If a 
chlorinating system proposes to switch to orthophosphate, the system should be required to make 
publicly available a study demonstrating that the switch will not substantially increase lead in 
drinking water, including an evaluation of the potential for creation of Pb(II) phosphate 
nanoparticles.  
vii. 
DBP pre-cursor removal as CCT 
In the LCRI, EPA should consider adding disinfection byproduct (DBP) precursor 
removal as a corrosion control treatment because it allows high chlorine and high pH that may 
maintain PbO2 scale while maintaining compliance with DBP MCLs.  If chlorine disinfection is 
maintaining PbO2 scales and low lead levels, but a water supply is dangerously close to the DBP 
MCLs, it is appropriate to study DBP precursor removal as an alternative to changing 
disinfectant and adding a corrosion inhibitor. Changing disinfectant and adding orthophosphate 
has been associated with destabilized PbO2 scales because of disinfectant change.52 A water 
system should be able to study whether DBP pre-cursor removal would allow the water system to 
maintain lead control via PbO2 scale in lieu of adding or studying an orthophosphate inhibitor 
while making other long-term treatment changes to maintain DBP compliance. 
D. § 141.81(d) & (e): The LCRI’s procedures for designating OCCT for small and 
medium systems should be modified 
The LCRI, in proposed sections 141.81(d)(1)(iii) and 141.81(e)(1)(iii), would require 
medium water systems without lead service lines and all small water systems to recommend 
optimal or re-optimized CCT within six months after an exceedance of the lead or copper action 
level. It is not clear that small and medium systems have sufficient technical capacity to make a 
technically and scientifically sound CCT recommendation within six months. State drinking 
water programs are more likely to have corrosion control experience and expertise, including 
from working with other similar water systems in the State. EPA should consider modifying this 
requirement to require such water systems to compile and provide specified information to the 
State within a shorter time frame, such as within 45 or 90 days, to facilitate a well-informed State 
designation of OCCT in Step 2 of the process (proposed section 141.81(d)(2), (e)(2)). For 
example, instead of recommending OCCT, small and medium water systems could be required to 
compile and provide to the State within 45 days: (1) all WQP monitoring results from the past 
ten years, including all available WQP data from the distribution system and from source water 
monitoring, (2) all lead and copper tap monitoring sampling results from the last ten years, 
including all tap sampling data for lead and copper collected for any purpose that are in the 
control of the water system, (3) a compilation of any known CCT studies and/or designated 
OCCT for water systems with similar characteristics (e.g., based on geographic proximity, source 
water, distribution system characteristics, etc.), and (4) any other information within the water 
system’s control that may be relevant to the State’s designation of OCCT.  
 
52 Michael K. DeSantis, et al., Orthophosphate Interactions with Destabilized PbO2 Scales, Env’t Sci. & 
Tech. (2020) 54 (22), 14302-14311, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/acs.est.0c03027.  

10-18 
 
In addition, EPA should conduct, or require States to conduct, systematic corrosion 
control studies using typical, representative source waters across the country (or their state) to 
provide a robust baseline of CCT studies that States and water systems could use to extrapolate 
to treatment requirements for individual small- and medium-size systems. In many cases, 
especially for systems that lack LSLs and GRRs, CCT experts can already predict CCT options 
that are likely to be effective based on a water system’s characteristics and chemistry and the 
substantial scientific literature on CCT. Representative CCT studies would complement existing 
information to make CCT selections even more streamlined. Ideally, the LCRI should require 
States to conduct such representative CCT studies as a condition of primacy. In addition or, at a 
minimum, in the alternative, EPA should consider conducting these studies or funding states to 
conduct them separate from LCRI requirements.  
E. § 141.81: The LCRI should require more water systems to conduct CCT studies and 
implement OCCT 
As drafted, the LCRI perpetuates a dizzyingly complex decision tree for determining 
which water systems are required to conduct CCT studies and implement OCCT, and it adds new 
exceptions and loopholes that fail to protect public health. The LCRI should be simplified and 
strengthened by requiring more water systems to conduct CCT studies and implement OCCT.  
Overall, the LCRI requires water systems to complete CCT steps, including a CCT study, 
when triggered to do so by an action level exceedance or, for large systems, when the 90th 
percentile tap sampling monitoring exceeds the lead PQL. These triggers, and multiple 
exceptions to them, are embedded in a complex web of cross-referencing provisions in proposed 
sections 141.81(a)-(g).  
i. 
More water systems should be required to conduct CCT studies 
A fundamental problem with the LCRI’s approach to CCT is that all CCT obligations are 
only triggered by an action level exceedance (or, for large systems, a lead PQL exceedance). That 
approach is problematic because of the length of time it takes to complete a corrosion control 
study. As EPA summarizes, “[i]t generally takes approximately five years to complete the CCT 
evaluation and installation process: 30 months to construct a pipe rig and conduct a treatment 
study followed by 30 months to install the State-approved OCCT and an additional one year to 
conduct follow-up monitoring.”53 That means that, after an action level or PQL exceedance, 
consumers generally are left to wait for about five years before getting any benefits from CCT as 
a treatment technique. And, even then, it typically takes additional months or years for the CCT 
to work as designed, for example, through the formation of new scales within the water 
distribution system.  
A feasible and more health-protective approach would be to require all water systems, 
without any exceptions, to complete at least Steps 1 through 4 of proposed section 141.81(d) (for 
systems with CCT) or Steps 1 through 4 of proposed section 141.81(e) (for systems without 
CCT). That would result in every water system having State-designated OCCT. The most health-
protective, feasible approach would be for all water systems then to be required to install and 
 
53 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,937.  

10-19 
 
maintain the OCCT, with an ongoing duty to re-optimize CCT if the water system’s 90th 
percentile tap sampling results exceed the lead PQL or the copper action level (see part 10(B) of 
these comments). But even if water systems were required only to implement the State-
designated OCCT after an action level exceedance (or, for large systems, a lead PQL 
exceedance), that would still be far more health protective than what the LCRI proposes. EPA’s 
own estimates show that completing the CCT study ahead of time would reduce the time lag 
before implementing CCT by up to about 30 months, allowing water systems to implement 
OCCT about twice as fast. Thirty months—about two-and-a-half years—represents a substantial 
portion of the period when a young child is most susceptible to lead poisoning. Reducing the 
time to implement OCCT after an action level or PQL exceedance by 30 months would provide 
far better protection for consumers and is a feasible way to make CCT a more effective treatment 
technique.  
In the alternative, if the LCRI retains a triggering condition for CCT studies, the 
appropriate trigger for all water systems should be 90th percentile tap monitoring results that 
exceed the lead PQL or the copper action level. Exceeding either of these thresholds indicates an 
unsafe level of lead and/or copper in at least 10 percent of sampled households, and water 
systems should begin CCT preparations immediately. Exceeding either the lead PQL or the 
copper action level should be sufficient to require a water system to complete at least Steps 1 
through 4 of proposed section 141.81(d) (for systems with CCT) or Steps 1 through 4 of 
proposed section 141.81(e) (for systems without CCT). The most health-protective, feasible 
approach would be for any such system to be required to implement the State-designated OCCT 
as well. But, even if the action level is retained as the triggering event for small and medium 
water systems to implement CCT, all systems with 90th percentile tap monitoring results that 
exceed the lead PQL or the copper action level should be required to start preparing for a 
possible action level exceedance to minimize the duration following an action level exceedance 
during which the system exceeds the action level and does not have OCCT.  
At a minimum, to facilitate regulatory flexibility, proposed section 141.81(a) should be 
modified to allow a State to require any water system to study and/or install CCT at any time and 
for any reason. This addition would ensure that primacy States reserve such authority for 
themselves in their regulations and would facilitate State interventions in unusual circumstances. 
For example, a State should be able to require a water system to study and install CCT if the 
State concludes that there is a problem with lead or copper in the system’s water notwithstanding 
the system’s 90th percentile tap monitoring results (which might be missing, inaccurate, 
incomplete, or otherwise erroneous).54 Moreover, as EPA is aware, some states have “no more 
stringent than federal law” clauses, making explicit authorization for such state actions 
important. 
ii. 
All systems with CCT should have an ongoing duty to re-optimize CCT after 
action level exceedances 
For water systems of all sizes with CCT, the LCRI would require a system that exceeds 
either the lead or copper action level to complete the re-optimized OCCT steps in proposed 
 
54 For example, EPA ordered emergency actions in Clarksburg, West Virginia, based on individual sampling results 
and other circumstances even though there had not yet been a formal action level exceedance.  

10-20 
 
section 141.81(d) after the first action level exceedance.55 Thereafter, a water system would be 
excused from completing the re-optimization steps if the system has re-optimized once after the 
LCRI’s compliance date, is meeting its State-designated water quality parameters, and continues 
to operate and maintain CCT.56 EPA justifies this exception to the re-optimization requirement by 
arguing that continued action level violations may be the result of factors other than the 
performance of the CCT.57 EPA also asserts that systems with repeated action level exceedances 
would be excused from re-optimizing more than once “unless required by the State.”58 
There are several problems with this provision. First, it assumes that a water system and 
State properly identified the single optimal CCT for the system during the one re-optimization 
process. That assumption ignores the reality that CCT is a complex science and that achieving 
OCCT may require multiple rounds of iterative adjustments to find the CCT that truly minimizes 
lead concentrations at the tap system-wide. For example, on January 9, 2019, the Michigan 
Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy (EGLE) told Benton Harbor to implement 
corrosion control treatment prior to studying it or testing it. The selected inhibitor was initiated 
despite skepticism from the EGLE manager and a contradiction with EPA’s CCT guidance 
manual. Benton Harbor had to continue increasing its orthophosphate dose for several years until 
the 90th percentile lead level finally began to decrease in late 2021. It also ignores a variety of 
circumstances that would indicate a new re-optimization study is needed, such as the possibilities 
that the initial re-optimization study was conducted poorly and reached erroneous results, that 
CCT science may have advanced since the time of the initial re-optimization study, or that the 
system’s source water quality or treatment may have changed.  
Second, EPA’s rationale for this provision—that repeated action level exceedances may 
result from factors other than the performance of CCT—is at odds with EPA’s rationale for 
setting the lead action level at 0.010 mg/L. EPA states that, in setting the lead action level, 
“EPA’s primary consideration was the finding that an action level at 0.010 mg/L is supported by 
past CCT performance data as being generally representative of OCCT,”59 and asserts that “an 
action level of 0.010 mg/L would ensure the treatment technique of CCT is feasible for small and 
medium systems.”60 EPA should stand by its determination that the lead action level is feasible 
for systems of all sizes and representative of OCCT, and should require systems with CCT that 
exceed an action level to try again and to continue improving their CCT until it is truly optimized 
and, at a minimum, achieves compliance with the action level, or until the State determines that 
nothing more can be done. (And, as discussed throughout these comments, any time there is an 
action level exceedance, water systems should be required to deliver certified lead reducing 
filters to all customers while CCT is being evaluated and implemented, and filters may be the 
only solution if a system truly has OCCT yet continues to violate an action level.) Any decision 
that nothing more can be done to optimize CCT in a water system that repeatedly exceeds an 
action level should be made by the State based on the specific circumstances of the particular 
water system, not determined in the abstract by a national regulation.  
 
55 88 Fed. Reg. at 85.056 (§ 141.81(a)(1)(i), (2)(i), (3)(i)).  
56 Id. (§ 141.81(a)(1)(i)(A)-(C), (2)(i)(A)-(C), (3)(i)(A)-(C)).  
57 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,937.  
58 Id.  
59 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,939.  
60 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,943.  

10-21 
 
Third, as drafted, proposed section 141.81(a), does not explicitly allow a State to require 
a water system with CCT that exceeds the lead action level to re-optimize CCT. For large 
systems, under proposed section 141.81(a)(1)(ii), a State may require a re-optimization process if 
a system exceeds the lead PQL but does not exceed the lead or copper action level. But there is 
no explicit provision in proposed section 141.81(a)(1)(i), (2)(i), or (3)(i) allowing a State to 
require multiple re-optimizations for a system of any size that has CCT and repeatedly exceeds 
the lead or copper action level. This reinforces the need, identified above in these comments, to 
add a provision to proposed section 141.81(a) allowing a State to require CCT steps at any time 
for any reason.  
For systems with CCT that repeatedly exceed either the lead or copper action level, the 
default assumption in the LCRI that CCT is already optimized should be reversed. Instead, by 
default, a system with CCT that repeatedly exceeds an action level should be assumed not to 
have OCCT and should be required to complete the re-optimization process in proposed section 
141.81(d), unless and until the State determines that no further optimization of CCT is possible. 
One mechanism to achieve this would be to require systems with CCT that have repeated action 
level exceedances to initiate the steps in proposed section 141.81(d) but starting with Step 1(iv) 
and Step 2 (proposed sections 141.81(d)(1)(iv) and 141.81(d)(2)). That would allow water 
systems with repeated action level exceedances to recommend CCT modifications based their 
past CCT study results and require the State to either require a new CCT study or to designate (or 
redesignate) re-optimized CCT for the system.  
In the alternative, at a bare minimum, proposed sections 141.81(a)(1)(i), (2)(i), and (3)(i) 
must be modified to include limits on how long a system with recurring action level exceedances 
can avoid doing a re-optimization study. EPA should draft the CCT provisions of the LCRI with 
an eye on long-term implementation, including during the period after mandatory lead service 
line removals during which the LCRI may still be in effect. As proposed, the LCRI could lead to 
the absurd result of water systems continuing to use ineffective CCT for decades, long after all 
lead service lines have been replaced and despite recurring action level exceedances. Even under 
EPA’s rationale for limiting repeated re-optimization studies, there should come a point when 
water systems that repeatedly violate an action level are no longer assumed to have, or treated as 
if they have, OCCT. To avert this outcome, proposed sections 141.81(a)(1)(i), (2)(i), and (3)(i) 
should be modified at a minimum to include specific time limits that ensure that a preexisting re-
optimization study is not outdated and to place limits on how many monitoring periods of action 
level exceedances are allowed. Specifically, we recommend that systems be allowed to defer 
further re-optimization studies only if the system’s preexisting re-optimization study is less than 
five years old and for no more than two consecutive six-month monitoring periods with action 
level exceedances. A new re-optimization study should be required of all systems with CCT if 
either of those conditions is not met because it would indicate that the preexisting CCT study 
may be outdated or that there may be pervasive, continuing problems with the system’s CCT. We 
recommend these thresholds because they would require a system to conduct no more than two 
re-optimization studies over the next 10 years during the mandatory LSLR program and would 
require new re-optimization studies by systems with chronic, ongoing action level exceedances 
that may be indicative of ineffective, non-optimized CCT. In doing so, these thresholds would 
account for the burdens of repeated CCT studies, especially during intensive LSLR efforts, while 
doing more to protect public health to the extent feasible by ensuring that water systems with 
inadequate CCT are not allowed to continue using inadequate CCT indefinitely.  

10-22 
 
iii. 
Medium and small systems should not be excused from the consequences of 
exceeding an action level 
Proposed section 141.81(g) should be deleted from the LCRI. As drafted, proposed 
section 141.81(g) applies to small and medium systems without CCT that exceed the lead and/or 
copper action level and are required to complete the CCT steps in proposed section 141.81(e).61 
If such a system subsequently does not exceed the lead and copper action levels for two 
consecutive six-month tap monitoring periods, the system is allowed to stop the CCT process 
after Step 2 (stopping before completing the CCT study in Step 3) or after Step 4 (stopping 
before installing OCCT in Step 5). EPA does not offer any substantive explanation or 
justification for proposed section 141.81(g), other than noting that the concept is carried over 
from the LCRR.62 
Proposed section 141.81(g) defeats the purpose of using the action levels to trigger initial 
CCT obligations for small and medium systems. In proposing the LCRI’s lead action level, EPA 
stated that “EPA’s primary consideration was the finding that an action level at 0.010 mg/L is 
supported by past CCT performance data as being generally representative of OCCT”63, and 
concluded that “an action level of 0.010 mg/L would ensure the treatment technique of CCT is 
feasible for small and medium systems.”64 Having concluded that the lead action level is 
generally feasible and achievable for small and medium systems, there is no reason to give small 
and medium systems a free pass after an action level exceedance. Even a single action level 
exceedance is evidence that a water system does not have OCCT, and such water systems should 
not be excused from studying and implementing OCCT even if their later tap monitoring results 
are below the action level.  
As drafted, proposed section 141.81(g) creates a strong, perverse incentive for small and 
medium systems that exceed an action level to attempt to game the monitoring program to bring 
their 90th percentile monitoring results below the action level, regardless of whether those results 
are truly representative of system-wide water quality. For example, within the bounds of 
allowable changes to a system’s monitoring program, a system might attempt to select different 
monitoring sites that are anticipated to have lower lead and/or copper concentrations or attempt 
to sample many additional sites that are anticipated to have lower lead and/or copper 
concentrations to move the 90th percentile value even if nothing actually changes in the water 
system.  
As a general matter, there is no reason to believe that action level exceedances will 
typically be self-correcting. Plumbing tends to corrode more over time, not less. A reduction in 
lead compliance sampling results from one monitoring period to the next that lacks an identified 
scientific mechanism for creating that reduction cannot be considered a correction to the water 
quality problem. One possible justification for proposed section 141.81(g) is that the mandatory 
10-year LSLR requirement may support an optimistic hope that action level exceedances in 
systems with LSLs and GRRs will be corrected by the LSLR requirements. If that is EPA’s 
 
61 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,058.  
62 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,937. The LCRR summarized this provision but did not explain or justify it. See 86 Fed. Reg. at 
4209.  
63 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,939.  
64 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,943.  

10-23 
 
rationale, it should be explained and proposed section 141.81(g) should, at a minimum, be 
narrowed to apply only under the following circumstances: (1) to small and medium systems that 
have LSLs and GRRs; (2) when the action level exceedance is driven entirely or primarily by 
fifth liter samples from LSLs and GRRs, not first liter samples from premise plumbing; and (3) 
for no longer than the 10-year period that corresponds with the mandatory LSLR requirements. 
These narrower conditions would ensure that proposed section 141.81(g) applies only to systems 
for which there is a conceivably plausible expectation that LSLRs may resolve the initial action 
level exceedance.  
More broadly, in considering whether to retain or modify proposed section 141.81(g), 
EPA should keep in mind how it will work in the future, long after the 10-year mandatory LSLR 
requirements are completed, when there would be little reason to expect that anything 
meaningful will change within a water system between monitoring periods (unless the system 
implements CCT or makes other major changes to the system or its source water). EPA should 
also keep in mind its conclusion that the vast majority of water systems have zero or fewer than 
1,000 LSLs, and so action level exceedances in many systems will be driven by issues unrelated 
to LSLs and that phenomenon will become even more widespread as systems complete the 
mandatory LSLR requirement. When a small or medium water system exceeds the lead or copper 
action level, there is no reason to excuse the system from studying and implementing CCT in the 
absence of evidence or a reasonable belief that something else has changed to meaningfully 
improve the safety of the system’s water.  
Proposed section 141.81(g) is also unnecessary because proposed section 141.93 creates 
flexibility options for small systems that would otherwise be required to study and implement 
CCT under proposed section 141.81. Rather than creating multiple avenues for small systems to 
evade studying and implementing CCT, the only exception for systems required to study and 
implement CCT should be the small system compliance flexibility options in proposed section 
141.93 (subject to the recommendations we provide in section 6 of these comments).  
For these reasons, proposed section 141.81(g) should be deleted from the LCRI. In the 
alternative, at a minimum, proposed section 141.81(g) should be modified to require small and 
medium systems to complete their CCT study through Step 4, the State designation of OCCT. If 
proposed section 141.81(g) is retained, it should only allow small and medium systems to defer 
implementation of their State-designated OCCT by allowing them to pause the CCT process 
before Step 5. As discussed in more detail in part 10(E)(i) of these comments, completing the 
CCT study through Step 4 would allow a water system that later exceeds an action level again to 
implement OCCT up to about 30 months faster than if the system has to start from scratch, and 
would help to reduce the lengthy period of time between an action level exceedance and the 
implementation of OCCT, which in turn would better protect public health. Also, as discussed 
above, if the intent of proposed section 141.81(g) is to allow for the possibility that LSLRs will 
resolve an action level exceedance, additional requirements should be added to ensure that 
proposed section 141.81(g) applies only to systems with LSLs or GRRs, only during the period 
of mandatory LSLRs, and only when the system’s initial action level exceedance is caused by 
fifth liter samples from the LSLs and GRRs, not by first liter samples from premise plumbing.  

10-24 
 
iv. 
Re-optimization requirement for systems currently using a polyphosphate or 
a polyphosphate blend for CCT 
Proposed section 141.81 should be modified to require all systems, of any size, that 
currently use a polyphosphate or a polyphosphate blend as their CCT to complete the re-
optimization process in proposed section 141.81(d), without any exceptions, if such a system has 
a lead action level exceedance. As EPA experts explained in a synthesis chapter about corrosion 
control, “[i]n both theory and practice, polyphosphate chemicals have been shown to be 
detrimental to lead control when all the important factors have been isolated in the tests. Some of 
the apparently successful applications of polyphosphate-lead corrosion control may actually be 
caused by pH adjustment or the reversion of a fraction of the polyphosphate to a protective 
orthophosphate form.”65 As a result, if a system that is currently relying on a polyphosphate or 
polyphosphate blend for CCT exceeds the lead action level, it must be required to complete the 
re-optimization process consistent with the LCRI’s requirements.  
F. § 141.81(g) & 141.90(a)(4): Requirements for systems planning a treatment or 
source change 
As widely reported in numerous cities, including Flint, MI, Washington, DC, Pittsburgh, 
PA, University Park, IL, and others, changes in a water system’s source water or water treatment 
can result in catastrophic corrosion control failures and massive public health crises due to lead 
in drinking water. Because EPA is expected to soon require certain additional measures to control 
disinfection byproducts though revised microbial and disinfection byproduct rules, additional 
widespread changes in water treatment can be expected. A change in disinfection practices or 
treatment changes intended to reduce disinfection byproduct levels (such as pH adjustments or 
certain technologies used for DBP precursor removal) may have a profound impact on the 
effectiveness of corrosion control, as we saw in Washington, DC66 and Newark, NJ.67 Proposed 
sections 141.81(g) and 141.90(a)(4) require water systems to notify the State and receive State 
approval before adding a new water source or making long-term changes in treatment.68 These 
provisions are necessary and a good first step but, alone, they are insufficient to ensure effective 
CCT and protect public health to the extent feasible. These provisions should be strengthened in 
at least four ways.  
First, the LCRI should have mandatory minimum requirements for the information and 
studies that a water system must conduct and submit to the State prior to adding a new water 
source or making long-term treatment changes. These studies and information should include, at 
a minimum: (1) WQP data for the existing water source(s) and any proposed new water 
 
65 Michael R. Schock & Darren A. Lytle, Ch. 20 Internal Corrosion and Deposition Control, in Am. Water Works 
Ass’n, Water Quality & Treatment, 20.1, 20.58 (6th ed. 2010) 
66 See, e.g., Rebecca Renner, Plumbing the Depths of DC’s Drinking Water Crisis, Environ. Sci. Technol. 2004, 38, 
12, 224A–227A, https://doi.org/10.1021/es040525h.  
67 See Lytle, D. et al., Lead Particles Size Fractionation and Identification in Newark, New Jersey's Drinking Water. 
Env. Sci. Technol. 54(21):13672-13679, (2020), https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c03797; CDM Smith, City of 
Newark Lead and Copper Rule Compliance Study, Newark, NJ, Pequannock WTP Corrosion Control Review And 
Recommendations – Final, City of Newark Department of Water and Sewer Utilities, March 15, 2019, available at 
https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/pequannock_water_treatment_plant_corrosion_control_review_and_recomm
endations-newark-20190315.pdf.  
68 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,059, 85,080.  

10-25 
 
source(s); (2) an evaluation of the impact of the water source or treatment change on 
simultaneous compliance with all national primary drinking water standards; and (3) unless the 
change is prompted by the results of a CCT study conducted consistent with proposed section 
141.82(c), the water system should be required to complete and submit a CCT study consistent 
with proposed section 141.82(c) that evaluates CCT using the proposed new water source and/or 
new treatments using plumbing materials harvested from the distribution system.  
Second, a State’s approval of any water source or treatment changes should require a 
water system to conduct standard tap monitoring under proposed section 141.86(c) and standard 
WQP monitoring under proposed section 141.87(b). A water system that had previously qualified 
for reducing monitoring under proposed sections 141.86(d) and 141.87(c) must be required to re-
qualify for the reduced monitoring after adding a water source or changing treatment.  
Third, a water system proposing to add a water source or change treatment should be 
required to notify its customers at the same time it notifies the State, hold at least one public 
meeting to present information and answer questions about the proposed change(s), and make 
publicly available the results of the studies and information regarding the proposed change(s) 
that are submitted to the State.  
Fourth, a water system changing its water source or treatment should provide certified 
lead reducing filters to all households until two standard tap monitoring periods demonstrate 
compliance with the lead action level, to verify that there is no increase in lead release due to the 
change.  
By making these changes, the LCRI would help to prevent catastrophic failures of OCCT 
before they occur, which is a feasible way to protect public health from foreseeable, preventable 
crises.  
G. § 141.82(g): CCT requirements for consecutive and wholesale systems must be 
strengthened 
The LCRI’s CCT requirements for consecutive and wholesale water systems are 
inadequate and should be strengthened. As proposed, the LCRI includes language from the 
LCRR stating that “the continued operation and maintenance of OCCT and re-optimized OCCT 
requirements apply to consecutive systems, including those distributing water that has been 
treated for corrosion control by another system.”69 This lone reference to consecutive systems is 
inadequate to address lead and copper issues that can arise in consecutive systems.70  
Many water systems across the United States have dependency relationships where a 
wholesale system treats water, in most cases to SDWA standards, then sells the water to a 
consecutive system that distributes the water to customers. The treating water system may or 
may not have its own customers. Treatment is designed to address source water contaminants; 
water quality changes as it moves through distribution systems due to chemical and microbial 
 
69 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,937, 85,060 (proposed section 141.82(g)).  
70 See generally Elin Betanzo, Safe Water Engineering, LLC, Corrosion Control Treatment and Compliance 
Requirements for Wholesale/Consecutive System Relationships Are Needed in the Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (2023) (from which much of this section of these comments is adapted).  

10-26 
 
reactions, and the potential for contamination to enter the distribution system. In this case, the 
treating water system determines the fundamental water quality in the wholesale/consecutive 
systems, but the purchasing system is responsible for compliance with distribution system 
drinking water standards, including the Lead and Copper Rule. Splitting a physically 
interconnected water system into different parts and dividing compliance responsibility 
according to ownership complicates the implementation of and compliance with drinking water 
regulations. The lack of requirements and triggers to assess source water treatment can limit the 
public health protection available to residents in the consecutive water system(s).  
EPA is considering regulations (The Water System Restructuring Assessment Rule71) that 
could greatly increase the number of wholesale/consecutive system relationships in the United 
States, and the LCRI must do more to account for and plan for these relationships. The LCRI, as 
proposed, does not create any responsibilities for wholesale water systems to evaluate and 
implement optimal corrosion control treatment when a purchasing consecutive system has a lead 
or copper action level exceedance. Corrosion control is a crucial treatment technique in the LCRI 
for reducing lead in drinking water. The failure to impose any CCT requirements on wholesale 
water systems means that residents and consumers in purchased water systems are not receiving 
the same public health protection as in treating water systems.  
A recurring example of the LCR corrosion control challenge is apparent in Michigan, 
where the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy (EGLE) has not 
required the Great Lakes Water Authority (GLWA) to evaluate corrosion control treatment 
despite several lead action level exceedances in consecutive systems in the Detroit area. GLWA 
has no service connections, so it is not required to collect compliance samples under the LCR, 
LCRR, or the proposed LCRI. Consequently, GLWA cannot experience its own lead action level 
exceedance that would trigger corrosion control treatment requirements. The GLWA system 
serves nearly 4 million people and includes up to 330,935 lead service lines based on July 2023 
reporting for Michigan’s Preliminary Distribution System Inventory. As December 2023, 15 of 
these systems have a 90th percentile lead value that exceeds 10 ppb representing up to 139,018 
LSLs and a population of 1.2 million. Three of these communities would be eligible for an 
extension of the 10-year LSLR mandate under the LCRI proposal. Several of these communities 
have had more than one lead action level exceedance over the past 4 years.72 
As the rules require, and would continue to require under the proposed LCRI, if a 
purchasing system has an action level exceedance, the purchasing system is responsible for 
compliance at the purchased system level. There is no exploration of treatment improvements to 
reduce lead levels in the wholesale system. In Michigan, this typically means that the system 
with a lead action level exceedance continues sampling and, due to the sporadic nature of lead 
release, the lead action level exceedance appears to go away after one or two compliance 
 
71 The America's Water Infrastructure Act (AWIA), Public Law 115–270, 132 Stat. 3765 et seq., October 23, 2018, 
section 2010(a), requires EPA to promulgate a regulation that authorizes State primacy agencies to require an 
assessment of restructuring options for a public water system that frequently violates health-based standards and is 
unwilling or unable to take feasible corrective actions to return to compliance, or that has unsuccessfully attempted 
feasible and affordable actions to return to compliance. See also EPA, The Water System Restructuring Assessment 
Rule, last updated Aug. 10, 2023, https://www.epa.gov/dwcapacity/water-system-restructuring-assessment-rule.  
72 Elin Betanzo, Safe Water Engineering, LLC, Analysis of Michigan LCR compliance data (2024) (unpublished 
analysis on file with the authors).  

10-27 
 
sampling periods despite no change in water quality. Even though the lead action level 
exceedance ends in one community, a new one frequently starts in another purchasing 
community because there has been no fundamental change in the water chemistry. As a result, an 
opportunity to protect public health by addressing water chemistry problems throughout the 
entire reach of the wholesale system is lost and any action level exceedances are addressed 
piecemeal, if at all, by the purchased water systems. In short, the existing and proposed corrosion 
control triggers fail to protect public health to the extent feasible when there is a 
wholesale/consecutive system relationship. In this case, the lack of CCT requirements would 
prevent public health protection to at least 1.2 million people that live in communities that 
currently exceed the 10 ppb proposed lead action level. 
The LCRI should clearly address the responsibility of treating systems to evaluate and 
improve corrosion control treatment when a purchasing system has an action level exceedance. 
The LCRI must clarify a treating system’s responsibility for providing water quality that meets 
all SDWA requirements to its consecutive systems, and it must clarify that the treating water 
system must evaluate or re-optimize corrosion control treatment if there is an action level 
exceedance in any one of its consecutive, purchased water systems. Further, the rule must be 
clear that a wholesale system and reviewing primacy agency must consider all consecutive 
systems when considering changes to corrosion control treatment. They also must have a 
mechanism for considering, evaluating, and addressing multiple purchasing consecutive systems 
with action level exceedances, given that action level exceedances can occur in different 
locations during different compliance sampling periods. The LCRI must clarify the 
responsibilities of wholesale systems to implement optimal corrosion control treatment and 
clarify the responsibilities of both wholesale and consecutive systems for addressing action level 
exceedances in a consecutive, purchasing system. These gaps in requirements for 
wholesale/consecutive system relationships must be addressed in the LCRI before EPA takes any 
further actions to increase the number of wholesale/consecutive system relationships in the 
United States. 
H. § 141.87: Water quality parameter monitoring should be expanded, simplified, and 
more transparent 
The LCRI’s Water Quality Parameter (WQP) Monitoring provisions (proposed section 
141.87) include at least two provisions that better protect public health compared to the LCR. 
The LCRI reaffirms EPA’s decision in the LCRR to eliminate triennial reduced WQP monitoring 
because it is too infrequent.73 We agree that triennial WQP monitoring is not sufficient for any 
water system to support water quality management decisions. In addition, the LCRI would 
“require all medium systems with CCT to monitor for water quality parameters regardless of the 
lead and copper levels, except those medium systems whose 90th percentile lead level is at or 
below 0.005 mg/L.”74 We generally support expanding WQP monitoring to more water systems 
because it equips systems with data to detect potential problems with water chemistry or CCT as 
early as possible, enabling water systems to try to avert water quality problems and action level 
 
73 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,944.  
74 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,944.  

10-28 
 
exceedances before they occur. Despite these improvements, there are several ways that the 
LCRI’s WQP monitoring provisions should be further strengthened and simplified.   
First, WQP monitoring requirements should be expanded and simplified to include all 
systems, regardless of lead and copper levels. WQP data is basic information about the water 
being distributed in a water system that all systems should have and evaluate regularly. Having 
regularly collected, baseline WQP data before any action level exceedance or any other 
triggering event would help water systems and States watch for evidence of water chemistry 
changes that could develop into problems and would help them diagnose what may have caused 
or contributed to an action level exceedance if one occurs.  
Second, for transparency, public accountability, and information sharing, water systems 
and States should be required to share publicly and proactively all WQP monitoring results by 
posting them conspicuously online in an easy-to-use electronic spreadsheet or database format 
and by submitting the results to EPA for EPA to post on its website. This would allow consumers 
to better understand the characteristics of their water. It also would facilitate information sharing, 
including about OCCT, among water systems by helping water systems identify other systems 
with similar water chemistry.  
Third, the entry point sampling requirements should be expanded to include samples 
representative of each water source both before and after treatment. As proposed, the LCRI only 
requires entry point samples after treatment.75 Failing to require WQP monitoring for untreated 
source water omits an important source of information that is highly relevant to designing 
optimal CCT and evaluating the possible effects of any future proposed changes in source water.  
Fourth, the WQP monitoring parameters specified in proposed sections 141.87(a)(1)(ii), 
(a)(2)(ii), and (b)(2)(i) and 141.82(J)(1)(i) should be expanded. As drafted, the required 
parameters include, at most, pH, alkalinity, orthophosphate and/or silica if used as an inhibitor, 
and any other parameters specified by the State.76 At a minimum, calcium, conductivity, and 
temperature should also be required parameters at all WQP monitoring sites for all systems 
because each of them can affect lead release and the selection of CCT, and many water systems 
will only monitor parameters that are mandatory.77 Calcium is important to measure because it 
may be necessary to adjust water hardness in order to make pH adjustments or to allow 
orthophosphate treatment to work. Calcium reacts with a variety of phosphates and can form 
scales or deposits in pipes and affect complexation by polyphosphates, which are important to 
understand when designing CCT. Also, calcium is an integral part of many “lead orthophosphate 
scales” where Ca-substituted lead(II) phosphate solid phases are the norm, and where hard 
waters cannot tolerate substantial pH adjustment without serious scaling issues.78 Conductivity is 
an important and easy to measure surrogate that can detect mixing of waters, detect chloride 
contamination of water supplies, and provide evidence of seasonal changes in major water 
quality constituents or degradation of source waters. All of those factors can directly or indirectly 
 
75 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,078 (§ 141.87(a)(2)(i)).  
76 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,077, 85,078 (§ 141.87(a)(1)(ii), (a)(2)(ii), (b)(2)(i)). 
77 See generally Michael R. Schock & Darren A. Lytle, Ch. 20 Internal Corrosion and Deposition Control, in Am. 
Water Works Ass’n, Water Quality & Treatment, at 20.80 tbl. 20-3 (6th ed. 2010). 
78 Michael R. Schock, personal comm.  

10-29 
 
impact lead release and effectiveness of CCT.79 Temperature affects lead and copper release and 
has a major role in the solubility and release of lead and other scale components.80 Relatedly, 
EPA should consider simplifying proposed section 141.87 to have a single, expanded list of 
required WQP parameters applicable to all WQP monitoring sites for all systems, rather than 
having three separate lists of required WQP parameters for distribution system samples, entry 
point samples, and initial tap sampling.  
Fifth, corrosion control is most effective when water quality is consistent both at the 
entry point to the distribution system and throughout the distribution system. Although WQPs are 
not indicators of lead or copper release, it is far easier to measure WQPs frequently to ensure 
water quality consistency than it is to measure lead in residents’ homes. For this reason, in 
addition to increasing the WQP parameters collected on a regular basis, we agree with EPA’s 
proposal to require more frequent WQP testing. Further, to maximize the utility of the WQP data, 
at least one round of WQP testing should always occur during the lead and copper compliance 
sampling period so that lead and copper release data can be analyzed in conjunction with 
contemporaneous WQP data.  
Sixth, the LCRI would continue the LCR’s requirement that states set minimum WQPs 
for systems with OCCT. We are aware of water systems that are capable of maintaining 
minimum WQPs, but still have wide variations in WQPs at the entry point that could limit the 
effectiveness of CCT.81 In proposed section 141.82(f),82 EPA should require states to set both a 
lower and upper bound for WQPs to ensure consistent water quality and to ensure optimal CCT 
conditions are maintained. 
Finally, in the LCRI, EPA proposes to maintain Optimal Water Quality Parameter limits 
and ranges as the primary compliance method for large public water systems and smaller systems 
employing corrosion control treatment. The proposed LCRI (and the LCRR and the LCR before 
it) fail to cite peer-reviewed scientific evidence that water quality parameters (as opposed to 
actual lead and copper tap monitoring results) will accurately predict whether or not a water 
system meets or exceeds the lead and copper action levels. To protect public health, EPA should 
make tap monitoring for lead and copper the primary, enforceable compliance method for all 
water systems.  
I. § 141.82(j): Distribution system and site assessment (formerly find-and-fix)  
The LCRI would largely maintain the “find-and-fix” provisions from the LCRR, albeit 
under the name “distribution system and site assessment” to reflect that “the ‘fix’ to address [a 
lead action level] exceedance [at a particular tap sampling site] may be outside of the control of 
the water system.”83 The concept of requiring water systems to follow up on and attempt to 
 
79 Id. 
80 Id. 
81 Examples include Benton Harbor, MI, and Jackson, MS. Elin Betanzo, Safe Water Engineering, personal comm.  
82 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,060.  
83 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,944; see generally id. at 85,061 (§ 141.82(j)).  

10-30 
 
address individual tap samples that exceed the lead action level is laudable. However, the design 
of this provision is problematic and it should be modified and strengthened in several ways.  
First, proposed section 141.82(j) takes a corrosion control treatment approach to a tap 
sample that exceeds the lead action level, which does nothing to address the immediate, near-
term risks of high lead concentrations in drinking water. Any amount of lead in drinking water is 
unsafe, and lead concentrations above the action level are especially hazardous to health. Any 
time a tap sample exceeds the lead action level, the water system should be required to provide to 
the affected customer(s) a filter certified to remove lead at no cost to the customer, which should 
be provided at the same time that the sampling results are shared with the customer under 
proposed section 141.85(d); (2) determine if the service line is a LSL or GRR and/or if there is a 
lead connector; and (3) if so, replace any LSL, GRR, and lead connector (which may be done as 
part of the general 10-year LSLR mandate if the tap sample is collected during that time period, 
to ensure that LSLRs are completed efficiently during the 10-year program). Including a LSLR 
provision here is necessary despite the general LSLR mandate in proposed section 141.84(d) 
because the “access” requirements in proposed section 141.84(d) mean that some LSLs and 
GRRs may be left in service. And a customer may be more likely to grant access to replace an 
LSL or GRR if tap sampling shows the customer’s water contains elevated levels of lead. Any 
CCT or WQP monitoring steps should be secondary to taking immediate actions to address the 
acute threat to public health represented by a tap sample above the lead action level (or lead 
PQL). Section 141.82(j) should be modified to make the provision of filters and LSLR the first 
steps in the process. If EPA perceives a tradeoff between this recommendation to provide filters 
and offer LSLRs and the proposed requirements for WQP monitoring and CCT modifications, 
modifying proposed section 141.82(j) to require filter provision and LSLRs instead of the current 
proposed text would simplify this provision and be more health-protective than the provision as 
drafted.  
Second, the threshold for triggering proposed section 141.82(j) is too high. Any amount 
of lead in drinking water is unsafe, so the trigger for this provision should be the lead PQL 
instead of the lead action level. At a minimum, our proposed filter requirements should be 
triggered by the lead PQL, even if the broader LSLR and WQP sampling provisions are tied to 
lead action level exceedances.   
Third, in conducting follow-up tap sampling pursuant to proposed section 141.82(j)(2), 
water systems should be required to provide the customer with information explaining that lead 
releases and measured lead concentrations in water vary over time, that subsequent samples 
showing lower or non-detectable lead concentrations do not prove that the problem has been 
resolved, and that the most health-protective option is for the customer to use a filter certified to 
remove lead (see, e.g., discussion of public education and notification content changes needed in 
section 8(A)(i) of our comments). Absent this information, and by allowing the water system to 
conduct follow-up sampling using any collection procedures, there is a risk that customers will 
get a false sense of security if the follow-up sampling shows lower or non-detectable lead 
concentrations. With no identified change to premise water quality and infrastructure, there is no 
evidence that the conditions that created the original high result have been removed or prevented 
and should be assumed to remain present. 

10-31 
 
Fourth, as drafted, proposed section 141.82(j) appears to require localized WQP 
monitoring and other steps for every tap sample exceeding the lead action level, even if the water 
system is simultaneously required to complete a CCT study or CCT re-optimization study. A 
more health-protective approach would be to require a comprehensive CCT study or CCT re-
optimization study and implementation of OCCT any time a tap sample exceeds the lead action 
level (or, better yet, the lead PQL). At a minimum, it may be more implementable and less 
burdensome and redundant to allow water systems, if triggered by proposed section 141.82(j), 
either to conduct the localized study required by proposed section 141.82(j) or to conduct a 
system-wide CCT study or re-optimization study. The LCRI should also clarify that, if the 
system’s 90th percentile sampling results exceed the lead action level, the system must comply 
with the systemwide CCT study and implementation provisions in proposed sections 141.82(d) 
or (e) and need not also conduct the studies required by proposed section 141.82(j).  
Finally, as discussed in part 10(H) of these comments, the WQPs specified in proposed 
section 141.82(J)(1)(i) should be expanded to include calcium, conductivity, and temperature.  
J. The lead practical quantitation limit (PQL) should be lowered to reflect current 
scientific and laboratory methods 
EPA’s derivation of the lead practical quantitation limit (PQL) is more than 35 years old 
and has not kept up with modern laboratory methods and capabilities. EPA should reduce the 
PQL to 0.0005 mg/L (0.5 ppb) or, at a minimum, to no more than 0.0025 mg/L (2.5 ppb).  
In the proposed LCRI, EPA concludes that the lead PQL should remain at 0.005 mg/L.84 
EPA asserts that the minimum detection limit for lead can be “as low as 0.0006 mg/L,” but 
asserts that the PQL should add an uncertainty factor of 5 to 10 to account for analytical 
variability.85 In support, EPA cites to its 35-year-old derivation of the lead PQL in its proposed 
lead and copper drinking water regulations from 1988.86 However, in 1988, EPA concluded that 
“the lowest [method detection limit] for any of the methods used to detect lead is 0.001 mg/L,” 
and EPA proposed a lead PQL that was five times higher: 0.005 mg/L.87 Having concluded in the 
LCRI that the minimum detection limit is now about half what it was in 1988, EPA should, at a 
minimum, reduce the lead PQL by half and set it no higher than 0.0025 mg/L (2.5 ppb). 
Moreover, the minimum detection limit cited in the LCRI is outdated88 and the lead PQL 
should be set even lower. For example, the 2021 CCT study for Flint, Michigan, quantified lead 
 
84 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,942-43. 
85 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,942.  
86 53 Fed. Reg. 31,516, 31,550 (Aug. 18, 1988).  
87 53 Fed. Reg. at 31,551.  
88 EPA’s cited value of 0.0006 mg/L (or 0.6 μg/L or 0.6 ppb) appears to come from EPA, Method 200.8, Revision 
5.4: Determination of Trace Elements in Waters and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry, at 
200.8-41 tbl.7 (1994), available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-08/documents/method_200-
8_rev_5-4_1994.pdf. However, that 30-year-old document does not reflect modern laboratory methods and, even 
then, using “state-of-the-art instrumentation” from 1994 it reported lower method detection limits for lead of 0.05 
μg/L and 0.02 μg/L. Id. at 200.8-41 tbl.7 n.2. Those lower method detection limits are more consistent with the 
results reported in Method 6020B twenty years later.  

10-32 
 
concentrations down to a method reporting limit of 1 μg/L (equivalent to 0.001 mg/L or 1 ppb).89 
More recently, EPA’s 2023 Benton Harbor Drinking Water Study quantified lead in drinking 
water down to a reporting limit of 0.5 ppb (equivalent to 0.0005 mg/L).90 For the Benton Harbor 
study, EPA’s Chicago Regional Laboratory achieved a reporting limit of 0.5 ppb using 
Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry, EPA method 200.8/SW-846 6020B, using the 
Agilent 7700x, Metals 001 version 11.91 EPA Method 6020B includes a table of “performance 
data for a simulated drinking water standard,” which found that the method measured lead 
concentrations down to about 24 ng/L, equivalent to 0.024 μg/L (or 0.024 ppb).92 Method 6020B 
notes that instrument detection limits are different than lower limits of quantitation, and directs 
laboratories to determine and verify the lower limit of quantitation, which may vary based on 
matrices, instrumentation, and operating conditions.93 The Benton Harbor study’s reporting limit 
indicates that EPA’s Chicago Regional Laboratory was able to achieve a lower limit of 
quantitation for lead of at least 0.5 ppb. In sum, there is evidence that modern methods have 
detection limits for lead in drinking water as low as about 0.024 ppb and reporting limits, based 
on the lower limit of quantitation, as low as 0.5 ppb. Accordingly, EPA should set the lead PQL 
at 0.5 ppb (0.0005 mg/L) consistent with the reporting limits achieved by modern laboratory 
methods.  
Setting the PQL too high has real world health impacts. Water systems may report test 
results below the PQL as non-quantifiable, non-detect, below reporting limits, or in other non-
quantified ways that suggest the sample contains no measurable lead, even if measurable lead 
was detected. When that happens, it gives consumers false confidence that their water is lead-
free when in fact it contains measurable lead. And, as EPA acknowledges, there is no safe level 
of lead in drinking water. Also, EPA treats the lead PQL as the lowest possible value to consider 
for the lead action level.94 A lead PQL of 0.5 ppb (or, at least, no more than 2.5 ppb) would 
further support reducing the lead action level below 10 ppb, as discussed elsewhere in these 
comments, which is a feasible way to better protect public health from lead in drinking water.  
The Safe Drinking Water Act requires EPA’s drinking water standards to use “the best 
available science best available, peer-reviewed science and supporting studies conducted in 
accordance with sound and objective scientific practices; and . . . data collected by accepted 
methods or best available methods (if the reliability of the method and the nature of the decision 
justifies use of the data).”95 To protect public health, keep up with modern and best available 
scientific methods, and ensure that water systems accurately report lead test results, the LCRI 
should set the lead PQL at 0.0005 mg/L (or 0.5 ppb), consistent with the reporting limit and 
lower limit of quantitation used in EPA’s recent Benton Harbor report. At a minimum, EPA 
 
89 Cornwell Engineering Group, Corrosion Control Study Pipe Loop Study Expanded Executive Summary, Prepared 
for City of Flint, at 6 (Jan. 18, 2021), available at https://www.michigan.gov/-
/media/Project/Websites/flintwater/documents/2021/Executive-Summary-Flint-Pipe-Loops-dated-
011821.pdf?rev=97a478f748dc47068b257e601d70937e. 
90 EPA, Benton Harbor Drinking Water Study, EPA/600/R-22/269, at 11 & tbl. 1, (April 2023), available at 
https://cfpub.epa.gov/si/si_public_file_download.cfm?p_download_id=546677&Lab=CESER.  
91 Id. at tbl. 1, nn. 6-7.  
92 EPA, Method 6020B, Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry, at 23, 29 tbl. 4 (rev. 2, July 2014), 
available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-12/documents/6020b.pdf.  
93 Id. at 2, 13-14, 17.  
94 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,942.  
95 SDWA § 1412(b)(3)(A), 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(3)(A). 

10-33 
 
should set the PQL no higher than 0.0025 mg/L (2.5 ppb), which would be generally consistent 
with EPA’s 1988 PQL methodology, adjusted for EPA’s (outdated) interpretation of modern 
laboratory method detection limits in the proposed LCRI.  
K. EPA should create incentives to address the identified shortages of CCT experts 
EPA expresses “concern[s] about the number of CCT experts available nationally to assist 
water systems in designing an OCCT study and implementing treatment.”96 EPA “expects CCT 
expertise to be highly technical given that corrosion chemistry is complex and theoretical 
predictions are rarely sufficient to fully understand a system.”97 And EPA concludes that 
“knowledge of relevant chemistry alone is usually not sufficient to perform comprehensive CCT 
studies. Instead, experts typically rely on significant practical and learned experience to evaluate 
each system individually. This knowledge is generally gained through practical, on-the-job 
experience that cannot otherwise be replicated.”98  
The effectiveness of the CCT provisions in the LCRI will depend in part on whether CCT 
studies and OCCT designations are based on sound science and carried out by well-qualified 
professionals. To address its concerns, EPA should consider all available options to encourage 
more people to become CCT experts. In particular, EPA should look for opportunities to fund 
educational programs that train CCT experts, including programs with substantial 
apprenticeship-type experiences that emphasize on-the-job learning. EPA also should seek to 
fund or create forums for sharing CCT knowledge among public- and private-sector CCT 
experts. As discussed elsewhere in these comments, the LCRI should contain robust transparency 
requirements for CCT studies and OCCT decisions to facilitate information-sharing among water 
systems and States. Within the LCRI, EPA also could try to create a reliable market for CCT 
experts by mandating that CCT studies and decisions about OCCT be conducted by or approved 
by CCT experts with particular credentials. However, any credentialing provisions should allow 
plenty of time for experts to obtain the necessary credentials, to avoid exacerbating any potential 
short-term shortages of CCT experts.  
As examples, at the time EPA’s LCRI development was announced, the Biden-Harris 
Administration also announced that EPA and the Department of Labor would collaborate with 
labor unions to accelerate LSLRs.99 EPA could pursue similar initiatives focused on building up 
CCT expertise and capacity. EPA also could partner with the National Science Foundation (NSF) 
to improve CCT expertise. The NSF and EPA have previously established research fellowships 
for NSF-funded projects or to host Graduate Research Fellowship Program Fellows,100 including 
for projects relating to sustainable and healthy communities and water research topics.101 In 
addition, NSF and EPA have made awards for centers for Environmental Implications of 
 
96 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,942.  
97 Id. 
98 Id. at 84,942.  
99 Fact Sheet, The Biden-Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan (Dec. 16, 2021), 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/16/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-lead-pipe-
and-paint-action-plan/.  
100 EPA, Research Fellowships for Graduate Students (last updated Oct. 17, 2023), https://www.epa.gov/research-
fellowships/research-fellowships-graduate-students.  
101 EPA, Fellowship Research Areas, Sustainable and Health Communities Research (last updated Dec. 22, 2023), 
https://www.epa.gov/research-fellowships/fellowship-research-areas#Sustainable.  

10-34 
 
Technology, led by UCLA and Duke University.102 All of these examples could serve as models 
for ways that EPA could invest in and promote the CCT capacity building and expertise.  
L. Responses to EPA’s requests for comment about CCT issues 
EPA has requested comment on the following specific CCT issues. Our summary 
responses are included here, along with cross-references to more detailed responses elsewhere in 
these comments.  
i. 
The proposed determination that the CTT [sic] treatment technique is feasible and 
prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible. 
We agree that CCT is a feasible treatment technique and, when designed and 
implemented properly, can prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects. For the reasons 
stated throughout section 10 of these comments, the LCRI’s CCT provisions, as currently 
drafted, do not prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible. 
Throughout section 10 of these comments, we have suggested modifications to the LCRI’s CCT 
provisions that are necessary to ensure that the LCRI’s CCT provisions collectively prescribe a 
treatment technique that will prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent 
feasible.  
ii. 
Comment on whether it would be more appropriate to require water systems to re-
optimize again following an action level exceedance regardless of meeting their 
optimal water quality parameters and to provide the State with the authority to 
waive this requirement. 
Yes. As discussed in detail in section 10(E)(ii) of these comments, LCRI should require 
that all systems with CCT have an ongoing duty to re-optimize CCT after action level 
exceedances, unless the State determines after full and carefully documented consideration that 
re-optimization is not needed.  
iii. 
The proposed option for a water system to delay OCCT until after the system has 
replaced all of its LSLs and GRR service lines, while the system achieves at least 
20 percent removal per year and must have no LSLs, GRR service lines, or lead 
status unknown service lines remaining at the end of the five-year period. 
As discussed in detail in section 10(A) of these comments, this five-year CCT delay 
provision fails to protect public health to the extent feasible, will not achieve EPA’s stated goals, 
and must be eliminated or modified.  
iv. 
The treatment recommendation and CCT study process can take multiple years to 
complete. For systems with existing corrosion control, the system may be able to 
alter the existing treatment (e.g., increase pH and/or orthophosphate dose) 
without a new CCT study on a much faster timeframe rather than waiting for 
 
102 U.S. National Science Foundation, NSF and EPA Establish Two Centers for Environmental Implications of 
Nanotechnology, News Release 08-155 (Sept. 17, 2008), 
https://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp?cntn_id=112234.  

10-35 
 
study results that may recommend that same change. EPA is requesting comment 
on whether there are situations and/or conditions where existing treatment 
modifications may achieve similar lead reductions rather than delaying new 
treatment for two-and-a-half years while a study is underway. 
We agree that there likely are situations and/or conditions where existing treatment 
modifications should be implemented in parallel with or instead of conducting a new CCT study. 
CCT is a complex science and optimizing CCT throughout a water system may require iterative 
processes to adjust treatment doses and methods to achieve intended water quality parameters. A 
well-designed and executed CCT study may provide sufficient information for a water system 
and State to designate re-optimized CCT without re-doing an entire CCT study. We note, 
however, that there will be other situations for which a new CCT will be necessary to re-optimize 
CCT. We support giving States flexibility to determine whether a new CCT study is needed or 
whether existing information is sufficient to designate re-optimized CCT because this 
determination will need to be a fact- and circumstance-specific evaluation customized to each 
individual water system.  

 
11-1 
 
Section 11: EPA Should Establish a Maximum Contaminant Level for Lead 
 
A. The SDWA requires EPA to set an MCL because it is feasible to ascertain the level 
of lead 
 
The Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) provides that EPA “is authorized to promulgate a 
national primary drinking water regulation that requires the use of a treatment technique in lieu 
of establishing a maximum contaminant level, if the Administrator makes a finding that it is not 
economically or technologically feasible to ascertain the level of the contaminant.”1 The Lead 
and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) proposal requires covered public water systems to 
monitor for lead at the tap, and thus it is per se feasible to ascertain the level of lead in drinking 
water. Thus, the statute requires EPA to establish a Maximum Contaminant Level, or MCL. 
 
Instead of re-establishing an MCL for lead as the law requires and as EPA had 
promulgated in 1975,2 the LCRI would fashion a complex and treatment technique that fails to 
protect public health to the extent feasible.3 Regrettably, because of the innumerable loopholes 
and exceptions to key provisions of the LCRI, if it is finalized in its proposed form many if not 
most lead service lines (LSLs) are likely to remain in use and to continue to contaminate 
drinking water. Therefore, not only is an MCL legally required for lead, but if these loopholes 
and exceptions are not eliminated in the final rule, the LCRI will allow continued unnecessary 
and inequitable lead exposure to millions of children and vulnerable subpopulations, contrary to 
the SDWA’s requirements and EPA’s and the Biden Administration’s stated goals.  
 
 
In the LCRI, the agency asserts that it cannot establish an MCL for lead, even though 
EPA had previously established an MCL for lead in 1975,4 which was in effect for 16 years until 
the original Lead and Copper Rule treatment technique came into effect in 1991.5 In fact, in 
issuing that MCL that was to be measured at the tap, EPA noted that,  
 
Concern was expressed over the inability to control potential sources of contaminants 
which are under the control of the consumer. The promulgated definition of “maximum 
contaminant level,” §141.2(d), retains the requirement that the maximum contaminant 
level be measured at the tap except in the case of turbidity….However, the definition has 
been expanded to make clear that contaminants added to the water by circumstances 
under the control of the consumer are not the responsibility of the supplier of water, 
unless the contaminants result from corrosion of piping and plumbing resulting from the 
quality of water supplied.6 
 
Thus, EPA was well aware of the fact that corrosive water could mobilize lead in drinking water 
but established an MCL for lead to be measured at the tap. The agency reasoned that the public 
 
1 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(7)(A). 
2 See National Interim Primary Drinking Water Regulations, 40 Fed. Reg. at 59,566 (Dec. 24, 1975) (setting a 50 
ppb MCL for lead, measured at the tap). 
3 See, ibid (“The Administrator shall identify those treatment techniques which, in the Administrator’s judgment, 
would prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible.”)  
4 Ibid. 
5 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460 (June 7, 1991).  
6 40 Fed. Reg. at 59,566, 59,567-68. 

 
11-2 
 
water system could control the corrosivity of its water and therefore is responsible for lead 
contamination mobilized by its corrosive water.  
 
 
In the LCR in 1991, however, the agency reversed course and asserted that it could not 
set an MCL for lead and instead established a treatment technique it called the Lead and Copper 
Rule.7 While the basis for that assertion was questionable then, none of those bases currently 
apply. EPA’s historic and current rationales for rejecting an MCL distill down to three: (1) 
indoor plumbing is the main contributor to lead in tap water and that is not under the control of 
the water system so it must set a treatment technique instead of an MCL; (2) if EPA were to 
crack down on lead levels at the tap through an MCL it would result in increases in other 
contaminants at the tap, a situation Congress did not anticipate and therefore EPA must set a 
treatment technique instead of an MCL; and (3) the levels of lead vary at the tap and therefore it 
is not feasible to set an MCL, so EPA must establish a treatment technique. As discussed below, 
each of these rationales is flawed, and the first two have been superseded by amendments to the 
SDWA enacted after the 1991 rule and the court decision upholding it. Therefore, EPA is under a 
legal obligation to establish an MCL. 
 
B. EPA’s previous justifications for refusing to set a maximum contaminant level no 
longer apply 
 
The D.C. Circuit in 1994 affirmed EPA’s choice in the 1991 Rule to set a treatment 
technique and not a maximum contaminant level for lead.8 But the Court’s decision turned 
on two justifications that no longer apply. 
 
First, at the time, the court relied upon the assumption that the primary source of lead in 
drinking water was indoor plumbing, not drinking water infrastructure owned or controlled by 
water systems.9 Household plumbing fixtures could then contain up to eight percent lead.10 The 
Court deferred to EPA’s interpretation that it was not “feasible” to set a maximum contaminant 
level when water systems did not control the major sources of lead in the water.11 
 
Since then, however, the Safe Drinking Water Act has been amended to nearly eliminate 
lead from plumbing and fixtures.12 As a result, lead service lines have overtaken household 
 
7 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460 (June 7, 1991).   
8 American Water Works Ass’n v. EPA, 40 F.3d 1,266, 1,270-71 (D.C. Cir. 1994). 
9 Id. at 1,271. 
10 See SDWA §1417 as in effect in 1993, Pub. L. 99–339, title I, § 109(a), June 19, 1986, 100 Stat. 642, at 651-53- 
(prohibiting sale of plumbing and fixtures that were not “lead free,” defined to allow lead up to 8 percent in 
plumbing). As discussed below, Section 1417’s definition of lead free for plumbing was amended in 2011 to allow 
at most 0.25 percent lead in any wetted surface of plumbing and fixtures. 42 U.S.C. § 300g-6. See, Pub. L. 111–380, 
§ 2(a), Jan. 4, 2011, 124 Stat. 4131 (amending the definition of legal “lead free” plumbing).  
11 Am. Water Works Ass’n, 40 F.3d at 1,271.  
12 See Pub. L. No. 104-182, § 118, 110 Stat. 1613, 1645-47 (1996) (codified as amended at 42 U.S.C. § 300g-6) 
(expanding previous restrictions on lead pipes, solder, and flux to include lead plumbing fittings and fixtures); Pub. 
L. No. 111-380, § 2, 124 Stat. 4131, 4131 (2011) (codified as amended at 42 U.S.C. § 300g-6(d)(1)(B)) (lowering 
the amount of allowable lead in plumbing to 0.25 percent). 

 
11-3 
 
plumbing as the dominant source of contamination, as EPA concedes.13 This moots EPA’s prior 
rationale. According to Jeff Cohen, the former EPA official who led the drafting the 1991 Rule: 
“Given the restrictions on lead in new plumbing, the Agency’s rationale in 1991 for rejecting the 
option to set [a maximum contaminant level] at the tap no longer holds today.”14 While indoor 
plumbing still can contribute to lead in tap water, EPA’s data presented in the LCRI preamble 
demonstrates that if the water systems have corrosion control treatment and remove all LSLs, 
both measures within the control of the water system, the lead levels plummet; currently about 
95 percent of large systems would meet a action level of 5 ppb.15 With application of additional 
actions such as improved corrosion control and if necessary provision of point of use devices to 
affected households, compliance with an MCL would certainly be feasible. Thus, systems could 
be held accountable for complying with an MCL at such a level. 
 
Second, EPA argued in 1991 that requiring all water systems to meet a maximum 
contaminant level would encourage remedial techniques that reduced lead but increased 
levels of other contaminants, with harmful unintended consequences.16 The Court agreed 
with EPA’s argument that Congress did not contemplate that risk, and therefore 
“impliedly delegated” to EPA the discretion to impose a treatment technique instead.17 
 
But Congress has since amended the Safe Drinking Water Act to address that situation 
too, allowing EPA to set a higher maximum contaminant level than otherwise required if 
necessary to prevent a harmful increase in the concentration of other contaminants.18 EPA’s 
argument about unintended consequences therefore no longer applies. 
 
In the LCRI proposal, EPA’s justification for refusing to set a maximum contaminant 
level, the agency says, is that “[b]ased on the analysis being conducted for the proposed LCRI, 
EPA is proposing to determine that information and factors consistent with the Act that cause 
lead and copper variation identified in the 1991 LCR and supported in the LCRR continue to 
apply today. Therefore, it is not feasible to establish MCLs for lead and copper consistent with 
the SDWA.”19 
 
The agency now offers three objections to establishing an MCL in the LCRI proposal:  
 
13 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,909 (“Studies have shown that LSLs are the predominant contributor of lead in drinking water 
where they are present”); see also Comment of Jeff Cohen (former manager of EPA’s drafting of the original 1991 
Lead and Copper Rule), April 12, 2021, EPA Docket for National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and 
Copper Rule Revisions, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300, document 1887,  
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-1887. (“the Agency should again consider 
establishing an MCL for lead instead of the current treatment technique approach. Given the restrictions on lead in 
new plumbing, the Agency’s rationale in 1991 for rejecting the option to set an MCL at the tap no longer holds 
today. As of 2020, it is possible that water systems can be held responsible for the sources of lead contamination in 
drinking water, specifically, corrosive water interacting with lead service lines.”(emphasis in original)).  
14 Comment of Jeff Cohen, Jan. 22, 2020, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300, document 0988, 
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-0988 
15 See, LCRI, 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,941, Exhibit 5 (about 95 percent of large water systems—the systems by which the 
SDWA requires EPA to measure feasibility—would meet an action level of 5 ppb).  
16 Am. Water Works Ass’n, 40 F.3d at 1,270-71. 
17 Id. 
18 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(5). 
19 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,907.  

 
11-4 
 
First, as noted in the LCR, “lead release can be unpredictable over time and across 
households, can originate from many sources owned by the water system and the 
customer, can vary based on the sample technique used, and can be affected by customer 
water use habits” (53 FR 31527, USEPA, 1988). Studies continue to show that the levels 
of lead and copper measured at the tap after treatment is variable due to several factors… 
Second, the conditions of plumbing materials also continue to vary from water system to 
water system, and from site to site within a water system, such that lead in drinking water 
continues to be subject to high levels of variability…. Third, despite changes to the 
allowable amount of lead in “lead free” plumbing, many older buildings can still be a 
source of lead.20  
 
At bottom, EPA’s argument is that lead levels in water are variable, and the 
amount measured can depend on sample technique used, customer water use habits, 
stagnation, physical disruptions to lead pipes, plumbing materials, and other factors. Yet 
for other purposes, EPA deems it feasible to ascertain lead levels in water despite lead’s 
variability. Indeed, EPA’s entire scheme under both the 1991 Rule and the LCRI depends 
on measuring lead levels and taking prescribed action based on the level detected.21 While 
EPA handwaves with a series of complex mathematical analyses of the variability of lead 
levels at the tap,22 and while we fully agree that lead levels are variable at the tap, EPA has 
failed to explain why it is feasible to ascertain lead levels to compel action under a 
treatment technique with an Action Level set at 10 parts per billion, but not feasible to 
ascertain lead levels to compel action using a maximum contaminant level. This 
justification is internally inconsistent and arbitrary. 
 
Moreover, EPA has set maximum contaminant levels for other similarly highly variable 
drinking water contaminants, like total trihalomethanes and haloacetic acids.23 These substances 
are disinfection byproducts (DBPs) that can vary within a single water supply and at a single 
location based on the season, water temperature, pH, residence time in the distribution system, 
and even the diameter of distribution pipes, among other factors.24 Yet EPA accounted for this 
variability and still established maximum contaminant levels for these chemicals.25 Just as for 
disinfection byproducts, EPA could design and prescribe sampling procedures that account for 
the variability of lead in water. Indeed, EPA’s former drafter of the original 1991 Lead and 
Copper Rule pointed out, “[u[nder an MCL approach, implementation and oversight would be 
significantly streamlined compared to the current rule and the proposed revisions, while 
continuing to provide comprehensive public health protection. The MCL could be established as 
either a single data point or as a statistical value similar to an action level….”26 
 
20 Id. at 84,907-09.  
21 See id. at 84,939 (summarizing required steps based on exceedance of 10 ppb “action level”). 
22 Id. at 84,907-909. 
23 40 C.F.R. §§ 141.64(b)(2)(i), 141.601(b). 
24 71 Fed. Reg. 388, 394 (Jan. 4, 2006). 
25 40 C.F.R. §§ 141.64(b)(2)(i), 141.601(b). 
26 Comment of Jeff Cohen (former manager of EPA’s drafting of the original 1991 Lead and Copper Rule), April 12, 
2021, EPA Docket for National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, Docket ID 
No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300, document 1887, https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-
1887. 

 
11-5 
 
In the LCRI EPA objects to the comparison of DBPs and lead, noting that  
there is no indication that the level of purported sampling ‘‘variability’’ associated with 
disinfection byproducts can be reasonably compared to that of lead contamination in 
drinking water. Another critical distinction between the lead and copper rules and the 
disinfection byproduct rules is that, unlike for lead, water systems disinfecting the water 
supply are the source of disinfection byproducts. Water systems introduce disinfectants, 
such as chlorine and chloramine, into the drinking water supply.27 
However, this rationale ignores that as is true for DBPs, lead levels can be significantly reduced 
by water systems through changes in treatment at the water treatment plant (i.e. corrosion 
control), and through removal of sources of lead under the control of the water system (e.g. 
removing LSLs). The rationale for rejecting the comparison to DBPs also runs directly contrary 
to the agency’s findings in establishing the MCLs for DBPs. For example, in setting the Stage 2 
MCLs for DBPs, EPA requires systems to test at multiple locations across the distribution 
system including at higher risk locations, and established “locational running annual average” 
MCLs at these high risk site, noting that there are extensive data on the “significant variability 
with respect to factors influencing DBP formation, including temperature, residence time, and 
geographical region.”28 EPA explains that, 
the Stage 2 DBPR is designed to address spatial variations in DBP exposure through a 
new compliance calculation (referred to as locational running annual average) for TTHM 
and HAA5 MCLs. …The Stage 1 DBPR running annual average (RAA) calculation 
allowed some locations within a distribution system to have higher DBP annual averages 
than others as long as the system-wide average was below the MCL. The Stage 2 DBPR 
bases compliance on a locational running annual average (LRAA) calculation, where the 
annual average at each sampling location in the distribution system will be used to 
determine compliance with the MCLs….The LRAA will reduce exposures to high DBP 
concentrations by ensuring that each monitoring site is in compliance with the MCLs as 
an annual average, while providing all customers drinking water that more consistently 
meets the MCLs.”29  
Thus, the agency clearly could fashion an MCL for lead that would address variability of lead 
levels across the distribution system, targeting high risk locations much as the LCRI does for 
compliance monitoring for the action level. 
 
 
EPA also has ignored evidence that regulatory agencies in other countries have set the 
equivalent of a maximum contaminant level for lead and devised adequate monitoring 
requirements to account for lead’s variability.30 Canada, for example, recommends a maximum 
 
27 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,910. 
28 71 Fed. Reg. 388, 465 (Jan. 4, 2006). 
29 Id. at 391. 
30 See Comment submitted by Natural Resources Defense Council, EPA Docket for National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (Mar. 1, 2020), at 6. Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-1546 
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-1546; comment submitted by Evan Feinauer, Staff 
Attorney, Clean Wisconsin et al. (Feb. 18, 2020) at 2. Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-1445. 
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-1445 . 

 
11-6 
 
acceptable concentration for lead of 5 ppb.31 Several Canadian provinces have imposed limits of 
either 5 or 10 ppb.32  
 
C. EPA’s stated concern about water system “responsibility” is internally inconsistent 
and arbitrary 
 
EPA asserts that lead service lines are “not always” owned or controlled by the 
water system, and thus water systems are not “always responsible” for lead in drinking 
water.33 EPA’s reasoning is muddled, but the agency appears to argue that this excuses it 
from setting a maximum contaminant level.34. 
 
This excuse fails because EPA’s treatment technique under the LCRI proposal already 
holds water systems responsible for lead contamination from lead service lines, regardless of 
whether they are owned or controlled by the water system. As EPA itself explained in the Lead 
and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR), “historically, the [Lead and Copper Rule] has not been 
limited to system-owned portions of the distribution system.”35 The LCRI imposes responsibility 
on water systems regardless of service line ownership in at least five ways. First, EPA defined 
“lead service line” to include lines “owned by the water system, owned by the property owner, or 
both.”36 EPA adopted this definition “to ensure that the customer or private side of the service 
line are included in rule requirements such as inventory and replacement.”37 Second, the rule’s 
corrosion control requirements apply equally to water systems with varying proportions of 
publicly and privately owned service lines.38 Third, to determine lead levels in a water system, 
EPA prioritizes sampling from sites with lead service lines, whether publicly or privately 
owned.39 Fourth, for sampling at homes served by lead service lines, EPA requires collection of 
both the first and fifth liter of water from the running kitchen or bathroom tap,40 which better 
reflects lead levels resulting from contact with service lines, including “customer-owned” lines.41  
Fifth, EPA directs water systems to inventory all lead service lines, including private lines, 
because customer-owned service lines are always “connected to either a system-owned service 
 
31 Comment submitted by Evan Feinauer, Staff Attorney, Clean Wisconsin et al., supra note 30, at 2. (citing Health 
Canada Guidelines). 
32 See Regulation respecting the quality of drinking water 2021, q-2, r. 40, s. 3 (Que.) (5 ppb lead limit); Standards 
and guidelines for municipal waterworks, wastewater and storm drainage systems 2012, 1.1 (Alta.) (adopting limits 
set forth in Health Canada Guidelines); Ontario Drinking Water Quality Standards 2003, O. Reg. 169/03 (10 ppb 
lead limit ). 
33 EPA, Public Comment and Response Document for the Final Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (December 2020), 
at 470. EPA Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-1622. https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-
2017-0300-1622 
34 Id. at 470-71. 
35 86 Fed. Reg. at 4,212. As discussed extensively in section 2 of these comments regarding water system “control” 
of LSLs, the contention that water systems often lack control over LSLs is incorrect. 
36 40 C.F.R. § 141.2. 
37 EPA, Public Comment and Response Document for the Final Lead and Copper Rule Revisions at 31 (emphasis 
added). 
38 40 C.F.R. § 141.81. 
39 Id. § 141.86(a)(3). 
40 Id. §§ 141.86(b)(1) & (b)(3)(ii). 
41 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,070, 85,073 (§§ 141.85(c)(2), 141.86(b)(1)(ii)). 

 
11-7 
 
line or system-owned water main and are therefore accessible to the system.”42 EPA does not 
explain why its “responsibility” rationale disqualifies a maximum contaminant level but not a 
treatment technique.  
 
In sum, Congress expressed a clear preference that EPA set maximum contaminant 
levels for regulated contaminants. Only infeasibility in measuring the level of the 
contaminant excuses the agency from doing so. EPA did not adequately justify its refusal 
to set a maximum contaminant level for lead. 
 
 
42 86 Fed. Reg. at 4,212. The requirement to test homes with private LSLs is not changed in the LCRI. See 88 Fed. 
Reg. at 84,933 (“EPA is not proposing changes to the initial inventories required under the LCRR….”). 

12-1 
 
Section 12: Analysis of the LCRI’s Benefits and Costs  
A. The LCRI Economic Analysis Presents Reasonable Estimates of Per-LSLR 
Costs, and There are Strategies Available to Water Systems to Further Reduce 
LSLR Costs  
Critics of the LCRI, especially among water systems, often argue that EPA understates 
the cost of full LSLR. In fact, an independent analysis commissioned by NRDC demonstrates 
that the LCRI Economic Analysis presents a reasonable estimate of per-LSLR costs, and that 
higher cost estimates put forward by the American Water Works Association (AWWA) are 
inflated.  
 
Further, the independent cost analysis identifies many strategies that water systems can 
use to further reduce costs, especially non-construction costs. Some of those strategies, such as 
requiring water systems to cover the full cost of LSLR, can be directly mandated by EPA in the 
LCRI, while others are within the power of water systems to implement through design of their 
own LSLR programs when they implement the LCRI.  
i. 
EPA’s estimated per-LSLR costs are reasonable and AWWA’s estimated 
costs are exaggerated 
 
In December 2022, the American Water Works Association (AWWA) submitted to EPA 
a per-LSLR cost estimate, in the form of a CDM Smith report attached to an AWWA comment 
to the LCRI docket.1 This new full LSLR cost estimate was about twice AWWA’s previous 
estimate presented to EPA in 2020,2 and also two times the previous average cost estimate 
provided by EPA and in the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) Economic Analysis in 
2020.3  
 
The proposed LCRI is supported by a new Economic Analysis, which presents EPA’s 
own updated per-LSLR cost estimates.4 As EPA observed in the Economic Analysis, CDM 
Smith’s cost estimates are “notably” higher than EPA’s new estimates.5  
 
NRDC commissioned an independent report from Safe Water Engineering, which 
analyzes the bases of CDM Smith’s and EPA’s most recent per-LSLR cost estimates, compares 
 
1 CDM Smith (Nov. 2022), Considerations When Costing Lead Service Line Identification and Replacement—Final 
Report, included as attachment to Ltr. of 12/19/2022 from AWWA to EPA, 
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0813-0031. 
2 Comment submitted by G. Tracy Mehan, III, Executive Director, Government Affairs, American Water Works 
Association (AWWA), Feb. 5, 2020, www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-1018. 
3 EPA, Economic Analysis for the Final Lead and Copper Rule Revisions. Office of Water (4607M) EPA 816-R-20-
008 (Dec. 2020), https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-1769/content.pdf.  
4 Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. Office of Water (4607M) EPA 815-R-
23-005 (Nov. 2023), https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0712. 
5 EPA, Economic Analysis Appendices for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements. Office of Water 
(4606M) EPA 815-R-23-005A (Nov. 2023), pp. A-5 to A-6, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-
2022-0801-0712. 

12-2 
 
similarities and differences, and provides an additional literature review to further contextualize 
available data.6  
 
The Safe Water Engineering report also presents independent per-LSLR construction cost 
estimates using data from RS Means, an industry standard construction cost tracking database. 
The results of that analysis provide the relative magnitude of individual line-item costs to 
identify major LSLR cost drivers, allowing for exploration of opportunities to reduce those costs.  
 
The Safe Water Engineering Report is included as an appendix to this section, which will 
be submitted in a separate comment submission. We incorporate the report and its findings into 
our comments. The report’s key findings are summarized below.  
 
The Safe Water Engineering report concludes that CDM Smith substantially 
overestimated per-LSLR costs because of certain methodological choices they made when 
interpreting the data they collected. In contrast, the Safe Water Engineering report presents 
several lines of evidence showing that EPA’s lower per-LSLR cost estimates are reasonable. 
These lines of evidence include: an independent re-analysis of CDM’s data that avoids selective 
inclusion of projects and more accurately reflect fixed auxiliary costs; a critical review of EPA’s 
data and analysis in the LCRI Economic Analysis; an independent literature review, not limited 
to the literature cited by CDM; and the independent per-LSLR construction cost estimates using 
data from RS Means.  
 
Based on the same lines of evidence, the Safe Water Engineering report also concludes 
that the highest per-LSLR costs reported by individual water systems are outliers. Likewise, the 
report’s independent estimate shows that there is a small set of construction conditions and 
auxiliary non-construction expenditures that can drive up costs, which, as reflected in the 
literature review cost estimates, are not experienced in the majority of LSLRs.  
ii. 
There are many strategies readily available to water systems to further 
reduce costs 
 
The Safe Water Engineering report identifies many opportunities for water systems to 
reduce non-construction costs associated with local LSLR programs, through attention to critical 
project planning and policy decisions. It includes a comprehensive description of the elements of 
program design and potential strategies for reducing costs. Some of those strategies, including 
having the water system cover the full cost of LSLR, can be directly mandated by EPA in the 
LCRI. Others would be within the power of water systems to implement through design of their 
own LSLR programs; the report notes several examples of cities that have been able to reduce 
costs over the course of multi-year LSLR programs, through improved program planning and 
implementation, even as some materials costs increase due to inflation.   
 
6 Elin Warn Betanzo, Safe Water Engineering, LLC, and Vanessa Speight, 2024, Lead Service Line Replacement 
Costs and Strategies for Reducing Them (appended to these comments and submitted under separate cover in 
Docket No. EPA-HW-OW-2022-0801).  

12-3 
 
B. Analysis of LCRI Benefit Analysis7   
i. 
General Comments 
 
EPA’s analysis of the LCRI benefits is improved over EPA’s previous cost-benefit 
analyses, but it remains manifestly inadequate.8  The SDWA requires EPA to consider all 
“[q]uantifiable and nonquantifiable health risk reduction benefits for which there is a factual 
basis in the rulemaking record to conclude that such benefits are likely to occur….”9 
Furthermore, EPA is analyze the “effects of the contaminant on the general population and on 
groups within the general population such as infants, children, pregnant women, the elderly, 
individuals with a history of serious illness, or other subpopulations that are identified as likely 
to be at greater risk of adverse health effects due to exposure to contaminants in drinking water 
than the general population.”10 This, the agency has failed to do. 
 
Compared to its LCRR analysis, EPA substantially increased the assessed benefits of 
health endpoints – from one health endpoint (decreased IQ-earnings) to 4 health endpoints across 
seven potential physiological systems, and the total estimated benefits have increased 20-fold.  
Nonetheless, the benefit analysis is conspicuous in its omissions. Most obvious – despite its 
heavy labor market/capital emphasis -- is the inexplicable omission of productivity losses 
associated with the limited health endpoints EPA has cherry-picked to include.   
 
This is unfathomable and omitting it substantially biases downwards the quantification of 
damages associated with preterm births and ADHD at a minimum.  For instance, Doshi et al., 
2012 (used in the EA) finds that “Overall national annual incremental costs of ADHD ranged 
from $143 billion to $266 billion. Most of these costs were incurred by adults ($105B – $194B) 
compared with children/adolescents ($38B – $72B). For adults, the largest cost category was 
productivity and income losses ($87B – $138B).” 11  The Doshi estimates do not include loss of 
employment or stress related illnesses. Another significant omission is that the low-birth-weight 
damage estimate includes only the costs of immediate hospitalization.  Estimates of the total 
costs of low birth weight infants show them to be an order of magnitude higher than the 
hospitalization costs, including parental productivity loss and numerous long term sequelae for 
the infant. 
 
For perspective, the cost assessment components (Chapter 4 of the Economic Analysis 
plus Appendix B), are largely reworks of the 2021 LCR cost analyses. Chapter 4 is 336 pages 
 
7 The economic analysis of the LCRI’s benefits assessment in these comments was provided by Ronnie Levin, T.H. 
Chan Harvard School of Public Health, based in large part upon her research published in, Levin R, Schwartz J. A 
better cost:benefit analysis yields better and fairer results: EPA's lead and copper rule revision. Environ Res. 2023 
Jul 15;229:115738. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2023.115738. Epub 2023 Apr 18. PMID: 37080271, which is hereby 
incorporated by reference in these comments. 
8 USEPA (2023) Economic Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, Report, EPA-HQ-OW-
2022-0801-0712, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0712. (“EPA 2023 EA”) 
9 SDWA §1412(b)(3)(C)(i)(I), 42 U.S.C. §300g-1(b)(3)(C)(i)(I). 
10 Ibid §1412(b)(3)(C)(i)(V), 42 U.S.C. §300g-1(b)(3)(C)(i)(V). 
11 Doshi JA, Hodgkins P, Kahle J, Sikirica V, Cangelosi MJ, Setyawan J, Erder MH, Neumann PJ. Economic impact 
of childhood and adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in the United States. J Am Acad Child Adolesc 
Psychiatry. 2012 Oct;51(10):990-1002.e2. https://www.jaacap.org/article/S0890-8567(12)00538-2/fulltext. Epub 
2012 Sep 5. PMID: 23021476.  

12-4 
 
with Appendix B another 266 pages and an additional 8 pages to compare the LCRI and LCR 
(Appendix C).12  The benefit component (Chapter 5 of the EA) is 66 pages long with an 
additional 12 pages of uncertainties (none in the cost sections!); Appendix D is 27 pages with an 
additional 17 pages of references to give it oomph.13   
 
EPA describes the robust scientific evidence of lead’s health damages, noting health   
endpoints identified using two comprehensive United States Government 
documents summarizing the literature on lead exposure health impacts. These 
documents are EPA’s Integrated Science Assessment for Lead (ISA) (USEPA, 
2013), and the United States Department of Health and Human Services’ NTP 
Monograph on Health Effects of Low-Level Lead (NTP, 2012). Both of these 
sources present comprehensive reviews of the literature as of the time of 
publication on the risk of adverse health effects associated with lead exposure. 
EPA summarized those endpoints to which either the EPA ISA or the NTP 
Monograph assigned one of the top two [highest causality] tiers of confidence in 
the relationship between lead exposure and the risk of adverse health effects. 
These endpoints include cardiovascular effects, renal effects, reproductive and 
developmental effects, immunological effects, neurological effects, and cancer.14   
 
First, these two comprehensive reviews are outdated.  EPA’s next ISA (USEPA, 2023) has 
already been released for external review.  The 2012 NTP report is more than a decade old.  Why 
isn’t more current research cited?  Second, with the almost 20 separate health endpoints across 7 
separate body systems EPA identified as causally related to lead exposure contained in these 
comprehensive reviews, why was EPA able to quantify only 4?  
 
EPA describes the health evidence to be compelling, with evidence of a causal 
relationship between lead exposure and 7 body systems.  EPA notes that for 3 of the 4 quantified 
benefits, the slopes are steeper at lower levels and several show no evidence of a threshold below 
which effects cease (IQ, cardiovascular, reduction in birth weight). EPA also describes average 
US lead exposures from drinking water as low.  This indicates that it is precisely the drinking 
water exposures that are likely to produce the highest benefits.  
 
Nonetheless, EPA ascribes several pages to uncertainties in these health estimates and 
declined to include other endpoints.  Does EPA think that the uncertainties in WLLs are 
principally higher WLLs?  If not, each of these monetized estimates should be portrayed as a 
LOWER BOUND estimate. 
 
EPA has not even included all the data that it clearly has.  The monetization of cognitive 
damage referred to as the IQ-earnings matrix is heavily detailed, but the effect on earnings is the 
delayed damage that is visible in adulthood. The concurrent remediation is compensatory 
education for the children who have sustained the IQ damage. Using the same exposure-IQ 
decrement data portrayed in chapter 5 (sections 5.5.1 and 5.5.2) of the EA, EPA could easily 
 
12 EPA 2023 EA, Appendices,EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0712, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-
OW-2022-0801-0712. (“EPA EA Appendices”) 
13 Ibid. 
14 EPA 2023 EA at 6-5.  

12-5 
 
estimate the number of children likely to need compensatory remedial education.  EPA estimates 
297,190 IQ points saved by the LCRI.  With a national mean IQ of 100 and with 68% of the US 
population estimated to have IQs between 85 and 115, assuming that children exposed to lead 
from drinking water have the same IQ distribution as the rest of the US population, we can 
assume that a loss of 10 IQ points will drop a child’s almost a standard deviation (Omni Health 
Calculator, available at www.omnicalculator.com › health › iq-percentile).  Only the children with 
below average IQs will require compensatory education.  
 
To better assess all the health benefits of EPA’s LCRI, we used EPA’s exposure and effect 
estimates from the LCRI (contained in its Economic Analysis), converted all estimates to 2022$, 
then scaled the omitted health endpoints to include all the categories published in the Levin 
Schwartz 2023 benefit analysis. 
 
 

12-6 
 
Table 1, monetized benefits of LCRI including those omitted from EPA economic analysis. 
Body system 
Component assessed 
Population 
Aspect monetized 
Monetized 
unit cost 
(2022$) 
Incidence 
Derivation 
of inci est 
Total 
monetized 
benefit 
(millions 
2022$) 
Nervous System 
Effects  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cognitive Function 
Decrements   
Children 
IQ earnings 
$22,400 
per IQ pta 
297,190a 
EPA LCRI 
$6,657a 
 
Cognitive Function 
Decrements   
Children 
Short-term damages 
(compensatory ed) 
$51,500b 
15,000 
Scalingc 
$773 
 
Behavioral & 
Conduct Problems   
Children 
ADHD  
$179,000a 
4,221a 
EPA LCRI 
$755a 
 
Sensory Function 
Decrements  
Children 
Auditory impairment 
$18,300 b 
1620 
Scalingc  
$30 
 
Internalizing 
Behaviors  
Children 
--- 
 
 
 
 
 
Cognitive Function 
Decrements  
Adults 
Depression  
$70,000 b 
2400 
Scalingc 
$168 
 
Psychopathological 
Effects  
Adults 
ADHD 
$11,000 b 
20,000 
Scalingc 
$220 
 
Psychopathological 
Effects (alternative) 
Adults 
Dementia  
$31,000 b 
400 
Scalingc 
$12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cardiovascular 
Effects   
Hypertension  
Adults  
Hypertension 
$5,700b 
100,000 
Scalingc 
$570 
 
Coronary Heart 
Disease  
Adults 
Coronary heart 
disease 
$19,500 b 
1500 
Scalingc 
$29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Immune System 
Effects 
Immunological 
damage 
Lifetime 
Asthma  
$56,000 b 
2080 
Scalingc 
$116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hematologic 
Effects  
Decreased Red Blood 
Cell Survival and 
Altered Heme 
Synthesis 
Lifetime 
Anemia  
$3,700 b 
50 
Scalingc 
-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproductive & 
Developmental 
Effects  
Development  
Lifetime 
--- 
 
 
 
 
 
Birth Outcomes  
Childhood 
& life 
Low birth weight  
$5 a 
1.4 mil a 
EPA LCRI 
$6 a 
 
Male Reproductive 
Function  
Adult  
Male reproductive 
impairment 
$66,800 b 
800  
Scalingc 
$53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cancer  
Cancer 
Adult  
Lung cancer  
$293,000 b 
5  
Scalingc  
$0.9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mortality 
Cardiovascular  
Adult  
VSL 
$10.4 mil a 
2642 a 
EPA LCRI 
$27,382 a 
TOTAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$36,772 
Legend: a: EPA LCRI 2023 Economic Analysis; b: Levin Schwartz 2023 converted to 2022$; c: scaling from Levin Schwartz to 
LCRI exposure estimates15 
 
 
15 Levin R, Schwartz J. A better cost:benefit analysis yields better and fairer results: EPA's lead and copper rule 
revision. Environ Res. 2023 Jul 15;229:115738. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2023.115738. Epub 2023 Apr 18. PMID: 
37080271.  

12-7 
 
 
The total estimated benefits ($36,772 in 2022$), while only 10% higher than EPA’s 
estimates, present a much more comprehensive picture of the benefits of the LCRI. Of course, 
this assessment remains a poor underestimate of the total damages because each monetized 
endpoint is incomplete; the largest omissions are likely productivity losses and the long-term 
sequelae of low birthweights. 
 
EPA repeatedly claims an inability to quantify benefits, but not costs.  For instance, 
“because of the lack of granularity in the lead tap water concentration data available to EPA for 
the regulatory analysis, EPA is unable to quantify the benefits of small improvements in CCT to 
individuals residing in homes with LSLs/GRR service lines.”16 Nonetheless, EPA does not find 
either the lack of granularity in the WLL data nor the lack of evidence of a threshold to constitute 
‘uncertainties’ in the cost estimates or a downward bias in the benefits. 
 
In addition to the paucity of monetized health benefits, EPA also refused to include 
materials benefits associated with required corrosion control. Corrosion control is the control 
treatment of choice because lead is principally a corrosion by-product in drinking water. EPA’s 
omission of monetized benefit estimation is willful. EPA acknowledges that estimates exist and 
indeed, EPA first published estimates of avoidable corrosion damage in 1986.17 The quadrennial 
American Society of Civil Engineers report card on the state of US infrastructure contains a host 
of estimates of corrosion damage.18  In addition, there are at least 2 international organizations 
that study corrosion: the National Association of Corrosion Engineers (NACE) and The 
Association for Materials Protection and Performance. EPA acknowledges that individuals who 
live or work in buildings without LSL/GRR lines are likely to benefit from the improved 
monitoring and additional actions to optimize corrosion control.19  Nonetheless, EPA concludes 
“EPA did not have sufficient information to estimate these impacts nationally for the proposed 
rule analysis.”20   
 
In sum, the agency’s EA fails to consider the full range of benefits from the proposed 
rule. OMB’s new Circular No. A-4 on Regulatory Analysis, issued on November 9, 2023, 
provides OMB’s guidance to Federal agencies.21  It requires that agencies’ regulatory cost benefit 
analyses should include the fullest range of information on known and anticipated social costs 
and benefits.  Not only has EPA failed to comply with the SDWA’s directives to consider the full 
range of health benefits, EPA has clearly not adhered to this OMB directive either. 
 
16 EPA 2023 EA, at 6-5. 
17 Ronnie Levin, EPA Office of Policy, Planning and Evaluation, Reducing Lead in Drinking Water: A Benefit 
Analysis, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA-230-09-86-019, Draft Final Report December 1986, (revised Spring 
1987). https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2017-12/documents/ee-0344_long.pdf  
18 American Society of Civil Engineers, Report Card for America’s Infrastructure, 2021 
https://infrastructurereportcard.org/   
19 EPA 2023 EA, at 5-22. 
20 Id. at 5-73. 
21 OMB Circular A-4, Nov.9 , 2023, To the Heads of Executive Agencies and Establishments, Subject: Regulatory 
Analysis,  https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/DraftCircularA-4.pdf  

12-8 
 
ii. 
Discount Rate 
 
EPA has used an unreasonably high discount rate of up to 7 percent to discount future 
benefits.  First of all, we note that although EPA’s EA discounts all benefits by 3 percent and 7 
percent.22 Yet OMB’s 2023 Circular No. A-94, which guides agencies on what discount rates to 
use in cost-benefit analyses, was revised in November 2023 and states, “Discounted benefits or 
costs should be determined using a real discount rate of 2.0 percent if the benefits or costs reflect 
certainty-equivalent valuations and 3.1 percent if they do not.” 23 It further notes that “This 2023 
version of the Appendix is valid until the release of a subsequent Appendix in 2026.”24 Based 
upon the OMB Circular alone, the LCRI should present at most a 2% and possibly a 3% discount 
rate. 
 
But based upon the best available science and literature, EPA should apply no (or at most 
a lower than 2 percent) discount rate for benefits to account for the intergenerational harms 
associated with PFAS and the nature of the rule’s economic impacts.25 Even OMB’s separate 
Circular A-4 notes that some experts believe that any discounting of benefits to future 
generations is inherently unethical.26  OMB notes that there are reasons to consider lower 
discount rates doe future benefits when they will accrue to future generations: 
Special ethical considerations arise when comparing benefits and costs across 
generations. Although most people demonstrate time preference in their own 
consumption behavior, which may vary by the good or service at hand, it may not be 
appropriate for society to demonstrate a similar preference when deciding between the 
well-being of current and future generations. Future citizens and residents who are 
affected by such choices cannot take part in making them, and today’s society must act 
with some consideration of their interest. Some believe that it is ethically impermissible 
to discount the utility of future generations.[citations omitted] That is, government should 
treat all generations equally.27  
 
22 EPA 2023 EA, passim.  
23 White House Office of Management and Budget, Issuance of Revised OMB Circular No. A-94, “Guidelines and 
Discount Rates for Benefit-Cost Analysis of Federal Programs.” A Notice by the Management and Budget Office on 
11/13/2023. Circular A-94, Appendix D: Discount Rates for Benefit-Cost Analysis, 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/CircularA-94AppendixD.pdf  .    
24 Ibid. 
25 See, e.g., Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Pricing the Priceless: Cost-Benefit Analysis of Environmental 
Protection, 150 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1553, 1571 (2002), 
https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3277&context=penn_law_review (questioning the use 
of discounting to address long-term, intergenerational harms, including those associated with “persistent toxins”); 
see also NYU Institute for Policy Integrity, Comments on National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and 
Copper Rule Revisions (Feb. 12, 2020), https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-1478  
https://policyintegrity.org/documents/EPA_Lead_Copper_Rule_Comments_2020.02.11.pdf (arguing for a “3% or 
lower discount rate” for benefits of EPA drinking water rule). https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-
2017-0300-1478  
26 OMB Circular A-4, supra note 20.  
27 Ibid at 80. & note 168 (citing, inter alia, Derek Parfit, Reasons and Persons (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1984).   

12-9 
 
 
While OMB does not rule out any discounting of future benefits when there are 
intergenerational effects, the Office says that “it is often appropriate to discount long-term 
consumption benefits and costs—although at a lower rate than the near term effects more 
likely to fall on a single generation—if there is an expectation that future generations will be 
wealthier and thus will value a marginal dollar of benefits or costs by less than those alive 
today….”28  
 
In the event a discount rate for future benefits is applied, a lower discount rate is more 
appropriate for this rulemaking than a higher, capital-based discount rate given the many 
decades-long timeframe for analysis, the impacts on future generations, and the extent of 
uncertainties in the magnitude of future health benefits.29 EPA’s draft preamble does not include 
or explain its determination as to why a discount rate is appropriate for intergenerational benefits 
as much or most of the benefits of the LCRI will be enjoyed by future generations of children 
and adults no longer exposed to lead. Instead, the EA does not even analyze a 2% discount rate, 
and presents benefit estimates based only on a 3% consumption-based discount rate and a 7% 
capital-based discount rate, as if they were equally relevant to assessing the net benefits of the 
rule.30 Thus, if EPA continues to apply a discount rate in the final EA, it should use a reduced 
consumption-based discount rate—below 2%—as the 3% rate used in the Draft EA does not 
reflect the OMB Circulars or the best available economic data and literature.31 
 
The agency fails to justify its use of 3% and 7% discount rates for future benefits. These 
discount rates, and particularly the 7% rate are wholly inappropriate and result in a substantial 
understatement of the benefits. Instead, EPA should use a zero discount rate for the 
intergenerational and long-term future health benefits over the next several decades of the rule. 
EPA must fully justify its use of a discount rate more than zero.   
 
28 Ibid at 80 (emphasis added) 
29 Peter Howard & Jason A. Schwartz, Valuing the Future: Legal and Economic Considerations for Updating 
Discount Rates, 39 Yale J. Regul. 595, 599, 603 (2022) https://policyintegrity.org/files/publications/09.-Howard-
Schwartz-Final_.-595-657_.pdf  (arguing that a consumption-based discount rate is appropriate for estimating 
benefits of rules designed to affect public health over a long time horizon).   
30 EPA 2023 EA, supra, Chapter 5. 
31 See, Ackerman & Heinzerling, supra note 24, NYU Institute for Policy Integrity, note 24, Derek Parfit, supra note 
26, and Howard & Schwartz, supra note 28. 

13-1 
 
Section 13: Water Systems Can Replace all LSLRs Without Making Water Bills 
Unaffordable 
Many water utilities and water utility associations have opposed a requirement to replace 
all lead service lines based on the cost of compliance, which they say may make water bills 
unaffordable, especially for low-income customers. The unavoidable implication is that millions 
of people should resign themselves to drinking unsafe water if low-income residents in their 
community cannot afford to pay higher water bills. Ironically, many people at risk of lead in their 
drinking water are the same people who would supposedly be “protected” from unaffordable 
water bills if lead pipes are allowed to remain in use. In reality, this approach would only 
perpetuate existing inequities in access to safe and affordable drinking water—inequities that the 
SDWA is meant to remedy and that President Biden, Vice President Harris, and EPA 
Administrator Regan have committed to addressing.  
Moreover, cost-based opposition to a strong LCRI is based on a faulty premise that 
compliance, including replacement of all lead service lines, would necessarily result in 
unaffordable water bills. This is simply false.  
Opponents of a strong LCRI overstate both the likely compliance costs and the 
significance of those costs relative to the overall scale of necessary investments in water 
infrastructure. Meanwhile, they overlook strategies they can use—in collaboration with EPA and 
the states—to ensure affordable access to safe water. When issuing the final LCRI, EPA should 
highlight strategies that water systems can use to comply without making water bills 
unaffordable for low-income customers.  
Critically, as described below, utilities should be expected to maximize the use of 
available federal water infrastructure funds and other non-ratepayer sources of funds for lead 
service line replacement. Because residents in many communities have spent decades paying for 
contaminated water, it is of the utmost importance that water utilities prioritize accessing those 
non-ratepayer funds before asking those same families to spend more money to fix a problem 
they did not ask for (and a problem that often was created by the utility itself, which often 
required, installed, or approved the use of lead pipes, without knowledge of the homeowner). 
Where last-resort rate increases are demonstrated to be necessary, utilities should adopt 
strategies—including many EPA has specifically recommended—that can increase total rate 
revenues without burdening low-income customers.  
A. AWWA has consistently overstated the likely costs of compliance  
As discussed in section 12 of these comments, the LCRI Economic Analysis presents a 
reasonable estimate of per-LSLR costs; higher cost estimates put forward by AWWA are 
inflated; and water systems can further reduce costs of full LSLR through careful attention to 
critical project planning and local policy decisions. 
We note that AWWA’s exaggerated cost estimates fit a pattern of grossly inflated SDWA 
compliance cost estimates by AWWA. For example, AWWA funded a recent study by Black and 
Veatch that suggests EPA’s proposed Maximum Contaminant Levels for six PFAS will cost $3.8 

13-2 
 
billion per year,1 when EPA’s more sober assessment concludes that they will cost more like 
$777 million per year. A careful comparison of the AWWA and EPA estimates by Safe Water 
Engineering, which was submitted to EPA, concluded that AWWA has substantially inflated the 
anticipated PFAS treatment costs with a variety of unsupported assumptions that cause the 
purported costs to balloon.2  
B. LCRI compliance costs would be a small fraction of water systems’ overall 
capital and operating expenses  
Even using the water utility sector’s inflated cost estimates, opponents of a strong LCRI 
overstate the significance of those costs relative to the overall scale of investments in water 
infrastructure. Lead service line replacement and control of lead in tap water are not the major 
drivers for increased water bills—and they should be prioritized within water utilities’ capital 
improvement programs because of the critical need to protect human health from toxic lead. 
The utility sector routinely offers numbers in the multiple trillions of dollars to fully 
address water infrastructure needs.3 Whatever the precise number, it is clear that the cost of lead 
service line replacement is only a small percentage of total water infrastructure needs and is not 
the primary driver of affordability concerns. Considering the comprehensive scope of water 
utility infrastructure and service provision, lead service line replacement costs represent an even 
smaller percentage of utilities’ total budgetary needs, when both capital and operating expenses 
are included.4 Further, whereas most water utility investment requires ongoing planning for 
reinvestment, maintenance, and replacement—meaning that projected needs continue to increase 
when planning horizons are expanded—lead service line replacement is a one-time expense. 
C. Compliance costs can be funded without making bills unaffordable for low-
income residents 
Water utilities often overlook steps that utilities, states, and EPA can take to fund 
compliance costs without relying exclusively on ratepayers, and without imposing unaffordable 
burdens on low-income residents. Affordability of water bills for low-income customers is, and 
will continue to be, a challenge for water utilities with or without an obligation to replace lead 
service lines. The affordability challenge calls for holistic solutions to more equitably fund 
 
1 AWWA statement on proposed PFAS drinking water standards, March 14, 2023, https://www.awwa.org/AWWA-
Articles/awwa-statement-on-proposed-pfas-drinking-water-
standards#:~:text=recent%20study%20conducted%20by%20Black%20%26%20Veatch%20on%20behalf%20of%2
0AWWA. 
2 Elin Betanzo, Safe Water Engineering, May 30, 2023, submitted as attachment to comments on the proposed PFAS 
MCL by Earthjustice, NRDC et al, https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0114-1808.   
3 See, e.g., AWWA, Buried No Longer, 
https://www.awwa.org/Portals/0/AWWA/Government/BuriedNoLonger.pdf?ver=2013-03-29-125906-653 (more 
than $1 trillion for water mains alone over 25 years); Value of Water Campaign & American Society of Civil 
Engineers, The Economic Benefits of Investing in Water Infrastructure—How a Failure to Act Would Affect the US 
Economic Recovery, https://uswateralliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/VOW-Economic-Paper_1.pdf, (over 
$3 trillion water and wastewater infrastructure need over 20 years).   
4 See Value of Water Campaign & American Society of Civil Engineers, The Economic Benefits of Investing in 
Water Infrastructure—How a Failure to Act Would Affect the US Economic Recovery, 
https://uswateralliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/VOW-Economic-Paper_1.pdf (over $100 billion annual 
operating expenses for water and wastewater, equivalent to $2 trillion over 20 years). 

13-3 
 
investment in water infrastructure, while prioritizing investments like lead service line 
replacement that meet critical public health needs. 
A recent EPA guidance document under the Clean Water Act (the Feb. 2023 “Financial 
Capability Assessment Guidance”5) pushes wastewater systems to pursue “strategies for 
lowering costs and reducing impacts on low-income households”6 using tools that “ensure that a 
financial strategy is in place to support needed infrastructure upgrades without overburdening 
their most vulnerable ratepayers.”7 In the guidance, EPA identifies “strategies for communities to 
support affordable utility rates while planning investments in water infrastructure that are 
essential to protecting clean water….Tools such as variable rate structures, consumer assistance 
programs, and grants or subsidies from the…State Revolving Fund are some of the tools outlined 
in the guidance.”8 All of those strategies are equally applicable to water systems. EPA’s 
guidance further states that technical assistance is available through EPA concerning these 
approaches.  
When issuing the final LCRI, EPA should highlight these and other funding and 
financing strategies that water systems can use to comply with the rule without making bills 
unaffordable for low-income households. As the final rule is implemented, EPA, the states, and 
water systems must all work to deploy these strategies.  
We describe below several of the most important strategies, including maximizing use of 
available federal funding, especially for disadvantaged communities; maximizing use of other 
non-ratepayer sources of funding; and adopting equitable rate structures and other programs that 
can increase rate revenues without burdening low-income customers. We urge EPA to ramp up 
its technical assistance offerings on these topics.  
i. 
Maximize the use of available federal funding, especially for 
disadvantaged communities 
To help communities achieve the Biden Administration’s goal of replacing all lead 
service lines within 10 years, Congress passed the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL). On top of 
federal and state funds available through the “base” Drinking Water State Revolving Fund 
program, the BIL provides $15 billion for water utilities to replace lead service lines, of which 
49% must be provided as grants and forgivable loans to “eligible recipients,” meaning 
disadvantaged communities.9 Further, the BIL includes an additional $11.7 billion for drinking 
water infrastructure needs generally, including lead service line replacement (LSLR), of which 
 
5 See EPA, Clean Water Act Financial Capability Assessment Guidance, February 
2023, https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-01/cwa-financial-capability-assessment-guidance.pdf. 
6 EPA, FAQ: Financial Capability Assessment Guidance Questions & Answers, Feb. 1, 
2023, https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-02/cwa-fca-questions-and-answers.pdf. 
7 EPA, EPA Announces Financial Capability Guidance to Support Communities and Ensure Clean, Affordable 
Water, Feb. 1, 2023, https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-announces-financial-capability-guidance-support-
communities-and-ensure-clean. 
8 EPA, Fact Sheet: Clean Water Act Financial Capability Assessment Guidance, February 2023, 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-02/cwa-fca-fact-sheet.pdf.  
9 Pub. L. No, 117–58, 135 Stat. 429, 1400-01 (Nov. 15, 2021); EPA, “Memorandum: Implementation of the Clean 
Water and Drinking Water State Revolving Fund Provisions of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law,” Mar, 8, 2023, 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-03/combined_srf-implementation-memo_final_03.2022.pdf. 

13-4 
 
49% is for grants and principal forgiveness to disadvantaged communities. LSLRs done with 
these funds come at no cost to ratepayers.  
Other BIL funding, though not eligible to be used for LSLR costs, indirectly supports 
water utilities’ ability to pay for LSLR by reducing the need to rely on ratepayer funds for capital 
improvements. This includes, for example, $9 billion in grants for water utilities to address 
emerging contaminants such as PFAS. For water utilities that function as combined water and 
wastewater utilities, the BIL’s $11.7 billion in clean water infrastructure funds also offset capital 
improvement costs for wastewater and stormwater management, which would otherwise be 
passed on to ratepayers on their combined water and sewer bills. In addition, of course, there is 
funding available under the State Revolving Funds that have been federally capitalized and 
matched by state funds over the past two and a half decades, which continue to receive annual 
appropriations of about $1 billion or more. A significant portion of those funds also is reserved 
for grants and forgivable loans for disadvantaged communities. 
Other federal funds are also available, such as Community Development Block Grants 
(CDBG), which are a major source of water infrastructure funding nationally.10 EPA has 
highlighted CDBG as an available source of funds for lead service line replacement, 
specifically.11 
Additionally, forty states have collectively dedicated almost $19 billion dollars in 
American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) State Fiscal Recovery Fund monies towards water 
infrastructure, much of which is available to municipal water (and/or wastewater) utilities.12 The 
Treasury Department’s ARPA rules explicitly authorize the use of these funds for full lead 
service line replacement, while prohibiting their use for partial replacements.13 
Many other federal funding programs also are available to help pay for lead service line 
replacement, including the Lead Reduction Project program,14 and the Small, Underserved and 
Disadvantaged Communities Program.15 EPA has highlighted these and other funding 
opportunities for LSL replacement on its website16 and should discuss them in the final rule and 
in its outreach to the public and water systems. EPA should continue to bolster its technical 
assistance efforts to ensure that eligible communities can access all available grants and 
subsidized loans. Likewise, EPA should bolster its oversight of states’ implementation of BIL 
funds, to ensure that funds designated for disadvantaged communities reach water utilities with 
 
10 The Congressional Research Service (CRS) reports that, “[b]etween FY2016 and FY2020, disbursements by 
CDBG recipients for water and sewer improvements have averaged $388.4 million per year.” CRS, Federally 
Supported Projects and Programs for Wastewater, Drinking Water, and Water Supply Infrastructure, Updated 
August 2, 2022, at 45, n. 132, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R46471.  
11 https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/funding-lead-service-line-replacement#CDBG.  
12 National Council of State Legislatures, ARPA State Fiscal Recovery Fund Database, 
https://www.ncsl.org/fiscal/arpa-state-fiscal-recovery-fund-allocations (last visited May 22, 2023). 
13 31 C.F.R. §§ 35.6(e)(1)(iii)(B), (iv)(A); see U.S. Department of the Treasury, Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal 
Recovery Funds, 87 Fed. Reg. 4338, 4414 (Jan. 27, 2022). 
14 SDWA section 1459B, 42 U.S.C. 300j-19b. 
15 SDWA section 1459A, 42 U.S.C. 300j-19a. 
16 Identifying Funding Sources for Lead Service Line Replacement, https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-
drinking-water/identifying-funding-sources-lead-service-line-replacement. 

13-5 
 
the greatest affordability challenges. EPA should closely track distribution of BIL funds (and 
other federal funds) and continue efforts to identify gaps in funding needs that can be identified 
for Congressional appropriators. 
ii. 
Maximize use of other non-ratepayer sources of funding to replace lead 
service lines 
EPA should strongly encourage innovative funding approaches to pay for lead service 
line replacements. For example, the EPA Administrator and Vice President Harris have 
celebrated the City of Newark, New Jersey’s innovative program to expeditiously replace over 
23,000 lead service lines at no cost to ratepayers, which was primarily financed through bonds 
that are being repaid with revenue provided by leasing fees from the local port authority.17 In 
Madison, Wisconsin, the water utility used revenue from allowing cell phone towers to be 
affixed to utility property to help fund lead service line replacements.18 Such innovative solutions 
can help fund these important investments. 
iii. 
Adopt equitable rate structures and other programs to increase utility 
revenue without burdening low-income customers 
As stated above, EPA’s Financial Capability Assessment (FCA) Guidance provides a 
toolkit of approaches that utilities can use to increase investment in water infrastructure without 
making bills unaffordable for low-income customers. In addition to securing grants and 
subsidized loans, which reduce the costs of capital improvements for all ratepayers, the guidance 
identifies many steps that utilities can take to reduce costs for low-income customers 
specifically. These include: 
 capping bills for low-income residents at a percentage of income;  
 adopting “lifeline” rates with a low charge for an initial amount of usage sufficient to 
meet each household’s essential needs; 
 offering bill discounts specifically to low-income customers; 
 helping low-income customers repair plumbing leaks and replace old, water-guzzling 
toilets, which can both reduce utilities’ water supply costs and provide ongoing bill 
reductions for low-income households.19  
 
 
17 See Gary Brune, Lead Service Line Replacement at a Blistering Pace Newark, New Jersey, Feb 10, 2022, 
https://www.jerseywaterworks.org/latest-news/lead-service-line-replacement-at-a-blistering-pace-newark-new-
jersey/; Andrew Coen, Port Authority lease deal will help Newark replace lead pipes, October 02, 2019, The Bond 
Buyer, https://www.bondbuyer.com/news/port-authority-lease-deal-will-help-newark-replace-lead-pipes.  
18 EPA, LSLR Financing Case Study: Madison, WI, https://www.epa.gov/dwreginfo/lslr-financing-case-study-
madison-wi. 
19 See FCA Guidance, pp. C-6 through C-11.  

13-6 
 
There are water utilities around the country using each of these approaches, to varying 
degrees. In addition to examples cited in the FCA Guidance, many of the best examples are 
collected in an extensive water affordability “toolkit” published last year by the Natural 
Resources Defense Council and National Consumer Law Center.20 That toolkit also provides 
detailed recommendations on best practices and factors to consider when implementing these 
strategies. 
 
 
 
 
20 Natural Resources Defense Council and National Consumer Law Center, Water Affordability Advocacy Toolkit 
(June 2022), https://www.nrdc.org/resources/water-affordability-advocacy-toolkit. Three of the most relevant 
chapters of from this publication are entitled “Equitable Water Rates,” “Affordability and Assistance Programs,” 
and “Water Efficiency and Plumbing Repair Assistance.”  

14-1 
 
Section 14: EPA Must Insert Provisions in the Final LCRI that Improve Compliance with 
and Enforcement of the Rule and Provide Transparency to EPA and the Public  
The proposed LCRI contains no provisions designed to improve: compliance with the 
LCR; the collection and comprehension of accurate sampling data; or, enforcement of the Rule.  
The final version must do so.  The LCR is infamous for: the lack of water systems’ compliance 
with it;1 its disincentives to comply with the rule; the paltry and inaccurate data provided to EPA; 
and, by EPA’s own admission, the inability of EPA to enforce the rule, largely because of those 
factors. As Cynthia Giles, the former Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement 
and Compliance Assurance from 2009 to 2017, and presently Senior Advisor in EPA’s Office of 
Air and Radiation, aptly put it when commenting on the proposed LCRR: 
All the regulatory provisions in the world don’t matter if the regulated systems 
aren’t following them. Rule improvements have little meaning if the underlying 
reality is that violations are rampant but largely invisible.2 
An NRDC report summarizing the limited data that states actually report to EPA found 
that from 2018 to 2020, 28 million people were served by 372 drinking water systems with over 
530 health-based violations for lead.3  And, as former Assistant Administrator Giles noted, there 
is a “mountain of evidence that violations of the lead [and copper] rule may be as much as ten 
times what EPA’s data claims.” Indeed, the most recent publicly available EPA audit of LCR 
data found that 92 percent of LCR treatment technique violations recorded in state files were not 
reported to EPA.4  
As the Biden administration has already acknowledged, lack of compliance, 
transparency, and enforcement is an environmental justice issue that must be addressed.  
Executive Order 14008 provides that EPA shall “strengthen enforcement of environmental 
violations with disproportionate impact on underserved communities…and create a community 
notification program to monitor and provide real-time data to the public on current 
environmental pollution, including emissions, criteria pollutants, and toxins, in frontline and 
fenceline communities—places with the most significant exposure to such pollution.”5  
As discussed further below, the final LCRI therefore must make changes that address: 1) 
accurate data submission and transparency, and, 2) rampant noncompliance with the LCR.  Only 
then will the positive changes proposed in the LCRI—and hopefully improved upon in the final 
LCRI—have any practical effect. 
More specifically, EPA must require direct electronic reporting of LCRI monitoring 
results from state-certified laboratories to EPA and create a web-based portal for public access to 
 
1 GAO, Additional Data and Statistical Analysis May Enhance EPA’s Oversight of the Lead and Copper Rule, 
GAO-17-424, (Sept. 2017), at 3. 
2 Comments by Cynthia Giles, Comments on Proposed Revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule, Docket ID No. EPA-
HQ-OW-2017-0300 (Feb. 4, 2020). 
3 Kristi Pullen Fedinick, Millions Served by Water Systems Detecting Lead, NRDC, (May 13, 2021), 
https://www.nrdc.org/resources/millions-served-water-systems-detecting-lead. 
4 EPA Office of Water, 2006 Drinking Water Data Reliability Analysis and Action Plan, EPA 816-R-07-010, March 
2008, https://bit.ly/2YAJv1U. 
5 Exec. Order No. 14008 §222(b), 86 Fed. Reg. 7619, 7631 (Feb. 1, 2021). 

14-2 
 
national drinking water data. EPA should also require all LCRI treatment technique violations 
manually or automatically determined by the state to be simultaneously reported to the public 
water system and to EPA, and EPA should also post that information on the portal.    Finally, 
EPA should require water systems to file quarterly reports indicating whether they have 
complied with LCR requirements.  We provide suggestions for the content of those reports at the 
end of this Section.      
A. EPA must implement and require direct electronic reporting of violations so it can 
increase compliance with the LCR through oversight and affected communities can 
receive timely and accurate information 
There are three types of violations of the LCR: 1) monitoring violations; 2) reporting 
violations; and, 3) health-based violations. Obviously, health-based violations, such as a failure 
to comply with corrosion control requirements or failure to remove lead service lines as required, 
pose immediate and known public health threats.  But the other types of violations are important, 
too. Monitoring violations such as a failure to test for lead in tap water as required may mask 
ongoing lead contamination problems that are not detected, whether intentionally or 
unintentionally. Reporting violations, such as a failure to issue public notification of a violation 
or failure to report test results to the state and public, undermine the awareness of the public of 
possible lead contamination problems, and harm states’ and EPA’s ability to oversee public 
water systems’ compliance with the rule.  
In general, the data in the Safe Drinking Water Information System Federal Version 
(SDWIS Fed) play a critical role in helping EPA monitor states’ and water systems’ compliance, 
which is a key component in how EPA performs its oversight role with respect to the LCR.6  But 
that system does not work for the LCR.  EPA does not currently receive all water system LCR 
compliance data. The limited scope of data currently required to be reported to EPA, and the 
anemic compliance with reporting of that limited scope, renders EPA oversight impossible, 
allowing the flagrant noncompliance with the LCR to persist.7  More specifically, water systems 
are supposed to provide monitoring data to their primacy agencies and often these are recorded 
in a database called SDWIS/State.8 The primacy agencies, however, do not then submit that 
monitoring and reporting data to EPA.9 Rather, primacy agencies mainly submit only violations 
data to EPA through SDWIS/Fed, not monitoring results.10 And as noted earlier, past EPA and 
GAO audits have found that often violations known to states are not passed on to EPA. As EPA 
has acknowledged, “[t]his limits EPA’s ability to determine the completeness of the data 
received by the Agency and hinders the development of national training, technical assistance, 
and oversight.”11 
 
6 GAO, Additional Data and Statistical Analysis May Enhance EPA’s Oversight of the Lead and Copper Rule, 
GAO-17-424, (Sept. 2017), at 3. 
7 See id. at 2. 
8 GAO, Unreliable State Data, supra note 2 at 9.  
9 EPA receives monitoring data from only Wyoming, Washington, D.C., and tribal lands other than the Navajo 
Nation. Id. at 2.  
10 EPA, Drinking Water Compliance Monitoring Data Strategic Plan, EPA-810-R-19-002 (July 2022) at 4. 
11 Id. at 2. 

14-3 
 
But even the limited violation data reported to EPA is unreliable for three reasons: (1) 
inaccurate monitoring; (2) anemic reporting; and, (3) reporting errors, whether intentional or not, 
from a convoluted reporting system. First, the known lack of compliance with the LCR results in 
monitoring data that is inaccurate. LCR monitoring is subject to inadvertent errors, but it is 
widely known that the rule also is subject to rampant intentional cheating and gaming by water 
systems to avoid having a 10 percent lead action level exceedance that would require corrective 
action, mechanisms that AWWA refers to as “loopholes.”12 The LCR has “very specific 
sampling procedures,”13 and, as noted earlier, the proposed rule would strengthen those 
procedures.14  But even if finalized, those improved sampling procedures might have little 
practical effect because, as EPA has acknowledged, the sampling procedures “are not always 
followed.”15  EPA has also recognized that some water systems do not test Tier 1 sites or fail to 
return to sites with previous high levels, in violation of the rule.16 Some water systems 
intentionally sample incorrectly, in ways known to miss worst-case lead levels and some increase 
the number of sites tested in an apparent attempt to keep the percentage of lead action level 
exceedances below 10 percent.17  
That LCR monitoring does not accurately capture the highest lead levels in a water 
system as it is supposed to can be seen by comparing recent lead testing results from water 
distributed by the Portland Water Bureau (PWB) in Portland, Oregon.  The 90th percentile 
compliance testing results for the LCR were between 6 and 11 ppb for five of the six sampling 
periods during 2021, 2022, and 2023, with the remaining one at 21 ppb.18 These results meant 
that there was no LAL exceedance publicly recorded for five of those periods, which led the 
 
12 See Marc Edwards et al., Gaps in the EPA Lead and Copper Rule That Can Allow for Gaming of Compliance, 
(2009), https://mediad.publicbroadcasting.net/p/michigan/files/201511/Gaming_the_LCR_WASA_2003-
2009_Oct_2009.pdf; Carol D. Leonnig et. al., Lead Levels in Water Misrepresented Across U.S., Wash. Post (Oct. 5, 
2004), www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A7094-2004Oct4.html; Oliver Milman, US Authorities Distorting 
Tests to Downplay Lead Content of Water, Guardian (Jan. 22, 2016), https://www.theguardian
.com/environment/2016/jan/22/water-lead-content-tests-us-authorities-distorting-flint-crisis; Oliver Milman & 
Jessica Glenza, Philadelphia’s Water-Testing Procedures Are ‘Worse Than Flint’ – Expert, Guardian (Jan. 28, 
2016), https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/28/philadelphia-water-testing-crisis-flint-health-risk; 
Letter from Lisa Daniels, Ass’n of State Drinking Water Admin’rs, to Scott Pruit, EPA, regarding State Drinking 
Water Program Comments on Long-Term Revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule, 6, (Mar. 8, 2018), 
https://asdwa.files.wordpress.com/2018/03/final-lt_lcr-federal-consultation-asdwa-comments_appendices.pdf. 
13 EPA, Lead and Copper Rule Revisions Presentation at Federalism Consultation Meeting (Jan. 8, 2018) at slide 5, 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2018-01/documents/eo_13132_federalism_consultation_presentation-
final_1.9.2018.pdf.   
14 See Section 7.B. 
15 EPA, Lead and Copper Rule Revisions Presentation at Federalism Consultation Meeting (Jan. 8, 2018) at slide 5, 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2018-01/documents/eo_13132_federalism_consultation_presentation-
final_1.9.2018.pdf.   
16 See, e.g., EPA Region III, Emergency Administrative Order Docket No. CWA-03-2023-0110DS, ¶16, (July 14, 
2021), 
https://yosemite.epa.gov/OA/RHC/EPAAdmin.nsf/Filings/5D20FEB828000B458525871300486662/$File/Clarksbu
rg%20Water%20Board.%20PWS%20Emergency%20Administrative%20Order.%207.14.2021.pdf; see also Brenda 
Goodman et al., Lax Oversight Wakens Lead Testing of Water, WebMD, (June 12, 2017) 
https://www.webmd.com/special-reports/lead-dangers/20170612/lead-water-testing. 
17 See Marc Edwards et al., Gaps in the EPA Lead and Copper Rule, supra note 19. 
18 https://yourwater.oregon.gov/leadcopper.php?pwsno=00657; Slide 3 of Frank Mazzola dated January 18, 2024. 

14-4 
 
State of Oregon to designate their CCT as optimized.19  However, PWB conducted separate 
water testing outside of the LCR over those three years to help assess the effectiveness of their 
CCT.  The results of that sampling showed 90th percentile results of 46.6 ppb in 2021, 39.1 ppb 
in 2022, and 28.8 ppb in 2023.20  (The cause of that discrepancy is unclear, but previously, after 
a LAL exceedance, PWB improperly changed sites sampled for LCR compliance monitoring that 
resulted in it avoiding an LAL exceedance.21)  This discrepancy demonstrates that whether 
purposeful or inadvertent, the LCR is not being properly followed or is being gamed, and thus 
persons are being placed at even higher risk than the construct of the LCR allows with 15 ppb 
LAL and 90th percentile.   
In addition, some water systems whose monitoring actually shows a lead action level 
exceedance may not report the data to their primacy agencies. 
Without accurate monitoring and reporting data, the number and location of water 
systems that have a lead action level exceedance requiring corrective action, and the number and 
location of systems that would have had an exceedance if the Rule’s monitoring requirements 
had been followed, cannot be surmised or overseen. See EPA, 2006 National Public Water 
Systems Compliance Report, EPA-K-09-002 (Mar. 2009) at 5 (“If a system did not monitor the 
quality of its water, it is impossible to know if it has violated a health-based requirement. For this 
reason, a system’s significant failure to monitor and report is a major violation that must be 
addressed and corrected.”).     
Second, very few known LCR health violations are reported to EPA in practice. As noted 
earlier, an EPA audit published in 2008 found that only eight percent of LCR treatment 
technique violations were reported to SDWIS/FED and thus to EPA.22 
Finally, even when water systems report in practice, the convoluted system for 
reporting—water systems to primacy agencies and then primacy agencies to EPA—provides 
another avenue for inaccurate data. Indeed, “on the basis of its 2002 through 2004 audits, EPA 
reported that the 37 states it audited did not report or inaccurately reported about 49 percent of 
health-based violations committed by community water systems to SDWIS/Fed.”23 As EPA has 
explained, “[t]he shorter the distance from the beginning of the lifecycle to the end use in 
 
19 Letter from Oregon Health Authority to Portland Water Bureau (PWB), dated December 23, 2023 documenting 
that PWB’s CCT is deemed optimized. 
20 See Sentinel Homes Data, Portland Water Bureau, for 2021, 2022, and 2023; Slides 1 and 2 of Frank Mazzola 
dated January 18, 2024. 
21 See “Lead Levels in Water Misrepresented Across U.S.,” Washington Post, Oct. 8, 2004, https://bit.ly/3HMnnZg   
https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/2004/10/05/lead-levels-in-water-misrepresented-across-
us/085c8f5b-22e5-4975-8abd-
11751e08abab/?pwapi_token=eyJ0eXAiOiJKV1QiLCJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJyZWFzb24iOiJnaWZ0IiwibmJmIjo
xNzA2NzYzNjAwLCJpc3MiOiJzdWJzY3JpcHRpb25zIiwiZXhwIjoxNzA4MTQ1OTk5LCJpYXQiOjE3MDY3Nj
M2MDAsImp0aSI6IjU4ZGM5NTQ2LWNmNWMtNDg0Mi1iNzNmLWQzNWQ5MTBiNWI2NyIsInVybCI6Imh0
dHBzOi8vd3d3Lndhc2hpbmd0b25wb3N0LmNvbS9hcmNoaXZlL3BvbGl0aWNzLzIwMDQvMTAvMDUvbGVhZ
C1sZXZlbHMtaW4td2F0ZXItbWlzcmVwcmVzZW50ZWQtYWNyb3NzLXVzLzA4NWM4ZjViLTIyZTUtNDk3
NS04YWJkLTExNzUxZTA4YWJhYi8ifQ.eEe7EZbWlf8vLomEd8j4ChrVSDZnU_XI5SChfv_q4uQ&itid=gfta 
22 EPA, 2006 Drinking Water Data Reliability Analysis and Action Plan, supra note 1 at i. Audits were discontinued 
in 2010 because of funding constraints. GAO, Unreliable State Data, supra note 2. 
23 GAO, Unreliable State Data, supra note 2 at 14. 

14-5 
 
analysis the better, since an error can be introduced into the data flow each time the data changes 
hands.”24 
It is therefore clear that the current LCR reporting system must be significantly revamped 
to eliminate the convoluted reporting structure and to provide EPA with access to more data.  
EPA itself has recognized this.  In 2009, in light of the abysmal quality of data moving through 
SDWIS, EPA decided to replace SDWIS,25 touting “SDWIS Prime,” a shared database that 
would give EPA “direct access to the states’ raw monitoring data” (rather than just violation 
data) thereby improving “EPA’s ability to better understand national patterns of compliance and 
to diagnose problems faced by states.”26 The redesigned system would “provide [EPA] with 
greater access to, and oversight of, the states’ determinations of SDWA violations,”27 by 
reducing complexity in the convoluted reporting structure. 
Congress also weighed in on the matter.  Congress previously recognized the serious 
shortcomings in EPA’s data collection and management systems for drinking water, and in 2018, 
passed the America’s Water Infrastructure Act (“AWIA”), requiring EPA to, within one year of 
enactment, “develop and provide to Congress a strategic plan for improving the accuracy and 
availability of monitoring data collected.”28  EPA was required to provide “recommendations on 
practicable, cost-effective methods and means that can be employed to improve the accuracy and 
availability of submitted data.”29 .   
But SDWIS Prime was never developed.30 And EPA has perplexingly both dropped both 
the urgency for reforming reporting and the narrowed the scope of such reform.  EPA did not 
submit to Congress a strategic plan as mandated by AWIA until July 2022, almost three years 
after it was required to.  EPA recently started developing what it calls “Drinking Water State-
Federal-Tribal Information Exchange System” or “DW-SFTIES.” But DW-SFTIES has not been 
described as a one-stop shop program for both monitoring and health violation data. Rather, DW-
SFTIES would be a centrally hosted web-based database to “replace SDWIS State with software 
that helps states perform day to day implementation of the drinking water program, and that 
facilitates easier information exchange among primacy agencies, regulated entities, EPA 
Regions, and EPA headquarters.”31  Thus, DW-SFTIES will not solve the complexity of LCR 
reporting like SDWIS Prime would have. 
EPA took a step forward by recently proposing a rule revising the Consumer Confidence 
Report Rule that would require primacy agencies to report all drinking water monitoring data to 
EPA annually.32  It is questionable, however, what practical effect that proposed rule alone, if 
promulgated, will have with respect to lead. As discussed above, primacy agencies currently fail 
 
24 Drinking Water Compliance Monitoring Data Strategic Plan, supra note 10 at 5.  
25 This decision was informed by an alternatives analysis that suggested that replacing SDWIS was more in line with 
cost and data quality objectives. GAO, Unreliable State Data, supra note 2 at 37 n.55.  
26 GAO, Unreliable State Data, supra note 2 at 38.  
27 Id.   
28 PL 115-270 §2011(1) 
29 PL 115-270 §2011(3 
30 See April 25, 2023 letter from environmental organizations to Assistant Administrator Radhika Fox, in Appendix. 
31 SDWIS Modernization Board, Safe Drinking Water Information System (SDWIS) Modernization Board Charter, 
(Mar. 21, 2020) at 1 (emphasis added).  
32 Id.  

14-6 
 
to report lead data to EPA that they are already required to (almost no monitoring and reporting 
violations and a small percentage of health violations that is also significantly smaller than 
reporting on other contaminants33). There is no reason to think an additional reporting 
requirement alone would result in compliance with the requirement. That proposed rule also: (1) 
maintains the convoluted reporting system (water systems to primacy agencies and primacy 
agencies to EPA) that causes failures to report and inaccurate reporting; (2) would not affect the 
unreliability of the underlying monitoring data; and (3) contains no measures designed to 
increase compliance with it or other LCR provisions. 
 But the proposed LCRI does not include any provisions to solve the problems outlined 
above and fulfill Congress’s directive in AWIA and that in Executive Order 14008.   
It is therefore imperative that EPA institute in the final LCRI a mandatory direct 
electronic reporting rule.  Such a mandate would help solve: (1) the low rate at which violations 
are reported; and (2) the inaccessibility of data amongst the public and other stakeholders.  It 
must immediately adopt a computer program to accompany that mandate. Any new program 
EPA institutes must go beyond offering “tools to assist with [primacy agencies’] required 
quarterly reporting of violations” to EPA as DW-SFTIES is designed for.34 The mandatory 
electronic reporting program must allow direct one-stop reporting of: (1) monitoring data; and, 
(2) monitoring, reporting, treatment technique, and health violation data that primacy agencies 
and EPA can access.  If EPA determines it is necessary, it could allow a short (perhaps 7-day) 
delay after reporting to allow states or water systems to correct any errors, and any such 
corrections should be required to be justified and posted online.  New Jersey implemented a 
streamlined electronic data reporting system that originates from the lab analyzing drinking 
water samples over 15 years ago.35   EPA could look to that program as guidance for developing 
that necessary information transmission mechanism.  And, as described in more detail at the end 
of this Section, the LCRI should also require electronic reporting to EPA’s database of any 
corrosion control and LSLR deadlines, sanitary surveys including a checklist of significant 
deficiencies and deadlines for follow-up, and whether those deadlines have been met.   
B. EPA must create an accessible web-based portal for public access to national 
drinking water sampling data and other important information  
EPA should also create a web-based portal for public access to national drinking water 
compliance and monitoring data and other information as it recommended in 2015.36 As EPA has 
recognized, “better public understanding of drinking water quality… is essential to making well 
informed local decisions on drinking water.”37 EPA has also recognized that “[a]ccess to 
drinking water compliance monitoring data can empower communities to take needed action. It 
 
33 EPA, 2006 Drinking Water Data Reliability Analysis and Action Plan, supra note 4 at i,19.  
34 E-Enterprise for the Environment, Drinking Water State-Federal-Tribal Information Exchange System (DW-
SFTIES) Board (Formerly SDWIS Modernization), (Feb. 2023).  
35 See New Jersey E2 Reporting System Laboratory Participation Package, in Appendix. 
36 EPA, Drinking Water Action Plan, supra note 34 at 18. 
37 Id; see also National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Consumer Confidence Report Rule Revisions, 88 Fed. 
Reg. 20092, 20094 (Apr. 5, 2023) (to be codified at 40 CFR pt. 141,142) (“[i]mproving access to and clarity of 
drinking water data [allows] customers of community water systems [to] make informed decisions about their health 
and the health of their families.”). 

14-7 
 
also provides a more complete picture of water quality than simple violation information, and 
this can improve consumer confidence or identify a potential problem.”38  
EPA should make the following information available to the public on the web portal, 
some of which has been recommended in earlier parts of these comments: 
 
Water system quarterly reports per suggestion below in Section 14.C.1 & .2 (which 
may include some of the information set forth below) 
 
Compliance monitoring data39 
 
Any supplemental lead monitoring conducted by or on behalf of the water system 
 
WQP monitoring results  
 
School and childcare testing data, and lists indicating which schools/childcares opted 
for testing, which refused testing, and which were unresponsive 
 
Lead service line inventories 
 
Lead service line removal replacement plans 
 
Filter distribution plans 
 
Whether a water system met the required number and/or percentage of full LSLRs in 
the previous year. (yes/no) 
 
The number of customers or homeowners that denied access for a full service line 
replacement 
 
The number of partials water systems performed in the prior year, where they occurred, 
and why 
 
Corrosion control plans 
 
Monitoring results for water quality parameters required in optimal corrosion control 
plans  
 
Corrosion control studies 
 
Annual reviews and biennial audits per suggestion below in Section 14.C.5 
It is encouraging that EPA stated in its proposed rule revising the Consumer Confidence 
Report Rule that it “intends” to make monitoring data public.40  But EPA has stated an intention 
to make more drinking water information available to the public for over a decade,41 yet even by 
EPA’s admission, the publicly available data remains substantially incomplete, and EPA’s front 
end for public access to SDWIS is largely impenetrable to average consumers. 
C. The final LCRI must contain incentives for water systems to comply with the LCRI  
Enforcement alone cannot solve the alarming level of noncompliance with the LCR or 
LCRI.42  EPA therefore must incorporate tools into the final LCRI that encourage full 
compliance with the LCRI and effectively penalize water systems that fail to do so.  do not 
 
38 Drinking Water Compliance Monitoring Data Strategic Plan, supra note 4 at 2; see also 88 Fed. Reg. 20092 at 
20095. 
39 As set forth in Section 7.B.vi, we also recommend that EPA require large systems serving over 10,000 customers 
to make sampling data available online and include a link in a variety of materials. 
40 See National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Consumer Confidence Report Rule Revisions, 88 Fed. Reg. at 
20094. 
41 GAO, Unreliable State Data, supra note 2 at 37 n.54. 
42 See, e.g., https://www.yalejreg.com/nc/symposium-giles-next-generation-compliance-07/. 

14-8 
 
comply to fulfill its duty. Fortunately, there are known, relatively easy tools EPA could use to 
reach those goals.   
EPA, and specifically the Office of Water, has integrated some of the tools of “Next 
Generation Compliance” into its work.43  Former Assistant Administrator Giles’s published a 
book, Next Generation Compliance, in 2022 that drew from her experience at EPA with those 
tools.  As set forth below, EPA could likely greatly increase compliance with the LCR if it 
incorporated some of those tools, explained below, into the final LCRI.  Given the anemic rate of 
compliance with the LCR, this is something EPA must do to ensure the LCRI makes a practical 
difference.     
In her book, Giles argues that the most important driver of compliance with 
environmental regulations is carefully and well-designed rules that employ creative strategies to 
set compliance as the default.44 Chapter 1, entitled “Rules with Compliance Built In” discusses a 
select number of environmental regulations. In that chapter Giles describes four programs that 
have high rates of compliance and the aspects of those regulations that encourage compliance. 
She then discusses four programs with pervasive violations—one being the Lead and Copper 
Rule—and the aspects of those rules she identifies as causing such high rates of noncompliance.  
Giles discusses LCR provisions that incentivize water systems to not comply with the Rule 
and/or not uncover high lead levels.45 Giles also sets forth a fairly straightforward roadmap of 
changes that can be made to the LCR to incentivize compliance. Below are some suggestions, 
extrapolated from Giles’ discussion, that EPA should incorporate into the final LCRI:  
1. Require direct electronic reporting of LCRI monitoring results and supplemental lead 
monitoring from state-certified laboratories to EPA and create a web-based portal for 
public access to national drinking water data. Any invalidated samples should be required 
to be noted, and an explanation provided as to why they were invalidated. 
2. Require all LCRI treatment technique violations manually or automatically determined 
by the state to be simultaneously reported to the public water system and to EPA, which 
should also post that information on the portal. This should also include: 
a. Any corrosion control and LSLR deadlines  
b. Sanitary surveys including a checklist of significant deficiencies and deadlines for 
follow-up, and 
c. Whether those deadlines have been met.   
3. Require water systems to electronically file, on an EPA database, quarterly reports 
certifying compliance or violations of the LCRI that a water system executive certifies as 
true, accurate and complete, subject to criminal penalties for false reporting.  
 
43 https://www.epa.gov/compliance/next-generation-compliance 
44 Cynthia Giles, Next Generation Compliance: Environmental Regulation for the Modern Era 1–13 (Oxford Univ. 
Press 2022). 
45 Id. at 34. Giles also filed comments on the proposed LCRR in 2020. See Cynthia Giles, Comments on the 
Agency’s Proposed Revisions to its Lead and Copper Rule in the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations, 84 
Fed. Reg. 61,684; Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300 (Feb. 4, 2020).  

14-9 
 
4. Set up the electronic filing program with a template to be complete for these quarterly 
filings that will: (a) automatically reject a report that is incomplete; and, (b) immediately 
determine when the data entered fails to meet the rule’s requirements, resulting in 
automatic penalties. 46  The template should include at least the following:47 
a. Date range of monitoring. 
b. Number of sites monitored; if more than required, explanation of why. 
c. Number of Tier 1 sites monitored and basis for determination that site is served by 
a lead service line. 
d. Number of Tier 2, 3 and 4 sites monitored. 
e. Whether any of the testing sites were changed from the previous monitoring with 
a multiple-choice response as to reason why.  
f. Results from the first liter draw.  
g. Results from the fifth liter draw.  
h. Whether wide-mouth bottles were used to collect sample. 
i. Whether sampling instructions were provided that directed that monitoring be 
done of water that was stagnant for 6 hours and prohibited aerator removal and 
cleaning and flushing of sampled taps. 
j. Number of samples invalidated and reason for invalidation. 
k. Lead levels of invalidated samples. 
l. Whether corrosion control was re-optimized. 
m. Number of full lead service lines replaced in that quarter.  
n. Location of the lead service lines removed. 
o. If applicable, number of customers or homeowners that denied access for a full 
service line replacement 
p. If final rule fails to include a presumption of control and/or access requiring 
statement by state legal officer, for each property claimed a lack of control and/or 
access, the basis for claim and that the required number of outreach attempts 
made to any such site 
q. Whether any partial lead service line replacements occurred, and if so why and 
when the remaining portion will be replaced.  
r. For systems serving more than 10,000 people, a shape file indicating the service 
area served by the system.48 
5. Provide that a failure to monitor or report will result in an automatic assumption that 
there was a lead action level exceedance (or other strong immediate consequence) for that 
monitoring period. Currently, monitoring or reporting violations often are not considered 
 
46 See Giles, Next Generation Compliance supra note 40 at 14-18, 23-24.  
47 If EPA chooses not to require quarterly reports, it should require water systems to submit to it all the information 
suggested to be included in the quarterly reports, and EPA should make that information public on the web portal. 
48 A shape file will provide EPA, states and the public with the information needed to locate the areas a water 
system serves, and to understand and map the system‘s service area to complete environmental justice, public health, 
and other research and evaluations. A shape file "is a simple, nontopological format for storing the geometric 
location and attribute information of geographic features. Geographic features in a shapefile can be represented by 
points, lines, or polygons (areas).”  https://desktop.arcgis.com/en/arcmap/latest/manage-data/shapefiles/what-is-a-
shapefile.htm  Shape files can be readily generated by standard, widely-used off-the-shelf GIS software. Many states 
use them to track their systems’ service area. See, e.g., Mississippi Water Service Areas, Mississippi Public Service 
Commission, https://www.psc.state.ms.us/mapping/.  

14-10 
 
an enforcement priority by states and often are not even reported to EPA according to 
EPA and GAO data audits. Moreover, improper monitoring that results in underreporting 
of lead levels can lead to a water system having to sample water less frequently under 40 
C.F.R, 141.86(d)(4), thus incentivizing noncompliance. This change would disincentivize 
water systems from failing to monitor and report.  
6. Amend 40 CFR 141.86 to mandate that if a water system collects more tap samples than 
the minimum number required for its size, the system must calculate its 90th percentile 
by using the minimum required number of samples for its size that have the highest 
measured lead or copper levels. This change will prevent the practice of testing more 
sites than a water system needs to dilute the pool and avoid a lead action level 
exceedance. 
7. Amend 40 CFR 142.17 to require that in addition to the regular annual reviews currently 
required, EPA conduct an audit every two years specifically of the state’s compliance 
with the LCR and other reporting requirements and compliance with EPA’s Enforcement 
Response Policy. EPA should publicly post the annual reviews and these biennial audits 
on its website. These changes will encourage states to comply with applicable 
regulations and allow the public to know if their state is accurately reporting violations 
and taking enforcement as EPA policy requires.   
8. Require the public posting of water systems’ own monitoring plan, optimal corrosion 
control plan, and lead service line replacement plans along with a certification from an 
executive that the plans and the water system’s implementation of it comply with federal 
and state regulations. This change will facilitate oversight and encourage compliance 
with monitoring requirements, and implementation of sound corrosion control and lead 
service line replacement policies. It will also allow the public to scrutinize their water 
system’s plans.49   
 
D. Response to EPA’s request for comment about promoting compliance outside of 
enforcement 
EPA requests comment on whether the proposed requirements of the rule are enforceable 
and promote compliance without the need for State or Federal enforcement action. EPA also 
solicits comment on ways the rule could be modified to better promote compliance.50  
As discussed immediately above in Section 14.C, even though the LCR is notorious for 
the lack of compliance with it, the proposed LCRI contains no provisions designed to improve 
this troubling and health-endangering issue.  In that subsection, we propose detailed suggestions 
for improvement based on similar successful mechanisms in other EPA regulations.   
 
49 These issues were also discussed in greater detail in an April 25, 2023 letter from environmental organizations to 
Assistant Administrator Radhika Fox (available in appendix). 
50 General Matter Request 3 (88 Fed. Reg. at 85,035). 

15-1 
 
Section 15: Environmental Justice Concerns 
 
EPA defines environmental justice as,  
 
the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of 
race, color, national origin, or income, with respect to the development, 
implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations, and 
policies. This goal will be achieved when everyone enjoys: [t]he same 
degree of protection from environmental and health hazards, and [e]qual 
access to the decision-making process to have a healthy environment in 
which to live, learn, and work.1  
 
Under Executive Orders 128998 and 14096, EPA is required to make achieving environmental 
justice part of its mission and to “strengthen its commitment to deliver[ing] environmental 
justice to all communities across” the United States.2 EPA claims that the proposed LCRI “will 
not create disproportionate and adverse human health or environmental effects on communities 
with environmental justice concerns.”3 SDWA requires that treatment techniques must account 
for the greater risks faced by subpopulations “identified as likely to be at greater risk of adverse 
health effects due to exposure to contaminants in drinking water than the general population.”4 
EPA’s analysis, however, fails to account for the weaknesses in the LCRI that will leave 
environmental justice communities disproportionately vulnerable to harms from lead in drinking 
water. 
 
Each section of these comments discusses in more detail the relevant environmental 
justice impacts of the relevant part of the proposed LCRI. Here, we compile our comments 
related to environmental justice for ease of reference, highlighting specific concerns and 
recommendations. We strongly urge EPA to strengthen the LCRI to address these environmental 
justice issues. 
 
A. Weaknesses in the proposed LCRI will disproportionately harm communities of 
color and low-wealth communities 
 
Lead in drinking water has disproportionately harmed low-wealth communities and 
communities of color, especially Black and immigrant communities, for decades. Flint, Newark, 
Benton Harbor Michigan, and many other examples highlight this problem. Where loopholes and 
other weaknesses exist in the proposed LCRI, the harm from those provisions will 
disproportionately affect the same communities that have already borne the brunt of the harm 
from drinking water contamination.  
 
 
1 Environmental Justice, EPA (last updated Jan. 11, 2024), available at 
https://www.epa.gov/environmentaljustice#:~:text=Environmental%20justice%20is%20the%20fair,laws%2C%20re
gulations%2C%20and%20policies. 
2 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,043.  
3 Id.  
4 42 U.S.C. § 300g-1(b)(3)(c)(i)(V) & (ii). 

15-2 
 
Numerous studies have documented that drinking water violations or ineffective, slow 
enforcement of drinking water standards, disproportionately affect communities with low wealth 
and communities of color.5   Recent studies also have documented that lead in drinking water 
poses particular risks to communities of color and low wealth communities. For example, studies 
have shown that lead service lines or lead contaminated drinking water poses disproportionate 
risks in New York City,6 the State of Illinois,7 Evanston, Illinois,8 Washington D.C.9 and likely 
nationally.10 One recent study highlighted the disproportionate risks to Black populations from 
lead in tap water for kidney disease, noting, 
 
Black patients have increased susceptibility to lead exposure due to higher rates 
of kidney disease and lower access to equitable health care, and, 
simultaneously, greater vulnerability, as evidenced by the higher levels of 
community water lead levels among Black than White patients with ESKD [End 
Stage Kidney Disease], with significantly less temporal improvement over the 
last decade.11 
 
 
5 Kristi Pullen Fedinick et al., Watered Down Justice (NRDC, Environmental Justice Health Alliance and Coming 
Clean, 2019), https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/watered-down-justice-report.pdf; McDonald YJ, Jones NE. 
Drinking Water Violations and Environmental Justice in the United States, 2011-2015. Am J Public Health. 2018 
Oct;108(10):1401-1407. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2018.304621. Epub 2018 Aug 23. PMID: 30138072; PMCID: 
PMC6137766; David Switzer, Manuel P. Teodoro, The Color of Drinking Water: Class  Race, Ethnicity, and Safe 
Drinking Water Act Compliance, September, 2017, . AWWA, v. 109, No. 9, pp. 40-45, 
https://doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2017.109.0128; McDonald YJ, Jones NE. Drinking Water Violations and 
Environmental Justice in the United States, 2011-2015. Am J Public Health. 2018 Oct;108(10):1401-1407. doi: 
10.2105/AJPH.2018.304621. Epub 2018 Aug 23. PMID: 30138072; PMCID: PMC6137766. 
6 Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health, Lead Service Lines in NYC Disproportionately Impact 
Hispanic/Latino Communities and Children Already At Risk, Aug. 30, 2023, 
https://www.publichealth.columbia.edu/news/lead-service-lines-nyc-disproportionately-impact-hispanic-latino-
communities-children-already-risk-lead-exposure;  Nigra AE, Lieberman-Cribbin W, Bostick BC, Chillrud SN, 
Carrión D. Geospatial Assessment of Racial/Ethnic Composition, Social Vulnerability, and Lead Water Service 
Lines in New York City. Environ Health Perspect. 2023 Aug;131(8):87015. doi: 10.1289/EHP12276. Epub 2023 
Aug 30. PMID: 37646509; PMCID: PMC10467360; Arnold C. Digging into Exposure Disparities: Mapping Lead 
Service Lines in New York City. Environ Health Perspect. 2023 Nov;131(11):114001. doi: 10.1289/EHP13735. 
Epub 2023 Nov 3. PMID: 37918850; PMCID: PMC10622229. 
7 Justin Williams, Data Points: the environmental injustice of lead lines in Illinois, Nov. 10, 2020. 
https://www.metroplanning.org/news/9960/Data-Points-the-environmental-injustice-of-lead-lines-in-Illinois.  
8 Adina Keeling, Evanston’s Lead Pipes called an Environmental Justice Concern, 
https://pulitzercenter.org/stories/evanstons-lead-pipes-called-environmental-justice-concern.  
9 Baehler KJ, McGraw M, Aquino MJ, Heslin R, McCormick L, Neltner T. Full Lead Service Line Replacement: A 
Case Study of Equity in Environmental Remediation. Sustainability. 2022; 14(1):352. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010352 
10 Abt Associates, Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, Contract # EP-
W-17-009, Revised Draft, October 22, 2019. https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-
0008/content.pdf. 
11 Danziger J, Mukamal KJ, Weinhandl E. Associations of Community Water Lead Concentrations with Hemoglobin 
Concentrations and Erythropoietin-Stimulating Agent Use among Patients with Advanced CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2021 Oct;32(10):2425-2434. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2020091281. Epub 2021 Jul 15. PMID: 34266982; PMCID: 
PMC8722797.  

15-3 
 
Not only does the proposed LCRI fail to fix many of these problems, the proposed rule 
would disproportionately harm environmental justice communities in certain ways.  Some 
examples include: 
 
 Rather than requiring water systems to pay for full LSL replacement, the LCRI allows 
them to charge individual customers for replacing LSLs under private property, which 
can cost thousands of dollars. As discussed extensively in the Cost-Sharing section 2.D.v. 
of these comments, peer reviewed studies and numerous examples show that this means 
that homeowners of color and those with low wealth often cannot pay, and landlords in 
low-wealth and communities of color will refuse to pay these costs.12 Under the LCRI, 
these LSLs will remain in use, thus exacerbating the already serious inequities in lead 
exposure of these communities.13 
 
 The LCRI’s definition of “control,” a change from the former presumption of control, 
means that LSLs, GRRs, and lead connectors would not have to be replaced in many 
instances. The ones that remain would be disproportionately in environmental justice 
communities.14  
 
 The proposed LAL, while an improvement over the LCRR, is still not health-based.15 
EPA’s own analyses confirm that a LAL of 10 ppb is not health protective—particularly 
for children. Harm from a LAL of 10ppb will not be evenly distributed. Black children 
have the highest blood lead levels.16 Children living in homes below the federal poverty 
line had higher blood lead levels than children living above the poverty line, and Black 
children living below the poverty line had markedly higher blood lead levels than 
children in any other demographic reported.17 Those disparities are not surprising since 
people of color are more likely to live in a home with a lead service line, and children of 
color are more likely to live in a home with lead paint.18   
 
 Retaining the 90th percentile calculation for the LAL is likewise not health based and is 
more lenient than what is feasible with modern-day corrosion control technology.19 For 
the same reasons that people of color, especially Black people, and people with low-
wealth are most likely to live with lead exposure in their drinking water, these same 
communities are most likely to be where LAL exceedances occur. Under a90th percentile 
calculation, 10% of these exceedances can occur without requiring the water system to 
 
12 See Cost-Sharing Section 2.D.v., supra.  
13 See id. 
14 See Control Section 2.D.iv., supra. 
15 See “Lowering the LAL will better prevent adverse health effects” Section 4.A.i, supra. 
16 Indicator B2, Table in ACE: Biomonitoring – Lead, EPA, available at 
https://awsedap.epa.gov/public/single/?appid=795b22e7-bc56-4252-8a36-8d68bcaee3a4&sheet=2dc75c28-4491-
4a98-a4ff-52ce1ac40751&opt=ctxmenu,currsel. 
17 See id.  
18 86 Fed. Reg. 71,574-01, 71,575; Yeter et al., Disparity in Risk Factor Severity for Early Childhood Blood Lead, 
available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7084658/.  
19 See A Percentile Higher Than 90th Would Better Prevent Adverse Health Effects Section 4.A.i, supra. 

15-4 
 
take any action at all. This puts the health of environmental justice communities 
disproportionately at risk.20 
 
 The lack of requirements for school and childcare facilities would especially harm the 
health of Black and low-wealth children.21 Schools and childcare facilities that can afford 
to remediate are most likely to enlist in a voluntary testing program such as proposed in 
the LCRI.22 This results in different drinking water protections based on where one lives, 
with less protections in place for infants and children in low-wealth areas. And low-
wealth children and children of color are more likely to have additional lead exposures 
and higher blood lead levels to begin with.23 The proposed LCRI would compound these 
problems.  
 
 EPA neglecting to provide guidance on replacement materials for removed lead service 
lines increases the risk of fenceline communities facing additional harm from plastics as 
lead pipes are replaced.24 As discussed in the Replacement Materials section 2.E of these 
comments, producing and disposing of plastics, and transportation of plastics feedstock 
such as vinyl chloride, are linked to serious human health harms – and these harms are 
experienced disproportionately by fenceline communities near petrochemical and waste 
disposal facilities.25  Fenceline communities near transportation hubs and corridors are 
also at serious risk from transport of plastics feedstocks.26 Due to residential racial 
segregation, expulsive zoning27 and environmental racism in the siting of production and 
disposal facilities, the residents of these communities are disproportionately people of 
color.28 
 
 The Biden administration has already acknowledged that lack of compliance, 
transparency, and enforcement is an environmental justice issue that must be 
addressed.  Executive Order 14008 provides that EPA shall “strengthen enforcement of 
 
20 See id.  
21 See “The Proposed Rule Does Not Protect Children” Section 9.C, supra.  
22 See id.  
23 See Marissa Hauptman, Justin K. Niles, Jeffrey Gudin, et al., Individual- and Community-Level Factors 
Associated With Detectable and Elevated Blood Lead Levels in US Children, JAMA Pediatrics (Sep. 27, 2021), 
available at  https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapediatrics/article-abstract/2784260. 
24 See Comments of Air Alliance Houston, et al. to EPA, Draft National Strategy to Prevent Plastic Pollution (April 
2023), Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OLEM–2023–0228-0276 (“Comment on Draft Plastic Strategy”), at 6-20 and 
citations therein, which are incorporated here by reference; Beyond Plastics, The Perils of PVC Plastic Pipes, 2023, 
https://www.beyondplastics.org/publications/perils-of-pvc-pipes. 
25 See id.  
26 Sun W. (2023). The Devastating Health Consequences of the Ohio Derailment: A Closer Look at the Effects of 
Vinyl Chloride Spill. International journal of environmental research and public health, 20(6), 5032. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20065032. 
27 Ana Isabel Baptista, et al., U.S. Municipal Solid Waste Incinerators: An Industry in Decline, Tishman Env’t and 
Design Ctr., at 13-14 (May 2019), https://www.no-
burn.org/wpcontent/uploads/2021/03/CR_GaiaReportFinal_05.21-1.pdf. 
28 See Toxic Free Future, PVC Poison Plastic: An investigation following the Ohio train derailment of widespread 
vinyl chloride pollution caused by PVC production (April 13, 2023), at 8-10, https://toxicfreefuture.org/wp-
content/uploads/2023/04/Report-PDF-PVC-Poison-PlasticInvestigation-4.pdf. 

15-5 
 
environmental violations with disproportionate impact on underserved 
communities…and create a community notification program to monitor and provide real-
time data to the public on current environmental pollution, including emissions, criteria 
pollutants, and toxins, in frontline and fenceline communities—places with the most 
significant exposure to such pollution.”29 As discussed in the Transparency and 
Compliance section 14 of these comments, the LCR is unfortunately known for lack of 
water systems compliance30 And the proposed rule includes no measures designed to 
increase that anemic lack of compliance. Lead is a greater threat to EJ communities, so a 
failure to comply with the LCR again disproportionately impacts those communities with 
the highest lead levels.  
 
Public education measures also fall short when it comes to ensuring people are informed about 
their risk of lead exposure from drinking water. The Public Education section 8 of these 
comments provides extensive analysis and suggestions for improvement. Because environmental 
justice communities are more likely to be exposed to lead, a failure to accurately inform the 
public of lead risks likewise disproportionately harms these communities and leaves individuals, 
especially Black and low-wealth people, uninformed and unaware of the need to take precautions 
to protect their health.  
 
i. 
The proposed LCRI would allow disproportionate lead exposure for 
renters, which is an environmental justice issue because tenants are 
disproportionately people of color and low-wealth 
 
 
Some provisions of the proposed LCRI would give landlords the ability to block LSLR, 
leaving their tenants exposed to lead. Absentee landlords especially lack incentive to enable 
LSLR under the proposed rule.31 And under the proposed rule, tenants have no recourse to 
override their landlord’s decision, despite being the ones who will bear the brunt of the harm. 
 
 
This is an environmental justice issue because tenants are more likely to be Black, Latinx, 
and low-wealth than their property-owning counterparts. According to Pew Research Center, 
“about 58% of households headed by Black or African American adults rent their homes, as do 
nearly 52% of Hispanic- or Latino-led households.”32 Only about a quarter of white households 
are rentals.33 The data is similar when it comes to income: “[a]bout three-fifths of people in the 
lowest income quartile (60.6%) rent their homes, as do 87.6% of people with net worths below 
 
29 Exec. Order No. 14008 §222(b), 86 Fed. Reg. 7619, 7631 (Feb. 1, 2021). 
30 See ”EPA Must Insert Provisions in the Final LCRI that Improve Compliance with and Enforcement of the Rule 
and Provide Transparency to EPA and the Public” Section 14 of these comments.  
31 See Access and Consent Section 2.D.iv. (”As Newark Water and Sewer Utilities Director Kareem Adeem has 
emphasized, it is logistically much easier to get consent from tenants at rental properties than it is from landlords 
(who may be absentee), and it puts the decision in the hands of the people who will most benefit from it. This works 
best in combination with prohibiting cost-sharing, as it then doesn’t put the tenant in the position of agreeing to 
spend the landlord’s money.”). 
32 Drew Desilver, Pew Research Center, As national eviction ban expires, a look at who rents and who owns in the 
U.S., August 2, 2021, available at https://bit.ly/3oPZs4S. 
33 See id.  

15-6 
 
the 25th percentile....Only 10.5% of people in the top income quartile...are renters.”34 Therefore, 
where the LCRI leaves renters vulnerable to lead exposure, it disproportionately harms people of 
color, especially Black people, and low-wealth persons. 
 
Some of the ways the proposed LCRI harms tenants, and therefore would 
disproportionately impact environmental justice communities include: 
 
 By defining control as “legal access, physical access,”35 EPA risks LSLR not taking place 
at all where landlords deny access to their property. Tenants would then continue to be 
exposed to lead from the pipes underneath their landlord’s private land with no 
recourse.36  
 
 If property owners are required to contribute money towards LSLR, landlords will be 
incentivized to decline LSLR and deny access to their property, again exposing tenants to 
ongoing exposure to lead in drinking water.37 A 2019 EPA environmental justice analysis 
of LCR revisions found that “household-level changes that depend on ability-to-pay will 
leave low-income households with disproportionately higher health risks.”38 
 
B. EPA must strengthen the LCRI to prevent adverse effects on environmental 
justice communities to the extent feasible  
 
The LCRI has the potential to be an immense step forward for public health. Eliminating 
lead from drinking water would be a huge step towards achieving environmental justice. As 
Executive Order 14096 states, “[t]o fulfill our Nation's promises of justice, liberty, and equality, 
every person must have...clean water to drink.” But that goal can be met only if EPA closes 
loopholes in the proposed LCRI and implements stronger compliance measures.  
 
EPA must take the following steps to ensure that lead exposure in drinking water is eliminated to 
the greatest extent feasible, thereby ensuring that all communities reap those benefits:  
 
 Require all LSLs to be replaced within 10 years without exceptions 
 Prohibit cost-sharing for full LSL replacements; 
 Return to the presumption that water systems control LSLs, as was presumed in the 
original LCR; require state provisions setting forth that water systems have control over 
full service lines as a condition of primacy;  
 Require prioritization of replacements in environmental justice communities; 
Advise that copper is the best replacement option for lead pipes; 
 Lower the LAL to no higher than 5ppb, and ideally 1ppb; 
 
34 Id.  
35 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,920.  
36 See Control Section 2.D.iv. 
37 See Cost-Sharing Section 2.D.v.  
38 Abt Associates, Environmental Justice Analysis for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Revisions, Docket No. 
EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-0008, 8–12 (2019), https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2017-0300-
0008. 

15-7 
 
 Raise the 90th percentile to the 99th or 95th percentile, or at least the highest percentile that 
is feasible given current corrosion control technology. At a minimum, justify why it 
cannot be raised; 
 Require all water systems to provide filters after one LAL exceedance; 
 Incentivize water systems to work with schools and childcare centers to install filtration 
stations; 
 If EPA allows an option for water systems to sample water instead of installing point of 
use devices at schools and childcare centers, require twice-annual sampling with prompt 
filter installation for sources testing at or above 1ppb. 
 Prohibit partial LSL replacements; 
 Require robust public education and outreach, in multiple languages and with multiple 
modes of communication, to ensure that everyone, especially the communities most 
impacted, are aware of the risks and their options to take precautionary measures; 
 Require direct electronic reporting of LCRI monitoring results from state-certified 
laboratories to EPA and create a web-based portal for public access to national drinking 
water data; 
 Require all treatment technique violations to be reported to the public water system and 
EPA, and post that information publicly; 
 Institute incentives for compliance with the rule and eliminate disincentives  
 State that any extension of LSLR poses an “unreasonable risk to health” as considered 
under the SDWA when granting small systems that need financial assistance extensions 
for treatment techniques.  
 Highlight funding and financing strategies that water systems can use to comply with the 
rule without making bills unaffordable for low-income households.   
 
EPA, the states, and water systems must all work to deploy these strategies once the rule 
is finalized. EPA must implement these measures in the Final Rule in order to effectuate a true 
LSLR program that does not leave out the highest-risk communities and demonstrate its firm 
commitment to achieving environmental justice.  
 
 

16-1 
 
Section 16: Compilation of Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comment1 
General Matters 
 
1. Whether the proposed revisions to the LCRR treatment technique are effective to prevent 
known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible in accordance with the SDWA. 
 
As described in the executive summary of our comments, the proposed LCRI includes 
many positive changes that will help to protect public health for decades to come. Nevertheless, 
the proposed LCRI contains weaknesses, loopholes, and shortcomings that we fear may imperil 
the LCRI’s ability to achieve President Biden’s and EPA’s laudable goals to reduce lead exposure 
in drinking water fully, quickly, and equitably. In the final rule, we urge EPA to make a variety of 
changes to strengthen and simplify the rule further and to help ensure that its implementation 
will live up to its promise. These changes are summarized in section 1, and specific suggestions 
for improvements to the proposed LCRI’s treatment techniques are addressed in detail 
throughout all sections of our comments. These changes are necessary for the LCRI prevent 
known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible and to comply 
with the SDWA. 
 
2. Whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the regulatory 
approach used to address lead in drinking water consistent with the statutory standard for a 
treatment technique rule in section 1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. Specifically, EPA requests comment 
on ways that the proposed LCRI could be simplified and ways that burden, including paperwork 
burden, could be reduced without affecting the ability of the rule to prevent known or anticipated 
adverse health effects. 
 
The best way for EPA to reduce the complexity of the agency’s regulatory approach 
would be to issue an at-the-tap Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) for lead, as discussed in 
section 11 of these comments. If EPA does not issue an MCL, the agency could, as proposed in 
section 2 of these comments, simply require utilities to remove all LSLs at utility expense, and 
require primacy states to include such a requirement and to streamline the process to achieve this 
goal in their LCRI implementing regulations. See also section 2.B for discussion of statutory 
provisions regarding treatment techniques and flexibility. 
 
3. Whether the proposed requirements of the rule are enforceable and promote compliance 
without the need for State or Federal enforcement action. EPA also solicits comment on ways the 
rule could be modified to better promote compliance. 
 
As discussed in Section 14.C, even though the LCR is notorious for the lack of 
compliance with it, the proposed LCRI contains no provisions designed to improve this troubling 
and health-endangering issue.  In that subsection, we propose detailed suggestions for 
improvement based on similar successful mechanisms in other EPA regulations, including 
specific requirements for electronic reporting among other recommendations.   
 
 
1 88 Fed. Reg. at 85,035-38.  

16-2 
 
4. The revised definition of ‘‘connector,’’ including that connectors are defined as ‘‘not exceeding 
two feet.’’ 
 
See section 2(D) regarding service lines and connectors subject to mandatory 
replacement. 
 
Service Line Replacement 
 
1. All aspects of the proposed scope of the replacement requirements, including the criteria used 
to define a full service line replacement (e.g., cutting the pipe at abandoned properties, replacing 
the entire service line) and which lead sources are subject to replacement under the mandatory 
program. EPA is seeking comment on whether to prohibit reconnection of any disconnected LSL 
or GRR service line. EPA is requesting comment on whether the Agency should include lead 
connectors or galvanized service lines that are or were downstream of a lead connector as part 
of mandatory replacement.  
 
Yes EPA should prohibit reconnection of any disconnected LSL or GRR service line, and 
should include lead connectors and GRRs that are or were downstream of a lead pipe or 
connector as part of mandatory LSLR. For further discussion, see section 2(D)(i)(c)-(d). 
 
2. Whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent should be more than four times 
(e.g., five, six, or seven times).  
 
 
Yes, additional efforts are necessary. See section 2(D)(iv). 
 
3. Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets “control” for the purposes of the 
mandatory replacement provision (i.e., require systems to conduct full service line replacement 
in situations where the system has access to conduct the full replacement).  
 
 
No, it does not appropriately interpret control. See section 2(D)(iv). 
 
4. The proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement deadlines. EPA is seeking comment 
on whether it is feasible for systems across the nation to complete service line replacement in a 
shorter timeframe than ten years, such as in six, seven, or eight years. EPA is seeking comment 
on the rate construct approach, including how to calculate compliance with a given service line 
replacement deadline and average annual rate calculated across a rolling three-year period. 
EPA also seeks comment on whether systems should be required to meet a minimum replacement 
rate in the first three years after the compliance date to give States an opportunity to enforce 
replacement rate progress sooner than three years after the compliance date. EPA also seeks 
comment on the complexity of the rate construct.  
 
See section 2(C). 
 
5. EPA is taking comment on whether States, as a condition of primacy, or EPA when it is 
directly implementing the program, should be required to set initial shortened deadlines by a 
certain timeframe, such as no later than 60 days after the compliance date.  

16-3 
 
 
 
Yes, EPA and primacy states should be required to set initial shortened deadlines within a 
reasonable timeframe, such as 60 days after the initial compliance date. See section 2(D). 
 
6. The overall approach and basis to offer deferred service line replacement to systems with a 
high proportion of LSLs and GRR service lines in their distribution system relative to their total 
number of households served. EPA is requesting comment on its proposed threshold of 0.039 
average annual number of replacements per household served, which is used to calculate the 
number of years that systems can defer.  
 
 
See section 2(C), which argues that EPA cannot allow systems with a high number or 
high concentration of LSLs to avoid removing all lead pipes in 10 years. Assuming arguendo that 
EPA will allow such extensions, section 2(C) recommends a cap (not allowing backsliding from 
the LCR’s 7% per year requirement) and a requirement that extensions not be automatic by rule 
but be subject to public notice, comment and a local hearing so local citizens can weigh in. 
 
7. Whether to require the State, as a condition of primacy, to approve the use of the deferred 
deadline provision where the water system qualifies for it and/or whether to require the State, as 
a condition of primacy, to assess whether it would be feasible for a system to meet the 10-year 
deadline or a shorter deadline even if the system meets the regulatory criteria for the deferred 
deadline.  
 
Yes, assuming arguendo that EPA allows such extensions, states should be required to 
approve them, after notice, comment and a local hearing, and should heave to determine whether 
the system could meet the 10 year or a shorter deadline. See section 2(C)(ii). 
 
8. Whether there are additional data on service line replacement rates achieved by systems in 
proactive programs (i.e., excluding programs that only replace service lines in coordination with 
main replacement or emergency repair).  
 
 
We challenge EPA’s unexplained assumption that crews can only work 20 weeks a year 
removing 100 LSLs a day. See Section 2(C)(i) for a detailed discussion of this analysis.  
 
9. The proposed use of a maximum threshold of 10,000 annual service line replacements for 
systems with atypically high numbers of LSLs and GRR service lines as well as seeking comment 
on the alternate threshold of 8,000 annual service line replacements. EPA is also seeking 
feedback on other thresholds and supporting data. EPA is also seeking feedback on if there’s 
data available that would inform if the maximum threshold for annual service line replacement 
could increase after ten years, such as if replacement rates could double.  
 
 
The LCRI cannot authorize extensions beyond 10 years for systems that would be 
required to remove 8,000 or 10,000 LSLs per year. See section 2(C)(i). 
 
10. Whether systems conducting deferred service line replacement should be subject to any 
additional requirements beyond those for systems that are not replacing service lines in 
accordance with a deferred deadline.  

16-4 
 
 
 
We oppose any extensions beyond 10 years, but assuming arguendo that EPA does 
include extensions in the final rule, it should at least ramp up the minimum number of LSL 
replacements to double or triple the rule’s required rate after the first 10 years. See section 2 for 
more details. 
 
11. The requirement for systems to install a dielectric coupling when conducting a partial 
replacement of an LSL or GRR to separate the remaining LSL or GRR service line and the 
replaced service line unless the replaced service line is made of plastic and other recommended 
risk mitigation activities.  
 
As discussed in section 2, partial replacements should be conducted only in emergencies, 
if at all, and we support the proposed requirements that 1) the water system offer to replace the 
rest of the LSL within 45 days and 2) the water system provide filters/POU devices and six 
months of cartridges to affected residents if the offer to replace the rest of the LSL is refused. We 
agree that a dielectric coupling should be required if a partial replacement will connect a new 
metal service line to an LSL or GRR. 
 
12. The proposed requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line replacement unless it is 
conducted in accordance with emergency or planned infrastructure work (excluding planned 
infrastructure work solely for the purposes of replacing lead and GRR service lines as part of a 
service line replacement program). Additionally, EPA is seeking comment on whether partial 
service line replacement should be prohibited during “planned infrastructure work” or with 
certain types of planned infrastructure work.  
 
Partial LSLRs should not be allowed during planned construction work. Only in limited 
circumstances and subject to several safeguards discussed in our comments should emergency 
partial LSLRs be allowed. This is addressed in section 2(D)(iii). 
 
13. The ability of the market to correct for potential shortages in workers and materials to 
conduct service line replacement, as well to provide sufficient quantities of filters to comply with 
the service line replacement and other relevant provisions in the proposal.  
 
 
We have great faith that if there is a clear universal deadline of 10 years for all LSLRs, 
that the market will respond. If EPA allows hundreds or thousands of systems that have 
potentially millions of LSLs to get extensions beyond 10 years, that will send a market signal 
that ramping us is not in the interest of materials and workforce suppliers and will create a 
pernicious negative feedback loop. This is addressed in section 2(C)(i). 
 
14. The extent to which property owner consent, if required by State or local law or water tariff 
agreement, might complicate full service line replacement and whether there are additional 
measures EPA can take to facilitate access through the LCRI.  
 
 
This is a serious problem with the LCRI which is addressed in 2(D)(iv), along with 
proposed solutions. 
 

16-5 
 
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
 
1. Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of the proposed sites should be 
included in Tier 3, if additional sites should be included, or if some should be included in a 
different, lower priority tier, such as Tier 4. Specifically, comment on whether sites served by 
galvanized service lines or containing galvanized premise plumbing that are identified as ever 
being downstream of an LSL or lead connector should be included in the same tier as other sites 
with a current lead connector (e.g., copper service line downstream of a lead connector).  
 
This is addressed in section 7(A). 
 
2. Comment and available data, such as modeling or sampling data, that inform lead corrosion 
rates over time.  
 
EPA asserts sampling provisions are meant to help determine the effectiveness of a water 
system’s corrosion control techniques. Section 10 of our comments includes suggestions on how 
to improve sampling protocol so that data accurately captures worst-case lead scenarios and 
identifies situations where the water is too corrosive. The CCT section 10(C) points to areas 
where the proposed LCRI’s provisions regarding the conduct of CCT studies should be 
strengthened, and explains why EPA should create incentives to address the identified shortages 
of CCT experts.  
 
3. Comment on the applicability of alternate sampling protocols to assess CCT performance, 
increase customer participation, and other relevant factors.  
 
We encourage EPA to require a standard sampling protocol for all sites, including 
requiring paired first- and fifth-liter samples at Tiers 1 through 3. See section 7(B) for more 
details. To increase customer participation, particularly with regard to renters who may not 
receive CCR or other written materials sent only to those with water system accounts, we 
encourage EPA to require annual public outreach activities of all systems.  We further encourage 
EPA to strengthen the enhanced public outreach requirements for systems with a LAL 
exceedance or that fail to meet the required SLR rate. See Public Education and Outreach section 
8(E). 
 
4. Comment on the proposed updated definition of wide-mouth bottles that is “bottles that are 
one liter in volume with a mouth, whose outer diameter measures at least 55 mm wide,” and 
specifically on the availability of qualifying bottles.  
 
We agree with the proposed updated definition. This is addressed in section 7(B)(ii). 
 
5. Comment [on] any relevant data on the number and tiering of samples used to calculate the 
90th percentile lead and/or copper levels for systems with LSLs for purposes of assessing CCT 
efficacy. Specifically, whether samples from non-LSL sites that have higher lead concentrations 
than samples from LSL sites should be included and whether these higher values should replace 
lower values from LSL sites in the 90th percentile calculation.  
 

16-6 
 
If a water system collects more tap samples than the minimum number required for its 
size, the system must calculate its 90th percentile by using the minimum required number of 
samples for its size that have the highest measured lead or copper levels. This is addressed in 
further detail in section 7(B)(v). Also, as discussed in section 7(D), the copper sampling pool 
should target sites with the highest copper risks—homes with new copper premise plumbing—
rather than piggybacking on the lead sampling pool sites.   
 
6. Comment on whether State authority to specify sampling locations when a system is 
conducting reduced monitoring should apply regardless of the number of taps meeting sample 
site criteria.  
 
This is not addressed. 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
 
1. In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a threshold of systems serving greater than 50,000 persons to 
host the inventory and plan online, which is the required threshold under the LCRR. EPA is 
seeking comment on the size threshold at which systems must host their publicly accessible 
inventory, inventory summary data, replacement summary data, and service line replacement 
plan online, and whether it should be lowered relative to the LCRR requirements.  
 
See section 5(C)(ii). 
 
2. In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of non-lead 
service lines in their inventory that were categorized using methods other than records review or 
visual inspection of at least two points along the line. EPA is requesting comment on the number 
of validations required, the proposed 95 percent confidence level approach used to develop the 
number of validations required, the criteria for which methods used to categorize non-lead 
service lines should be included in the validation pool (including whether non-lead lines 
categorized based on records should be subject to validation), and the seven-year timeline for 
systems on a 10-year replacement deadline to complete the validation requirements.  
 
See section 5(C)(ii). 
 
3. Comment on establishing a deadline for systems to identify all unknown service lines prior to 
their service line replacement deadlines.  
 
See section 5(C)(i). 
 
4. Comment on a requirement for systems to update their service line replacement plans if there 
are any changes, such as changes to laws and policies applicable to full service line 
replacement.  
 
See section 5. 
 

16-7 
 
Lead Action and Trigger Levels 
 
1. EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of 0.010 mg/L, as well as comment 
and supporting data on alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, with regards to generally 
effective corrosion control treatment and identifying systems most at risk of elevated levels of 
lead in drinking water.  
 
 
The final LCRI should include a lead action level of no higher than 5 ppb because that 
will better prevent adverse health effects and is feasible. This is discussed in more detail in 
Section 4(A). 
 
2. EPA is also seeking comment on the use of the action level to determine when additional 
public education is required, and the use of the same action level for public education as for the 
CCT provisions.  
 
We agree that enhanced public education requirements should be triggered by tap 
sampling results that exceed a specified threshold. In our CCT section 10(E), we have proposed 
alternative triggers for CCT requirements that are feasible and would be more health protective.  
We agree that using the same trigger levels for CCT and for enhanced public education is logical 
and would help to simplify the rule.  In our public education section 8(E), we have more specific 
suggestions about the manner and frequency of the public education following that trigger. 
 
3. EPA is seeking public comment, data, and information on the anticipated benefits and 
tradeoffs, including for public health and administrative burden on systems and States, if more 
small and medium systems are required to conduct a detailed OCCT demonstration and take 
other actions if they exceed the proposed action level of 0.010 mg/L or other lower values, while 
water systems are simultaneously required to mandatory conduct full service line replacement.  
 
As discussed in section 4, EPA is legally required to include in the final rule a LAL lower 
than 10 ppb, and legally required to mandate CCT upon an LAL exceedance.  We also believe 
that at both a 10 ppb or a lower LAL, the anticipated benefits of requiring detailed OCCT 
demonstration and other actions upon a LAL exceedance for small and medium system outweigh 
the administrative burdens while those systems simultaneously conduct lead service line 
replacement.  However, as discussed in section 6 regarding small system flexibility, in certain 
cases we support providing systems serving up to 10,000 people with the flexibility, subject to 
primacy state approval, to use POU devices (meeting all SDWA section 1412 requirements for 
water systems overseeing them) plus full LSLR. Sections 4 and 10(C)-(E) explain that requiring 
CCT upon an exceedance would generate substantial public health benefits and we propose 
several ways to mitigate the burdens for water systems and states. Similarly, in section 8(E)(i) 
and (iv) we discuss our recommendation that public outreach activities be conducted by all 
systems independently of the LAL and argue that enhanced public outreach will be beneficial at 
both 10 ppb or a lower LAL. 
 

16-8 
 
Corrosion Control Treatment 
 
1. The proposed determination that the CTT treatment technique is feasible and prevents known 
or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible.  
 
We agree that CCT is a feasible treatment technique and, when designed and 
implemented properly, can prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects. For the reasons 
stated throughout section 10 of these comments, the proposed LCRI CCT provisions, as 
currently drafted, do not prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent 
feasible. Throughout section 10, we have suggested modifications to the CCT provisions that are 
necessary to ensure that they collectively prescribe a treatment technique that will prevent known 
or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible. 
 
2. Comment on whether it would be more appropriate to require water systems to re-optimize 
again following an action level exceedance regardless of meeting their optimal water quality 
parameters and to provide the State with the authority to waive this requirement.  
 
Yes. As discussed in detail in section 10(E)(ii), the final LCRI should provide that all 
systems with CCT have an ongoing duty to re-optimize CCT after action level exceedances, 
unless the State determines after full and carefully documented consideration that re-
optimization is not needed. 
 
3. The proposed option for a water system to delay OCCT until after the system has replaced all 
of its LSLs and GRR service lines, while the system achieves at least 20 percent removal per year 
and must have no LSLs, GRR service lines, or lead status unknown service lines remaining at the 
end of the five-year period.  
 
As discussed in detail in section 10(A), this five-year CCT delay provision fails to protect 
public health to the extent feasible, will not achieve EPA’s stated goals, and must be eliminated 
or substantially modified. 
4. The treatment recommendation and CCT study process can take multiple years to complete. 
For systems with existing corrosion control, the system may be able to alter the existing 
treatment (e.g., increase pH and/or orthophosphate dose) without a new CCT study on a much 
faster timeframe rather than waiting for study results that may recommend that same change. 
EPA is requesting comment on whether there are situations and/or conditions where existing 
treatment modifications may achieve similar lead reductions rather than delaying new treatment 
for two-and-a-half years while a study is underway.  
 
We agree that there likely are situations and/or conditions where existing treatment 
modifications should be implemented in parallel with or instead of conducting a new CCT study. 
CCT is a complex science and optimizing CCT throughout a water system may require iterative 
processes to adjust treatment doses and methods to achieve intended water quality parameters. A 
well-designed and executed CCT study may provide sufficient information for a water system 
and State to designate re-optimized CCT without re-doing an entire CCT study. We note, 
however, that there will be other situations for which a new CCT will be necessary to re-optimize 
CCT. We support giving States flexibility to determine whether a new CCT study is needed or 

16-9 
 
whether existing information is sufficient to designate re-optimized CCT because this 
determination will need to be a fact- and circumstance-specific evaluation customized to each 
individual water system. See Section 10. 
Compliance Alternatives for a Lead Action Level Exceedance for Small Community Water 
Systems and Non-Transient, Non-Community Water Systems 
 
1. EPA is proposing that small system flexibilities be limited to CWSs serving 3,300 persons and 
fewer and all NTNCWSs for the remaining compliance alternatives of point-of-use devices and 
plumbing replacement. EPA is seeking comment on whether the Agency should allow systems 
serving up to 10,000 persons (or another threshold) to be eligible to use the small system 
compliance flexibility provision. EPA is also seeking information, data, and analysis on whether 
point-of-use devices and plumbing replacement are as effective as OCCT at systems serving up 
to 10,000 persons (or another threshold).  
 
We recognize the limits EPA cites on CCT expertise for small systems and support these 
systems having the flexibility to choose POU devices or replacement of lead-bearing plumbing 
instead of CCT.  To make POU devices as effective as possible, however, EPA must ensure they 
are installed, maintained, and properly used by water systems to protect public health, consistent 
with the requirements for small system use of POU devices established in SDWA 
§1412(b)(4)(E)(ii), 42 U.S.C. §399g-1(b)(4)(E)(ii). Until full LSLR is achieved, POU devices 
provide crucial protections for customers still drinking water from LSLs and GRRs. But these 
protections are only realized with proper implementation, maintenance, and use of the filters. As 
such, we encourage EPA to provide educational materials in multiple languages and to bolster its 
requirements for PWSs that choose to use POU devices rather than CCT. These systems should 
be required to meet strong standards throughout the lifecycle of the POUs, and should also be 
required to provide public education and outreach to ensure that POU recipients know how to 
properly use them. See section 6 for more details. 
 
2. EPA is requesting comment on the ability and practicality of point-of-use devices to address 
multiple contaminants.  
 
See section 6. 
 
Public Education 
 
1. The proposed determination that the public education treatment technique is feasible and 
prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible. 
 
Additional changes are needed to make public education and notification materials more 
accurate and outreach more effective and to prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the 
health of persons to the extent feasible. These changes are addressed throughout our section 8 of 
our comments describing public education requirements. 
 
2. Comment and supporting data on the capacity of water systems to conduct some or all of the 
required public education activities in 30 days, or another period of time that is less than 30 or 

16-10 
 
60 days, after the end of the tap sampling period in which a systemwide lead action level 
exceedance occurs. 
 
We believe that it will be feasible for systems to conduct the public education activities 
within 30 days. See section 8(E)(i) for more details. 
 
3. Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water systems are capable 
of providing consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three calendar days of 
obtaining those results, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or copper action level, 
or if a longer time frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 calendar 
days).  
 
We encourage EPA to adopt a 24-hour notification requirement for all individual tap 
sampling results. This is discussed in section 8(B)(i). 
 
4. Whether the proposed requirement for water systems to offer lead sampling to consumers with 
LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines in the notice of service line material is 
effective at reducing adverse health effects. EPA is also requesting comment on the requirement 
for water systems to deliver consumer-initiated test results within three days of obtaining those 
results.  
 
We support the proposal to require systems that exceed the LAL to offer free tap 
monitoring to all customers who request it, and to offer tap monitoring for all customers with 
LSLs, GRR, or unknown service lines who request it regardless of whether there has been an 
LAL exceedance. It should be clarified that this monitoring should be done at the utility’s 
expense. This is discussed in section 8(B)(ii). 
 
5. Whether the types and timing of outreach activities proposed for systems failing to meet the 
mandatory service line replacement rate are appropriate and whether other activities should be 
considered.  
 
We support EPA’s proposal to require additional outreach activities for systems that fail 
to meet the mandatory service line replacement rate to conduct annual public education but 
encourage EPA to strengthen the requirements for outreach activities. This is discussed in section 
8(E)(i) and 8(E)(ii). 
 
6. Whether EPA should require systems to annually notify consumers if they are served by a lead 
connector, in addition to notifications for sites with lead, GRR, or lead status unknown service 
lines.  
 
We encourage EPA to increase the frequency of service line materials notifications from 
annual to once every six months for water systems that have lead, GRR, or unknown service 
lines beginning five years after the compliance date. See section 8(C)(i). 
 

16-11 
 
7. Whether EPA should require water systems to provide filters to consumers when there is a 
disturbance resulting from replacement of a water main.  
 
Yes. This is addressed in section 8(C)(ii). 
 
8. Whether EPA should require additional public education requirements to further encourage 
swift service line replacement faster than the 10-year replacement deadline. For example, should 
water systems that have LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines five years after the 
compliance date for the LCRI be required to increase the frequency of the notification of service 
line materials from annual to once every six months?  
 
Yes. This is addressed in section 8(C)(i). 
 
9. EPA is seeking information and data on when a system provides translated materials to 
consumers with limited English proficiency, what resources are used to translate materials (e.g., 
State resources, community organizations), and what barriers water systems may face in 
providing accurate translated materials.  
 
EPA should provide translated templates and materials to assist water systems in reaching 
out to low English proficiency and low literacy individuals. EPA and states should strongly 
encourage water systems to work through community-based organizations, places or worship and 
other trusted community partners to reach such individuals. Section 8(a)(ii) of these comments 
discusses translated materials, in which we highlight the legal requirements and environmental 
justice implications of ensuring that public materials are made available in a manner that will 
effectively reach people with limited English proficiency or limited literacy.  
 
10. Whether the Agency should require States, as a condition of primacy, to provide translation 
support to water systems that are unable to do so for public education materials to consumers 
with limited English proficiency.  
 
Yes. See section 8(A)(ii), as well as the discussion of primacy within section 2(D)(iii). 
 
11. EPA is also requesting comment on additional ways to streamline public education and 
associated certification requirements (e.g., combine deadlines for systems to conduct public 
education or submit information to the State).  
 
This is not addressed in our comments. 
 
Additional Requirements for Systems With Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances 
 
1. Whether water systems should be required to take additional actions when the system exceeds 
the lead action level multiple times and if so, what actions are appropriate and feasible, and 
when these additional actions should be required under the LCRI. 
 
 
As discussed in Section 4(C)(i), additional actions should be required for not only 
multiple LAL exceedances, but after one exceedance.  As discussed in Section 4(C)(ii), those 

16-12 
 
actions should include the delivery of filters and related materials.  In our public education 
section, we have suggestions about the manner and frequency of the public education following a 
LAL exceedance. See Section 8(E). In our CCT section, particularly Section 10(E), we have 
suggestions about the contours of CCT that should be required after one or more LAL 
exceedances. 
 
2. Whether EPA should use three action level exceedances in a five-year period for identifying 
systems with multiple action level exceedances where additional action is warranted and, 
whether additional actions should be required sooner, or later, than the five-year period, or 
whether EPA should use a modified metric (number of consecutive action level exceedances in a 
set time period) or a different metric entirely (i.e., based on one or more factors other than the 
number of action level exceedances in a set time period).  
 
 
As discussed in Section 4(C)(i), EPA should require additional actions, such as the 
delivery of filters to all consumers at no charge, to occur after a water system has one LAL 
exceedance. 
 
3. The proposed public education activities after a system exceeds the lead action level multiple 
times. EPA is specifically seeking any information, data, or analysis on whether the proposed 
public education activities support preventing adverse health effects in this situation. EPA is also 
requesting comment on whether systems should be required to conduct more than one (e.g., two 
or three) of the public education activities proposed.  
 
As described in more detail in Section 8(E)(i), some of the proposed public education 
activities may be ineffective without additional criteria (e.g. for town hall meetings, publicity and 
notice requirements). Because face to face, individualized contact tends to be more effective than 
other outreach activities, we would encourage EPA to require water systems to contact customers 
by two of the following options: phone, text, email, door hanger, or through an outreach activity 
in partnership with a local community organization. Our comments cite Flint and Newark, for 
example, where despite widespread publicity, many residents did not properly install or use 
filters. Multiple modes of outreach are critical to successfully reaching many populations. 
 
4. Whether EPA should require water systems to make filters certified to reduce lead and 
replacement cartridges, along with instructions for use, available to all consumers within 60 
days of a system having multiple action level exceedances and whether there are any supporting 
or contrary data on whether the proposed filter requirement would be protective of public 
health. 
 
As described in Section 4(C)(ii), within 30 days following a LAL exceedance, water 
systems should be required to deliver filters independently certified to meet NSF/ANSI standards 
to reduce lead and replacement cartridges, along with instructions for use, to all consumers at no 
charge, and continue to deliver replacement cartridges until two sampling periods have passed 
with no LAL exceedance. Because those filters would reduce lead levels to 5 ppb in a water 
system where more than 10 percent of sites sampled exceeded 10 ppb, the filter requirement 
would be more health protective than not providing filters. 
 

16-13 
 
5. The proposed requirements for systems to develop a filter plan and submit to the State after 
the system has multiple action level exceedances for the first time, and whether EPA should 
require systems to take additional actions to facilitate filter distribution.  
 
We agree that water systems should develop a filter plan and submit it to the State. Our 
suggestions for additional required actions are set forth in Section 4(C). 
 
6. Alternative requirements for systems with multiple action level exceedances to provide filters 
to their consumers, such as requiring water systems to provide filters and replacement cartridges 
to consumers served by an LSL, GRR service line, or unknown service line or to all consumers, 
or to require systems to consult with the State upon meeting the criteria for multiple action level 
exceedances, after which the State determines the appropriate action to reduce lead exposure.  
 
We support requiring water systems to deliver filters at no charge to all consumers in the 
system following an LAL exceedance. While such filters must, at a minimum, be delivered to 
consumers with LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown service lines, they should be delivered to 
all consumers. 
 
We do not support EPA providing States discretion to determine the appropriate action 
following whichever number of LAL exceedances trigger the provision of certified filters.   
Provision of filters can provide immediate protection and reduce levels to 5 ppb. EPA 
acknowledges that other actions take time to implement. States should not be allowed to 
authorize the use of other actions in the place of filters that will unnecessarily leave consumers 
exposed to high levels of lead for a longer period of time. See section 4 for more details. 
 
7. An additional provision providing discretion to States to allow systems with multiple action 
level exceedances to discontinue the proposed required actions sooner if the system takes actions 
(e.g., installs optimized or re-optimized CCT, completes mandatory service line replacement) 
and is at or below the lead action level for two consecutive monitoring periods.  
 
As stated in Section 4(C)(ii), we propose allowing water systems to discontinue the 
proposed actions if the system takes additional actions and is at or below the lead action level for 
two consecutive monitoring periods. 
 
8. Whether, in addition to the proposed requirements, EPA should provide States discretion to 
determine appropriate action following a multiple action level exceedance that is tailored to 
meet specific system needs. 
 
We support EPA permitting States to determine additional appropriate actions that a 
water system must take following an LAL exceedance, or multiple LAL exceedances tailored to 
a specific water system as long as those actions must be in addition to, and not in place of, the 
actions required by the final LCRI. See section 4 for more detail.  
 

16-14 
 
Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities 
 
1. Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or to sample more frequently 
in schools and child care facilities.  
 
EPA’s proposed sampling program for schools and child care centers is wholly 
inadequate and should be replaced by a requirement that water systems either: (a) install POU 
filtration stations then conduct testing; or (b) conduct robust ongoing testing with installation of 
filters for outlets testing above 1 ppb. This is addressed throughout section 9, but specifically in 
the introduction to the section. EPA should require twice per year sampling of every outlet in a 
school or childcare center used for drinking, cooking or other human consumption, or if a system 
chooses the filtration station installation option, it should test it once annually to ensure it is 
working correctly. 
 
2. The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community water systems from the 
requirement for lead sampling in schools and child care facilities during the five-year period 
after the LCRI compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021 but 
prior to the LCRI compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver requirements of 
§ 141.92(h).  
 
 
We support a cutoff date of January 1, 2021 for a waiver for facilities with filter first 
programs. See section 9. 
 
3. Whether or not to allow States to waive the requirements of § 141.92 for CWSs in schools and 
child care facilities that use and maintain filters certified to reduce lead, and if so, whether the 
waiver should only be allowed where schools and child care facilities are required by State or 
local law to install POU devices and maintain them.  
 
The waiver should be limited to schools and child care facilities that are required by state 
law, local law, or school district requirements to install and maintain POU devices. This is 
addressed in greater detail in section 9. 
 
4. The minimum requirements for States to provide a waiver (e.g., should the waiver be limited to 
locations where the filter use is required by State or local law; should the waiver be limited to 
locations where State or local law requires periodic sampling or testing to ensure proper filter 
use).  
 
Waivers should be limited to places where certified POU filters are installed, maintained 
properly, and tested at least once a year. This is addressed in greater detail in section 9. 
 
5. Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and child care facility sampling results 
publicly available, and if so, how frequently and in what manner.  
 
EPA should require that all sampling results be made publicly available and disseminated 
by the water system in a manner calculated to reach parents, guardians, and employees so that 

16-15 
 
interested parties can identify the facility and related test results. This is discussed further in 
section 9(C)(iv). 
 
Reporting and Recordkeeping 
 
1. EPA is requesting comment on the expansion of the inventory reporting to include lead 
connectors and non-lead service lines.  
 
Yes, the inventory should be expanded to include all lead connectors of any length and 
should require verification of non-lead service lines. See section 2(D)(i). 
 
2. EPA has heard concern over the ability of States to review all required site sample plans and 
provide approvals in time for the first tap monitoring period, and is requesting comment on 
whether EPA should consider a phased approach or alternate approach to reduce the burden on 
States following the rule compliance date.  
 
See section 2(D)(i). 
 
3. EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be required to maintain records related 
to distribution system and site assessments conducted by water systems.  
 
This is not addressed in our comments. 
 
4. EPA is requesting comment on whether States should be required to maintain documentation 
of determinations of more stringent implementation, including but not limited to conditions or 
approvals related to reduced compliance monitoring and additional information required to 
conduct a review or designate OCCT.  
 
 
EPA and GAO audits have found that often violations known to states are not passed on 
to EPA. The final LCRI must make changes that address 1) accurate data submission and 
transparency, and, 2) rampant noncompliance with the LCR. One such change includes reducing 
complexity in the convoluted reporting structure by requiring direct electronic reporting of raw 
monitoring data (rather than just violation data) and other information discussed in our 
comments to EPA, thereby improving EPA’s ability to better understand national patterns of 
compliance and to diagnose problems faced by states. See section 14 for more detailed 
discussion of transparency and compliance requirements. 
 
Compliance Dates 
 
1. Whether it is practicable for water systems to implement notification and risk mitigation 
provisions after full and partial service line replacement (§ 141.84(h)), notification of a service 
line disturbance (§ 141.85(g)), and associated reporting requirements (§141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) 
upon the effective date of the LCRI.  
 
. As discussed in section 3, it would be practicable for some or all of the LCRI’s 
requirements to take effect less than three years after the LCRI’s promulgation, and we 

16-16 
 
specifically recommend that many or all provisions take effect no later than one year after 
promulgation. We believe that it is practicable for the notification and reporting provisions 
discussed in EPA’s first question to take effect immediately or nearly immediately after the 
LCRI’s promulgation, because these are largely administrative and procedural changes that do 
not require major capital improvements or much time to plan and implement.  
 
2. Whether earlier alternative compliance dates for LCRI are practicable such that water 
systems transition directly from LCR to LCRI in less than three years (i.e., one or two years) 
based on the assumption that water systems would comply with the LCR until the LCRI 
compliance date.  
 
This is addressed in section 3 of these comments. We support allowing the specified 
provisions of the LCRR (plus the LCRR’s Tier 1 public notification provisions, as discussed 
elsewhere in the proposed LCRI) to take effect as planned in October 2024 and we believe that 
all of the LCRI can and should take effect one year after it is promulgated. 
 
3. Whether there are other LCRR provisions besides the initial inventory and notifications of 
service line material for which the October 16, 2024 compliance date should be retained.  
 
This is addressed in section 3 of these comments. We support allowing the specified 
provisions of the LCRR (plus the LCRR’s Tier 1 public notification provisions, as discussed 
elsewhere in the LCRI) to take effect as planned in October 2024 and we believe that all of the 
LCRI can and should take effect one year after it is promulgated. 
 
 
Other Proposed Revisions to 40 CFR Part 141 
 
1. Consumer Confidence Report 
a. EPA is requesting comment on the proposed requirement for systems to provide an 
informational statement in the CCR about the school sampling requirements with the information 
that consumers can contact the school or child care facility about any potential sampling results.  
 
See section 8(F). 
 
2. Definitions 
a. EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed definitions, and specifically the 
following:  
b. EPA is proposing to define a two-foot maximum length of connectors. EPA proposes 
that “connectors” that exceed two feet in length be treated as a service line. EPA is requesting 
comment on the defined length of a connector.  
 
See section 2(D)(i). 
 
 

 
 
17-1 
Section 17: Conclusion 
We applaud EPA’s efforts to strengthen and simplify the regulation of lead and copper in 
drinking water to achieve the Safe Drinking Water Act’s mandate to protect public health. Our 
comments highlight the significant positive steps EPA proposed in the LCRI and identify many 
additional ways EPA should strengthen and streamline the LCRI before it is finalized. We would 
be happy to discuss any of our comments further or provide any additional supporting 
information that would assist EPA. We look forward to working with EPA on the shared goal of 
ensuring that every person—no matter their race, income, or zip code—enjoys the right to safe, 
affordable, lead-free drinking water. 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
/s/ Suzanne Novak 
 
 
 
 
EARTHJUSTICE 
Suzanne Novak 
Marissa Lieberman-Klein 
Molly Prothero 
Julian Gonzalez 
Eve Gartner 
Hannah Levy 
snovak@earthjustice.org 
212-823-4981 
/s/ Erik D. Olson 
 
 
 
 
NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE 
COUNCIL 
Erik D. Olson 
Cori Bell 
Jared J. Thompson 
Karen Chen 
Larry Levine 
Cyndi Roper 
Nicole Vandal 
eolson@nrdc.org 
202-289-2415 
 
/s/ Yanna Lambrinidou 
 
 
 
CAMPAIGN FOR LEAD FREE WATER 
Yanna Lambrinidou PhD 
Paul Schwartz 
 
 
/s/ Allen C. Overton  
 
 
 
CONCERNED PASTORS FOR SOCIAL 
ACTION  
Pastor Allen C. Overton 
 
/s/ Nayyirah Shariff 
 
 
 
 
FLINT RISING 
Nayyirah Shariff, Director 
/s/ Yvette Jordan 
 
 
 
 
NEWARK EDUCATION WORKERS 
CAUCUS 
Yvette Jordan 
 
/s/ Zakia Rafiqa Shabazz 
 
 
 
UNITED PARENTS AGAINST LEAD 
Zakia Rafiqa Shabazz, Founder and National 
Director 
/s/ Melissa Mays 
 
 
 
 
WATER YOU FIGHTING FOR? 
Melissa Mays, Founder

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0735 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
January 9, 2024 
Submitted via https://www.regulations.gov  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket,  
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Re: Proposed Rule, Environmental Protection Agency, “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and 
Copper: Improvements (LCRI),” Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
Dear Assistant Administrator Fox: 
On behalf of the more than 32,000 members of the American Public Works Association (APWA), we are grateful for 
this opportunity to submit comments to the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on proposed 
revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) for lead and copper. Public works shares the 
administration’s commitment to the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) and protecting Americans from harmful 
contaminants. APWA has engaged with EPA over many years and been supportive of efforts under the administrations 
of both political parties to deliver needed infrastructure improvements.  
Public works appreciates the multitude of tasks EPA has been given and understands this has been a lengthy process 
from conducting research to translating findings into regulatory policy. APWA includes not only personnel from local, 
state, and federal agencies, but also private sector personnel with direct oversight, expertise, and involvement in 
scientific matters for their respective organizations. As such public works professionals often must look at these issues 
in a holistic manner across all water systems. The responsibilities of our nation’s public works professionals include the 
planning, design, construction, and maintenance of infrastructure while balancing those tasks with protecting the 
environment and public health. Our members take these duties very seriously and are constantly looking for avenues to 
submit constructive input as to how we can achieve a balance between sound guidelines that protect the public as well 
as the environment while limiting regulatory burdens that may negatively impact valuable projects.  
There is no doubt that our nation’s infrastructure needs updating and maintenance, and in some cases full replacement. 
Drinking water, wastewater, stormwater, sanitation, cybersecurity, and much more need investment right now. While 
the federal government does provide funds for projects like these across the country and our members are grateful for 
additional resources through the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act/Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, it is becoming 

 
 
increasingly clear the funds provided are insufficient to meet the rising cost burden from new or more stringent 
regulations. 
As the administration has noted the infrastructure law provides $55 billion to support upgrades to the nation’s water 
infrastructure, with projections speculating a cost of $30 billion to replace all lead service lines (LSLs). However, only 
$15 billion of this is dedicated to LSL replacements while the rest is being stretched by multiple demands particularly 
the $11.7 billion of general Drinking Water State Revolving Funds (DWSRF). The DWSRFs can support the 
replacement of LSLs, but they are also being utilized for addressing other contaminants like per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS) in drinking water systems and as pay-fors for congressionally directed spending (earmarks). These 
two factors are significantly reducing available funds. Since 2022 alone Congress has earmarked $2.3 billion or 42% in 
annual federal funding for state SRF projects. Meanwhile, other infrastructure law funds have also been reserved for 
specific purposes including $6 billion for emerging contaminants, $4 billion for PFAS in drinking water, $6.6 billion 
for western water infrastructure and resiliency, and $11.7 billion for the Clean Water State Revolving Funds (CWSRF). 
These dollars are also not going as far due to inflation and cost projections are likely to continue rising in the next 
decade especially with permitting delays and added expenses from expanded requirements under Davis-Bacon and Buy 
America when suitable components are unavailable domestically. All of this threatens to shift much of the cost to 
communities and ultimately the citizens they serve. 
We urge that if the administration wants to prioritize the removal of LSLs that it carefully considers these other 
variables and any opportunities to provide relief whether through changes to other proposed regulations, exemptions, 
and more flexibility in conjunction with greater funding. Some changes would be contingent on Congress too and we 
encourage the administration to work with stakeholders in developing a coherent and convincing message to lawmakers 
to secure any necessary adjustments. We expect the administration to fulfill their pledge that utilities and their 
ratepayers will not be required to pay to replace lead pipes on private property provided they replace whole pipes. 
We also appreciate EPA’s promise of additional water technical assistance (WaterTA), including the recently launched 
Get the Lead Out Initiative that partners with 200 underserved communities nationwide to help identify LSLs, develop 
replacement plans, and apply for funding. As methods are further refined, we request the agency will share updates on 
successful practices and tools through virtual and in-person trainings along with potentially more partnerships. In the 
interest of making these upgrades as expeditiously as possible, we hope EPA will identify opportunities to streamline 
processes by removing any potential redundancies, simplifying procedures, and making sure other agencies are aware 
for projects that are more complex and use a combination of funds. We believe these efforts will prove most critical for 
other disadvantaged communities with limited resources who may need greater guidance in combination with more 
accessibility to federal funds. It is important to recognize that the challenges for some will be far greater than others 
and we are hopeful that EPA will remain thoughtful through this process particularly as we learn more from the 

 
 
development of a national inventory of LSLs. Bearing this in mind, we are pleased EPA has stressed feasibility in this 
proposal asserting that: 
EPA finds that a minimum average annual replacement rate of 10 percent, calculated across a rolling three-year 
period and corresponding to a 10-year replacement deadline, is feasible as defined in SDWA section 1412(b)(4)(D) 
because it is technically possible for systems of all sizes and affordable relative to large water systems. EPA estimates 
that a 10-year replacement deadline is feasible for 96 to 99 percent of CWSs nationwide (USEPA, 2023g).  
For many systems this deadline is difficult to attain. We understand the agency is proposing two eligibility criteria for 
systems to defer their LSL replacement deadline past 10 years in accordance with a schedule that is feasible and 
prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects of lead to the extent possible. We appreciate the first criteria takes 
into consideration systems with a high proportion of LSLs and galvanized requiring replacement (GRR) service lines in 
their distribution system relative to their total number of households served. Moreover, that EPA acknowledges 
financial sustainability and affordability must be maintained for these systems through the replacement process and 
through the use of methods such as corrosion control treatment and point-of-use devices to protect households. For the 
second eligibility criterion we believe the alternate annual service line replacement threshold of 8,000 service lines per 
year to be more realistic given the resources larger systems may need to marshal and coordinate. As the agency has 
pointed out, this level would ideally allow for more flexibility in locating sufficient labor and materials within certain 
regions and distributing work in a more efficient manner that helps to better account for weather, economic conditions, 
and the composition of buildings requiring replacements.  
Furthermore, as the agency stated in the Federal Register, additional time and engagement may be necessary for some 
property owners to receive consent to remove LSLs from their properties. For those who refuse treatment for their 
service lines, we advise they be deemed not under the control of the water system and forego replacement of the lines 
until permission has been granted. As for the proposed level of “reasonable effort”, we advise the number of attempts 
to engage the property owner and methods of communication are best decided by localities who know what is most 
effective when conducting outreach with their citizens.  
Again, while the objectives of the proposed rule are well meaning, we want to ensure that resources are not 
misallocated from other efforts that are critical to certain communities such as improvements to resiliency and 
addressing other forms of contamination, which otherwise could result in a lower quality of life for residents, as well as 
lower environmental protections and higher public health risks. We want to ensure respect for local authorities 
regarding infrastructure and encourage close coordination across federal, state, and local governments to enhance the 
project process and avoid overwhelming public works professionals in carrying out their responsibilities especially for 
limited staff in small and disadvantaged communities.  

 
 
APWA members pride themselves on being committed to public service by profession, and on being a resource for 
federal initiatives is just another way we work to protect our communities. We look forward to continuing to work with 
the EPA to share information with our membership as well as provide input on behalf of public works practitioners 
across the country. If APWA may be of further assistance, please contact Ryan McManus, APWA Government Affairs 
Manager, at rmcmanus@apwa.org or 202-218-6727. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of these comments. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
W. Gary Losier, PEng  
 
 
 
Scott D. Grayson, CAE  
APWA President 
 
 
 
 
Chief Executive Officer

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0817 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue  
NW, Washington, DC 20460 
 
Dear Sir or Madam: 
 
Subject:  Comments on Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, Docket ID No. EPA–
HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
The Alameda County Water District (ACWD) appreciates the opportunity to submit comments on 
the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
(LCRI). The EPA is proposing to require water systems to replace lead service lines, remove the 
lead trigger level, reduce the lead action level to 0.010 mg/L, and strengthen tap sampling 
procedures, among other changes that would improve public health protection and simplify the 
rule relative to the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR).  As a public water utility that 
serves water to over 344,000 people in the cities of Fremont, Newark, and Union City in the San 
Francisco Bay Area, ACWD has a strong commitment to the protection of public health through 
the development of stringent and effective drinking water regulations. 
 
On December 6, 2023, EPA announced in the Federal Registry the availability for public comment 
of the proposed LCRI. Prior to this time, lead and copper were regulated under the Lead and 
Copper Rule (LCR) promulgated in 1991 - 40 CFR Part 141 Subpart I, which was subsequently 
revised by the LCR Minor Revisions in 2000, the LCR Short-Term Revisions in 2007, and the 
LCRR in 2021. 
 
ACWD supports the development of EPA’s LCRI, and requests consideration of the following 
comments: 
 
1. Lead Service Line Inventory (LSLI) 
 
a) Include Provisions in the LCRI Which Allow Other Means to Demonstrate that an 
Existing Galvanized Service Line Does Not Require Replacement.  

Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Page 2 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
The LCRR defines galvanized service lines requiring replacement (GRR) as “galvanized 
service lines that are or ever were downstream of an LSL” (Lead Service Line), and the LCRI 
expands the definition of an LSL to include lead connectors. 
 
ACWD supports EPA’s goal of reducing lead exposure in drinking water by identifying and 
replacing lead service lines and agrees with the LCRI that “focusing the proposed service line 
replacements requirements on LSLs and galvanized service lines that are or were downstream 
of an LSL will allow these more significant lead sources to be eliminated as quickly as feasible, 
and with lower overall replacement program costs.”  ACWD, like many other utilities, has 
consolidated other water systems into its system throughout its long history.  As with many 
agencies, standards and detailed records for water main and service line installations did not 
exist in a retrievable format until several decades after our formation as a Community Water 
System (CWS).  Consequently, ACWD does not have records of service line materials which 
were installed prior to the establishment of standards or the maintenance of retrievable records.  
This definition of GRR would essentially require replacement of all customer-side service lines 
which are made of galvanized material unless records exist to prove otherwise.  Though 
ACWD does not have a history of installing LSLs in our service area, and through our LSLI 
efforts, ACWD has confidence that we have no existing lead service lines or existing lead 
connections in the utility-owned portions of our service area, it is impossible to confirm that a 
leaded line or connection did not exist sometime in the past, beyond the span of ACWD’s 
existing standards or records. By requiring ACWD to classify private service lines as GRR 
when explicit records do not exist to prove that the public portion of the service line “was never 
downstream” of a LSL, this provision may be interpreted to require ACWD to divert very 
significant funding, resources, and time from other priorities (including voluntary efforts to 
further optimize public health protection) toward replacing lines that were never impacted by 
an LSL. 
 
ACWD appreciates EPA’s acknowledgement within the LCRI of “scarce system and State 
resources” and requests EPA consider the development of provisions other than records to 
identify GRR services, such as institutional knowledge based on interviews and observations 
of long tenured field maintenance staff, or a defined sampling routine.  
 
The LCRI expands the LCRR definition of an LSL to include lead connectors up to two feet 
in length, for identification of GRRs.  ACWD completed an inventory of lead service line 
material in 2020, for the utility-owned portion of service lines, for compliance with California 
Senate Bills 1398 and 427, which identified no lead service lines in our service area.  The 
inventory development process included checking for the presence of lead connectors through 
means of record reviews, service line repairs/replacement records, main replacement projects, 
field verifications, and staff interviews, and no LSLs or lead connectors were discovered. This 
inventory was conducted based on the material of water mains currently in place and would 
not necessarily account for a potential lead-containing connector between a service line and a 
main which may have been replaced decades prior, and though that main replacement would 
normally include the replacement of the utility-owned portion of the service line, it would not 
have included the portion of the service line on the customer’s property.  Retaining the 

Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Page 3 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
inclusion of connectors, coupled with the requirement for CWSs to demonstrate that a 
galvanized line was never downstream of a connector which may have contained lead, would 
essentially require the replacement of all galvanized customer-side service lines which were in 
place prior to a CWSs retrievable records of installation, and may also introduce the complexity 
for CWSs to reassess their already in progress or completed LSL inventories for the potential 
historical presence of previous lead connectors, which would be both resource intensive and 
conceptually challenging.  
 
ACWD requests EPA consider allowing or developing alternative means to determine if a 
galvanized service line was ever downstream of a potentially lead-containing connector, such 
as grandfathering inventory information which was collected and submitted in support of State 
LSLI requirements.  If an alternative method to determine GRRs cannot be developed, EPA 
should update the economic impact analysis to account for the associated costs of replacement 
of potentially all customer-owned portions of galvanized service lines that a CWS cannot prove 
were never downstream of a LSL, or downstream of a connector which potentially contained 
lead.   
 
b) Provide Funding Directly to Property Owners for Private Service Line Replacements. 
 
The LCRI includes requirements to replace both the utility-owned and privately owned 
portions of LSLs, and removes language included in the LCRR that addressed who would pay 
for the work of replacement.   
 
ACWD supports EPA’s goal of reducing lead exposure in drinking water through the 
replacement of LSLs.  Prior to the introduction of the LCRR, ACWD’s responsibility for 
service lines has always stopped at the water meter.  Requiring CWSs to replace the private 
portion of service lines would expose CWSs to potentially significant liability and costs.  
Replacement of private service lines cannot be assumed to be a cookie-cutter process due to 
the wide range of factors that can affect a replacement.  For example, a service line that runs 
through a grass front yard will cost less to replace than a service line that runs underneath 
concrete or pavers.  Replacing items such as concrete or pavers can result in aesthetic issues 
that the customer will demand the utility to resolve. Without clear guidance or cost caps per 
replacement, it is anticipated that replacement costs will balloon.  As a mid-sized water utility 
with a diverse customer base, ACWD’s experience attempting to utilize existing federal and 
state funding streams to support regulatory compliance has indicated that they can be difficult 
and costly for CWSs to take advantage of due to eligibility constraints or other nuances of the 
specific funding effort.  
 
ACWD requests EPA consider clarifying that property owners are responsible for replacement 
of private side service lines and offering the use of grants directly to the property owners to 
fund private service line replacements, rather than placing responsibility on CWSs to replace 
LSLs on private property. 
 
 

Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Page 4 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
c) Extend Initial Inventory Submittal Deadline of October 16, 2024. 
 
The LCRI extends compliance dates in the LCRR with the exception of the LSL inventory, 
and associated notification and reporting requirements. 
 
ACWD supports EPA’s extension of the compliance deadline to implement the revisions 
included in the LCRI, and agrees that this would facilitate a more effective implementation of 
the multiple enhancements to public health protection.  The LCRR includes requirements for 
CWSs to fulfill regarding services classified as a material type of “unknown,” and to make the 
inventory publicly accessible.  Additionally, the LCRI includes provisions which may affect 
the final inventory service line classification, particularly in regard to determining GRRs.  This 
combination of provisions adds a level of complexity into current inventory efforts since it 
could be confusing for customers if a service line can be identified as galvanized non-lead 
under the requirements of the LCRR and needs to be reclassified as a GRR under the 
requirements of the LCRI.  Conversely, it would be an unnecessary use of resources to classify 
a service as “unknown” and comply with the associated requirements thereof, for a service 
which ultimately would not be a GRR. 
 
ACWD requests EPA consider extending the deadline for submission of the initial lead service 
line inventory to provide time for CWSs to accurately conduct the inventory according to the 
guidance in the LCRI and provide more consistent messaging for customers. 
 
d) Reduce Required Number of Customer Outreach Attempts for Privately Owned LSLs from 
Four to Two. 
 
The LCRI includes provision for CWSs to make a reasonable effort to obtain property owner 
consent for replacing customer-owned service lines. As proposed in the LCRI, a reasonable 
effort would include at least four customer outreach attempts using at least two different 
communication methods. 
 
ACWD is supportive of improved customer outreach.  However, four outreach attempts 
by CWSs would increase the burden without added public health benefits.   ACWD 
requests EPA take into consideration the cost and resources for CWSs and suggests the 
outreach attempts be reduced to two, as proposed under the LCRR.   
 
2. Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
 
a) Remove Requirement for Delivery of Lead and Copper Tap Sampling Results to Residents 
Within 3 days for Customers Below the Action Level. 
 
The LCRR includes the requirement to provide customer tap sample results within 3 days when 
the action level is exceeded.  EPA is proposing in the LCRI that CWSs deliver all consumer 
notices of lead or copper tap sampling results within three days, regardless of whether the 
results exceed the lead or copper action levels. 

Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Page 5 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
ACWD supports EPA’s efforts for timely customer notification for those customers whose 
lead sample results exceed the action level.  However, the requirement of notifying customers 
with 3 days regardless of the lead results does not provide additional benefits and may not be 
consistently achievable by some agencies.  Additionally, requiring CWSs to notify all sampling 
participants, regardless of their test results, in such a short timeframe could divert CWS staff 
attention from focusing on the messaging and notifications of those customers whose test 
results exceeded the action levels.  ACWD requests EPA consider extending this time period 
to a minimum of 15 business days, for participants whose sample results are below the action 
level, to allow CWSs staff sufficient time to organize data and create customer-friendly 
notifications and education materials. Alternatively, if a shorter notification timeline is 
required, please consider allowing the initial notification to be made via phone call, text 
message, and/or email followed-up with written customer-friendly material within 30 days. 
 
3. Public Notification 
 
a) Re-evaluate or Provide Guidance for Tier 1 Messaging for 90th Percentile Results Above 
the Action Level of 0.010 mg/L. 
 
Under the LCRR, CWSs must comply with the Tier 1 public notification requirement for a 
lead action level of 0.015 mg/L.  Additionally, EPA is proposing under the LCRI that CWSs 
must comply with Tier 1 public notification requirements when sample results exceed the 
proposed revised lead action level of 0.010 mg/L.  
 
ACWD is supportive of EPA efforts to improve public notification in regard to health risks 
associated with lead in drinking water.   A Tier 1 public notification has historically been used 
for providing information to the public about drinking water hazards that pose an immediate 
risk to public health such as E. coli or nitrate.  
 
ACWD requests EPA provide messaging guidance for the Tier 1 public notifications 
associated with 90th percentile (P90) results that are above the action level such that the 
notification language is not unnecessarily alarming to customers.  The P90 value is a ranked 
value derived from sample results from selected homes that are most susceptible to lead 
contamination in drinking water.  These homes are generally not representative of the majority 
of homes in the service area.  ACWD does not have lead service lines, and it has been ACWD’s 
experience that sample results greater than the detection limit are normally associated with 
internal customer plumbing in homes that have not gone through plumbing modernization.    In 
these cases, the potential health risk may not be present for the majority of customers in the 
distribution system, who would be receiving the Tier 1 public notifications.  ACWD suggests 
that EPA consider a more targeted approach to messaging directed to the locations where 
sampling indicates that lead levels are higher than the action level.  
 
 

Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Page 6 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
4. Lead Sampling at Schools and Child Care Facilities 
 
a) Consider Expanding, from January 1, 2021, to January 1, 2017, the Timeframe for Prior 
School Lead Sampling Results to be Considered Acceptable as Part of the Initial School 
Lead Sampling. 
 
The LCRR requires CWSs to conduct lead sampling at schools and childcare facilities that 
were constructed prior to January 1, 2014, or the date the State adopted standards that meet the 
definition of lead-free in accordance with section 1417 of the Safe Drinking Water Act, 
whichever is earlier.  Initially, all elementary schools and childcare facilities would be sampled 
within 5 years of the rule compliance date and then upon request, once every five years 
afterward. The LCRI includes a provision for CWSs to attain waivers for the initial round of 
sampling provided the schools had been sampled after January 1, 2021, in acknowledgement 
that some states have enacted legislation regarding school lead sampling since the LCRR was 
promulgated.   
 
ACWD supports EPA’s goal of the reduction of exposure to lead in drinking water at schools 
and requests EPA consider expanding the date for waiver eligibility to January 1, 2017.  In 
2017, ACWD conducted outreach offering lead sampling at K-12 schools in its service area as 
required by the State of California Division of Drinking Water’s amendment to our water 
supply permit.  Between 2017 and 2019, ACWD conducted additional lead sampling at all 
public K-12 schools and preschools and child day care facilities located on public school 
properties in compliance with California Assembly Bill 746.  This sampling included five 
samples per school and was conducted according to the guidance contained in EPAs 3Ts 
Toolkit, which is the same guidance referenced in the LCRI. Additional sampling of the same 
locations using the same methodology may not provide additional health benefit.  ACWD is 
supportive of reducing exposure to lead in drinking water for children and requests that EPA 
consider amending the waiver eligibility timeframe to encompass school lead sampling 
conducted in support of the earlier legislative and regulatory efforts within California to 
minimize lead exposure for children in schools.   
 
We appreciate the opportunity to participate in the rule-making process.  Should you have any 
questions about these comments, please feel free to contact Mike Wickham at (510) 668-6516, by 
email mike.wickham@acwd.com, or via U.S. mail at the letterhead address. 
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Ed Stevenson 
General Manager

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0938 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
1 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
General Matters 
 
Whether the proposed revisions to the 
LCRR treatment technique are 
effective to prevent known or 
anticipated adverse health effects to 
the extent feasible in accordance with 
the SDWA. 
While the rule goes a long way to reduce lead, through requiring lead service line removal, it 
implicitly minimizes the importance of premise plumbing and other sources of lead beyond the 
service line. While there are lead service lines in use in Vermont, essentially all action level 
exceedances in the past decade of LCR implementation have been from premise plumbing or 
lead content in various appurtenances and equipment. Minimizing the role premise plumbing 
plays is counter to public health protection. 
 
As detailed below, Vermont DWGPD has concerns about the ability for a water system to cease 
monitoring for entry point and/or distribution water quality parameters, as this is the first 
indicator of excursions and likely impacts “down the line”. Continuing the entry point monitoring 
would be a good way to assess the anticipated adverse health effects early while reducing the 
burden of the distribution WQP monitoring.  
Whether there are additional ways EPA 
could reduce the complexity of the 
regulatory approach used to address 
lead in drinking water consistent with 
the statutory standard for a treatment 
technique rule in section 1412(b)(7)(A) 
of SDWA. Specifically, EPA requests 
comment on ways that the proposed 
LCRI could be simplified and ways that 
burden, including paperwork burden, 
could be reduced without affecting the 
ability of the rule to prevent known or 
anticipated adverse health effects. 
Vermont DWGPD suggests reducing, streamlining, and even eliminating some of the annual 
certifications, notifications, education, and updates that a water system is required to do as 
individual requirements. These individual steps will need to be tracked system-by-system and 
step-by-step, will likely lead to increased non-compliance, and as part of that, will erode 
consumer confidence in the product delivered. It will also mandate technical rule manager staff 
into focusing time and attention on the more administrative aspect of the rule and not the 
technical content. Vermont has limited staffing to implement these rules; so, time spent tracking 
annual notice and education is time taken away from technical and compliance assistance. 
 
The CCR is a powerful tool that can be updated to include most if not all of that information 
directed in the LCRI, but if that is the approach, it must be done using plain language and not 
complicated wording that is difficult to translate and difficult for non-industry individuals to 
understand. 
 
A streamlined inventory document, including some of the required metrics all in one place would 
also streamline the “paperwork” requirements of the regulation so that things can be tracked in 
“bunches” not individual submissions. The more individual compliance items, and with separate 
due dates, means there are more items to track for already burdened water system operators 
and state staff. 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
2 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
The revised definition of “connector,” 
including that connectors are defined 
as “not exceeding two feet.” 
Vermont DWGPD will defer to other states and industry professionals. As part of the inventory 
training and program deployment in Vermont, we have been referencing the 2-foot limit as being 
a connector versus a segment of pipe and have not been told by systems that this is inaccurate 
or poses any problems. 
 
Service Line Replacement 
 
All aspects of the proposed scope of 
the replacement requirements, 
including the criteria used to define a 
full-service line replacement (e.g., 
cutting the pipe at abandoned 
properties, replacing the entire service 
line) and which lead sources are 
subject to replacement under the 
mandatory program. EPA is seeking 
comment on whether to prohibit 
reconnection of any disconnected LSL 
or GRR service line. EPA is requesting 
comment on whether the Agency 
should include lead connectors or 
galvanized service lines that are or 
were downstream of a lead connector 
as part of mandatory replacement. 
We recommend prohibiting re-connecting lead service lines once disconnected except in rare 
instances of emergency or critical need. Otherwise, EPA regulations and/or plumbing code 
should be expanded to prohibit something that is largely outside of the control of the water 
system. If incorporated into the plumbing code, it would be more applicable and more directly 
linked with the individuals making those connections – the plumbers.  
 
It is a difficult argument to say that a lead line segment of 25 inches will have a dramatically 
different impact on public health than a lead connector of 23 inches; especially if that connector 
is upstream of a galvanized line.   
 
We would support making the known connectors a mandatory replacement when upstream of 
galvanized, however, the associated funding needs to be provided as discussed elsewhere in 
these comments.  A blanket mandate of replacing lead connectors within 10 years will create an 
additional burden with which water systems cannot comply readily. Without records, identifying 
a 10-inch segment of lead pipe would be very difficult to do via sequential sampling, so leeway 
needs to be given for “connector unknown” or unvalidated connectors if it becomes a mandate.  
Whether a reasonable effort to obtain 
property owner consent should be 
more than four times (e.g., five, six, or 
seven times). 
Four times seems reasonable; repeated attempts could be seen as “pestering” and may burn 
bridges for future engagement and support, however selecting an arbitrary number feels 
insufficient. We would defer to other states with more related experience to assign the correct 
number based on their experience.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
3 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Whether the proposed LCRI 
appropriately interprets “control” for 
the purposes of the mandatory 
replacement provision (i.e., require 
systems to conduct full service line 
replacement in situations where the 
system has access to conduct the full 
replacement). 
Clarity is required around “control”. “Control” and “ownership” are different things.  Vermont 
DWGPD anticipates most systems will not know the extent of their authority and therefore defer 
to the State’s support or legal advice to assess whether they have control or not.  Further, if it is 
documented that a system does not have full access, is that line not included in the 10-year 
removal/replacement goal? 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
4 
 
The proposed minimum replacement 
rate and replacement deadlines. EPA 
is seeking comment on whether it is 
feasible for systems across the nation 
to complete service line replacement 
in a shorter timeframe than ten years, 
such as in six, seven, or eight years. 
EPA is seeking comment on the rate 
construct approach, including how to 
calculate compliance with a given 
service line replacement deadline and 
average annual rate calculated across 
a rolling three-year period. EPA also 
seeks comment on whether systems 
should be required to meet a minimum 
replacement rate in the first three 
years after the compliance date to give 
States an opportunity to enforce 
replacement rate progress sooner than 
three years after the compliance date. 
EPA also seeks comment on the 
complexity of the rate construct.  
The rate approach is problematic. It does not take into account the real life demands of a water 
system operator/public works department- they read meters, they do other planned 
maintenance, they respond to breaks and leaks; in Vermont many plow roads, pave roads, 
simultaneously operate the wastewater system. They are also dealing with other complicated 
drinking water regulations such as PFAS. To say that a system can devote 100% of their attention 
to lead removal is ambitious. The preamble cites situations such as Newark, NJ and Flint, MI, 
both of which are extreme examples and national-level priorities. They were certainly all-hands-
on-deck, and we don’t say this to minimize the importance of lead removal, but in reality, most 
‘average’ water systems do not have the capacity to deploy like resources were deployed in Flint 
or Newark. 
 
In Vermont, our fifth largest community water system has been working since 2017 to inventory 
service lines with service line replacement starting in 2021, in a project fully funded by federal 
funds (pre-BIL). Granted, this includes impacts from the Covid-19 pandemic, however, they have 
also simultaneously been addressing PFAS and expanding the distribution mains considerable 
distances to add on hundreds of homes that had private wells contaminated with PFAS.  This 
demonstrates the real-world situation we are under; working with a very devoted water system 
and consultants to inventory approximately 1,500 of the 4,000+ connections and removal of just 
under 500 GRR or lead/partial lead service lines. The system is not expected to complete 
inventorying and removal of LSLs/GRR until at least 2025 or 2026. They are doing everything they 
can to complete approximately 100 line replacements per year and are working with the most 
experienced consulting firm in the State on the matter.  Much of our world, and likely other small 
states and systems are not constructed in a simple grid like large cities, so it takes more 
resources to “mobilize” and replace lines, integrate with state permitting for road construction, 
and other state and local permits.    
 
In Vermont service lines are buried 6+ feet down, so trenching/digging/pulling in new lines is 
labor intensive especially considering rocky, rural terrain, further complicated by seasonal 
limitations on work/construction season that at best runs from mid-May to mid-December. 
 
If a water system conducts partial service line replacement and all associated notice, filters, re-
sampling, etc. then that line should “count” toward the system’s rate and ultimate completion. 
The difficulty is the permitting, mobilization and digging under the road/sidewalk/right of way. 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
5 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Especially if the remaining partial line is only a few feet long and the owner declines to replace 
their portion, that should not be held against the water system. Realizing then that they can’t 
“double count” the replacement, consider assigning that a value of “half” replacements so the 
systems get credit for replacing at least some of the line and doing the heavy lifting to get to that 
point.  A system doing a number of partial replacements due to property owners declining to 
replace the private side replacement should still count for the water system if/when they have 
the process mobilized and engaged.  
EPA is taking comment on whether 
States, as a condition of primacy, or 
EPA when it is directly implementing 
the program, should be required to set 
initial shortened deadlines by a certain 
timeframe, such as no later than 60 
days after the compliance date.  
Having multiple timelines will be confusing and difficult. There needs to be a set compliance 
date by which the rule goes into effect and, as discussed below, the opportunity to have a staged 
sampling and implementation date from that point pertaining to sampling plans and water 
quality monitoring.  
Whether to require the State, as a 
condition of primacy, to approve the 
use of the deferred deadline provision 
where the water system qualifies for it 
and/or whether to require the State, as 
a condition of primacy, to assess 
whether it would be feasible for a 
system to meet the 10-year deadline 
or a shorter deadline even if the 
system meets the regulatory criteria 
for the deferred deadline. 
If the state has flexibility to allow a longer or tightened timeframe, there needs to be clear 
eligibility criteria set forth in the rule, otherwise, it will lead to “gray”, which is difficult to apply 
consistently on the state-level and nation-wide.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
6 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Whether there are additional data on 
service line replacement rates 
achieved by systems in proactive 
programs (i.e., excluding programs that 
only replace service lines in 
coordination with main replacement or 
emergency repair). 
This topic is detailed elsewhere in these comments, but the decision to set the framework for 
line replacement cannot be done in a vacuum without considering other regulations and 
regulatory impacts. The anticipated PFAS regulations pose a significant burden on water 
systems, who will only have so much capacity to focus on improvements and tight timelines.  In 
Vermont we have a public water system that is simultaneously identifying and removing lead 
service lines and extending its water mains to serve hundreds of new customers with private 
wells impacted by PFAS. There is not sufficient capacity in the water system or its consultants to 
have aggressive strategies for service line replacement AND deal with other increasingly 
complicated regulations.  
The requirement for systems to install 
a dielectric coupling when conducting 
a partial replacement of an LSL or GRR 
to separate the remaining LSL or GRR 
service line and the replaced service 
line unless the replaced service line is 
made of plastic and other 
recommended risk mitigation activities 
Vermont DWGPD supports the use of dielectric coupling in the event of partial service line 
replacements.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
7 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
The proposed requirement to ban 
partial lead and GRR service line 
replacement unless it is conducted in 
accordance with emergency or 
planned infrastructure work (excluding 
planned infrastructure work solely for 
the purposes of replacing lead and 
GRR service lines as part of a service 
line replacement program). 
Additionally, EPA is seeking comment 
on whether partial service line 
replacement should be prohibited 
during “planned infrastructure work” 
or with certain types of planned 
infrastructure work. 
While Vermont DWGPD agrees that partial replacements pose significant health risks, it is still 
removing a major source of lead which, in the long run, will be beneficial; especially if/when 
properties change ownership, and the new owners are willing to engage.  The process 
established in the rule about pre-replacement notice/education, provision of filters, post-
replacement flushing and sampling would help alleviate public health concerns directly 
following replacement.  If the goal is to remove as much lead as possible, there are safeguards in 
place, and the water system can document the owner declining to replace the private segment, 
then partial replacement should be allowed.  It cannot be done in a vacuum or without 
signoff/declining on behalf of the owner. There must be steps to satisfy to warrant the partial, not 
just that the system could not be bothered to attempt to work with the private side owner.  
The ability of the market to correct for 
potential shortages in workers and 
materials to conduct service line 
replacement, as well to provide 
sufficient quantities of filters to 
comply with the service line 
replacement and other relevant 
provisions in the proposal. 
Vermont is a rural and isolated state. It is highly likely that larger states and municipalities in the 
region will dominate the market and purchase filters, making it difficult and therefore expensive 
to obtain filters in Vermont. The assumption in the rule that manufacturers will rise to the 
challenge is ambitious.  What is more likely to happen is that systems and homeowners will turn 
to online retailers that source products internationally and may not meet the ANSI/NSF 
standards.  We have seen this with school plumbing replacements given the recent national 
prioritization of these sorts of things, kitchen spray nozzles were hard to find, so the school went 
online and, unknowingly, purchased a product that did not meet US plumbing code. 
 
If filters are a long-term option, they need to be made a “fundable” expense under the DWSRF. 
Otherwise, systems will not have the ongoing revenue to support their purchase and upkeep.  
Many small and rural water systems do not charge a sufficient water rate and operate at a break-
even budget. Purchasing, maintaining, and replacing filters will increase costs significantly for a 
small system. 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
8 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
The extent to which property owner 
consent, if required by State or local 
law or water tariff agreement, might 
complicate full service line 
replacement and whether there are 
additional measures EPA can take to 
facilitate access through the LCRI. 
There are no state laws in Vermont that grant access/control to municipalities in absence of 
consent to address service line replacement. This would be governed by local laws and/or 
ordinances and be system-by-system. Because of this, especially without the option of funding 
to replace privately owned segments, it will absolutely be a hurdle for public water systems to 
replace lead and galvanized lines in absence of consent. 
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
Comment on the sites included in Tier 
3 and whether all of the proposed sites 
should be included in Tier 3, if 
additional sites should be included, or 
if some should be included in a 
different, lower priority tier, such as 
Tier 4. Specifically, comment on 
whether sites served by galvanized 
service lines or containing galvanized 
premise plumbing that are identified 
as ever being downstream of an LSL or 
lead connector should be included in 
the same tier as other sites with a 
current lead connector (e.g., copper 
service line downstream of a lead 
connector). 
Tier 3 as written in the LCRI is too broad. Lead connectors have a higher risk than other 
characteristics listed in the regulation under that Tier. If there are systems that have Tier 3 as the 
“highest tier” there would be a broad range of possible sampling locations and likely lead 
sources. 
 
Consider including lead connectors in Tier 1 if no lead service lines are present or make lead 
connectors alone Tier 3, then bump the other characteristics currently included in Tier 3 into Tier 
4 and so on. 
Comment on the applicability of 
alternate sampling protocols to assess 
CCT performance, increase customer 
participation, and other relevant 
factors. 
Integrating the WQP monitoring in distribution with the RTCR sampling already documents 
representative sampling locations, at locations that are already accustomed to having staff 
access and collect samples and is a population-based way to assess water quality. Linking the 
distribution WQP sampling with the date/time of RTCR sampling would make things easier on the 
system staff and utilize the existing mechanism. It would also capitalize on existing access and 
relationships for sampling. 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
9 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Comment on the proposed updated 
definition of wide-mouth bottles that is 
“bottles that are one liter in volume 
with a mouth, whose outer diameter 
measures at least 55 mm wide,” and 
specifically on the availability of 
qualifying bottles. 
Labs in Vermont have made valiant efforts since 2016 to procure and use wide-mouth bottles for 
analytic purposes. However, they report that many wide-mouth bottles do not have a 1-liter fill 
line and many that have fill lines are not truly to the full capacity of 1liter required for the analysis, 
adversely impacting the QA/QC process. The assumption that sufficient bottles will be available, 
and that they will be able to meet the 1st and 5th liter sampling is problematic based on our 
experiences since 2016. 
 
The rule is unclear about whether the 55 mm reflects the opening aperture, includes the threads, 
or the measurement with the cap on. Simply put, the internal opening should be what is 
measured and required (and adjusted from the expected 55mm external opening accordingly). 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
10 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Comment and any relevant data on the 
number and tiering of samples used to 
calculate the 90th percentile lead 
and/or copper levels for systems with 
LSLs for purposes of assessing CCT 
efficacy. Specifically, whether samples 
from non-LSL sites that have higher 
lead concentrations than samples 
from LSL sites should be included and 
whether these higher values should 
replace lower values from LSL sites in 
the 90th percentile calculation. 
The highest sample results should be used to assess the 90th percentile, regardless of tier. The 
likelihood is that in systems with insufficient Tier 1 locations these locations would represent a 
greater percentage of the system infrastructure and possible lead exposure.   
 
Not counting the highest results also creates confusion for the users who see high results, but 
they aren’t “counted”; this can lead to an education/outreach problem where it looks like the 
system or the State are covering things up. As we have learned in the last several years, 
everything pertaining to this rule needs to be easily understood and its implementation needs to 
be transparent.  
 
In the preamble there is discussion about whether any sample, including customer-requested 
sampling would be used to calculate the 90th percentile. From a workload standpoint and 
monitoring framework standpoint, it would be difficult for states to manage “random” data 
arriving at random intervals but be required to apply it toward the 90th percentile, especially 
if/when a system samples early in the monitoring period and there has been considerable work 
to assess that they did not exceed the action level, for then a random sample to arrive months 
later and require a re-review of everything and potentially changing course. This would mean tap 
notices which would need to go out within 3 days of receipt of results would all need to be 
changed if the action level is exceeded and would lead to user confusion and lack of trust.  
 
There is also concern that this could lead to more “gaming” of the system whereby a system may 
receive 10-20 more samples per monitoring period from locations that are not highest risk/Tier 1 
sites, so it would change the 90th percentile by allowing “more” samples above the action level to 
not count toward the action level.  
Comment on whether State authority 
to specify sampling locations when a 
system is conducting reduced 
monitoring should apply regardless of 
the number of taps meeting sample 
site criteria. 
What is it that EPA is attempting to address by limiting/setting the sampling locations? If it wants 
to assess those locations with the highest concentrations, then require that under reduced 
monitoring, the sampling locations include the top “X” number of locations when sampling 
under standard monitoring.  Currently the State would have difficulty asserting authority to do so, 
but this could be easily done in the final LCRI. 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
11 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
In the LCRI EPA is proposing a 
threshold of systems serving greater 
than 50,000 persons to host the 
inventory and plan online, which is the 
required threshold under the LCRR. 
EPA is seeking comment on the size 
threshold at which systems must host 
their publicly accessible inventory, 
inventory summary data, replacement 
summary data, and service line 
replacement plan online, and whether 
it should be lowered relative to the 
LCRR requirements. 
Vermont DWGPD would support making systems serving a population of 10,000 or more to post 
the inventory and plans online. While there are significant limitations on resources not far below 
the 10,000 “line”, our experience shows that systems serving 10,000 or more have the resources 
and capacity to host this information on the municipal/water system website.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
12 
 
EPA is proposing a requirement for 
systems to validate the accuracy of 
non-lead service lines in their 
inventory that were categorized using 
methods other than records review or 
visual inspection of at least two points 
along the line. EPA is requesting 
comment on the number of validations 
required, the proposed 95 percent 
confidence level approach used to 
develop the number of validations 
required, the criteria for which 
methods used to categorize non-lead 
service lines should be included in the 
validation pool (including whether 
non-lead lines categorized based on 
records should be subject to 
validation), and the seven-year 
timeline for systems on a 10-year 
replacement deadline to complete the 
validation requirements. 
For many NTNCs the service/supply line can be visually inspected at one point.  This new 
requirement would necessitate an excavation or supplemental records review for every NTNC. 
Clarity around distinguishing between community and NTNCs should be provided since digging 
at all NTNCs state-wide is prohibitive for each system to engage and mobilize individually for a 
single or very small number of lines. If adequate records exist and a visual inspection can be 
performed at the building inlet, that should satisfy the validation requirements and this needs to 
be clarified in the rule.  
 
For community systems, there should not be a timeframe that records are considered less 
reliable, if they have been documented to be accurate within a set range of acceptance (90-95% 
for example). Vermont has many old water systems where some things have not yet changed. A 
records review should be adequate evidence for an inventory determination.  
 
Perhaps consider a validation process through which a 5% audit is performed to confirm the 
records, regardless of age or pipe material.  
 
We do not believe that including non-lead service lines, categorized based on a records review in 
the validation pool would be worthwhile. 
 
In terms of validation of non-lead lines, this directive creates a considerable burden on systems 
that may have limited or no information pertaining to its materials, especially those that were 
built post-lead ban.  Requiring 2 points of validation in a northern climate state would mean 
digging 6+ feet down to inspect portions of lines.  Also, the regulation is not clear whether it is 2 
points of validation per ownership segment or 2 in general. If 2 per segment, it would mean 
digging 3 holes per service line (assuming a visual inspection inside the building is possible for 
the fourth point of inspection). That is incredibly disruptive due to the depths at which services 
are buried in Vermont, which likely -if found lead- would lead to release.  Clarity is needed on the 
number of visual validations and those lines specifically that need to be validated.  Vermont 
DWGPD recommends creating a framework under which a system can do some truthing of their 
records and if documented to be “X%” accurate, that the rest of the inventory is assumed to be 
accurate.  
 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
13 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Seven years seems to be an appropriate window for the completion of the validation, but only if 
BIL funding continues past the expected 5 year timeframe. Without additional support and 
resources, the water systems will be on their own and unable to proceed under that timeline. 
 
Comment on establishing a deadline 
for systems to identify all unknown 
service lines prior to their service line 
replacement deadlines. 
Vermont DWGPD supports the need to identify all unknown lines and anticipate having more 
unknown lines than lead or GRR lines, however, without expanded/extended BIL funding or 
related funding, the systems will be “on their own” to do this work and the growth in the State 
program will retract because of the end of the BIL funding term. Additional state resources and 
funding are necessary to meet this directive.  
 
Almost by definition, GRR lines are on the homeowner property and therefore likely homeowner 
owned. While BIL includes funding for full removal of the private side, once BIL money “goes 
away”, if after 7 years the systems identify the unknown lines, and they are lead or GRR there is 
no funding support left to aid in their removal.  
 
Clarification is needed whether it is sufficient to say a line is “confirmed not lead” due to its age 
or diameter. Is that sufficient to inventory that the line is not categorized as “unknown”? 
Comment on a requirement for 
systems to update their service line 
replacement plans if there are any 
changes, such as changes to laws and 
policies applicable to full service line 
replacement.  
There is concern in Vermont and confusion on whether replacement plans are required under the 
LCRR prior to 10/16/2024. In light of changes from the LCRR to the LCRI, it is too late to pivot and 
require the plans to be updated and submitted by 10/16/2024 that meet the LCRI requirements. 
Additionally, States will not have authority to require the updated/changed plans under the LCRI 
until at/after the point where they are due, since the LCRI will not be valid law until at least that 
point in time. It is difficult for a state to tell a system to do something for which we do not have 
authority and then get authority (likely under and extension agreement) under the LCRI the day 
that something is due. 
Lead Action and Trigger Levels 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
14 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
EPA is seeking comment on the 
proposed lead action level of 0.010 
mg/L, as well as comment and 
supporting data on alternative action 
levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, with 
regards to generally effective corrosion 
control treatment and identifying 
systems most at risk of elevated levels 
of lead in drinking water. 
In Vermont, since 2013, there have been 254 sampling events at 117 water systems that have led 
to an action level exceedance at the 15ppb action level.  Should the action level have been 
established at 10ppb, there would have been 427 sampling events at 180 water systems that 
would trigger an action level exceedance. If the action level were 5 ppb, then 681 sampling 
events at 320 water systems would have resulted in an action level exceedance. This is in a State 
that has approximately 640 water systems subject to lead and copper sampling.  To set the 
action level at 5 ppb would require half of our water systems to install corrosion control and/or 
manage a POU filtration program. This would lead to a tremendous burden on the operators and 
water systems.  Provision of corrosion control requires a higher classification of operator and 
more on-going training for that operator.  
EPA is also seeking comment on the 
use of the action level to determine 
when additional public education is 
required, and the use of the same 
action level for public education as for 
the CCT provisions. 
Vermont DWGPD suggests using the same framework as established in the LCR – public 
education following an action level exceedance, with the potential to have a population-
dependent timeline with shorter timelines for smaller systems and longer timelines for larger 
systems.  
EPA is seeking public comment, data, 
and information on the anticipated 
benefits and tradeoffs, including for 
public health and administrative 
burden on systems and States, if more 
small and medium systems are 
required to conduct a detailed OCCT 
demonstration and take other actions 
if they exceed the proposed action 
level of 0.010 mg/L or other lower 
values, while water systems are 
simultaneously required to mandatory 
conduct full service line replacement. 
As detailed elsewhere in these comments, Vermont DWGPD is not supportive of wide-spread 
OCCT demonstrations and pipe loop studies. They are complicated, expensive, and time-
consuming projects that will likely arrive at something that a desktop analysis and comparison of 
existing water quality/situations can bring forth in a much more expedited timeline. The existing 
Optimal CCT Evaluation Technical Recommendations for Primacy Agencies and Public Water 
Systems from EPA is a very powerful document, and with minor updates, could continue to be 
the path forward for assessing OCCT and steer a system toward pH adjustment, corrosion 
inhibitor, or both. In Vermont we have only ever had one water system complete one pipe loop 
study and it was focusing on premise plumbing impacts of switching from disinfection using 
chlorine to chloramines. There is no experience in service line pipe loop studies in the State.  
Corrosion Control Treatment 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
15 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
The proposed determination that the 
CCT treatment technique is feasible 
and prevents known or anticipated 
adverse health effects to the extent 
feasible. 
 Vermont DWGPD supports the continued approach of the treatment technique triggering 
activities that the system must complete to address corrosion and the associated health effects.  
However, Vermont DWGPD does not support requiring the pipe loop studies and complicated 
CCT studies as part of the process and believe that a more expedited framework is possible and 
can be successful at addressing public health concerns, especially at small/very small systems.  
Comment on whether it would be 
more appropriate to require water 
systems to re-optimize again following 
an action level exceedance regardless 
of meeting their optimal water quality 
parameters and to provide the State 
with the authority to waive this 
requirement. 
In Vermont many of our water systems, including those that would be categorized as those with 
multiple exceedances, may already provide CCT, however, due to prolonged periods of water 
stagnation (see elsewhere in comments pertaining to setting a maximum stagnation period), for 
a corrosion inhibitor to be effective there must be routine water movement in the plumbing.  A 
system may only be able to control things at the entry point, so requiring re-optimization every 
time there is an Action Level Exceedance, in absence of other changes or excursions from 
OWQP, would only serve as a paperwork exercise.  Discretion should be afforded to those 
systems who have been deemed optimized who, without excursions, subsequently exceed the 
action level. The state should also be provided with adequate discretion to require re-
optimization regardless of past attempts so long as the state provides written rationale. 
The proposed option for a water 
system to delay OCCT until after the 
system has replaced all of its LSLs and 
GRR service lines, while the system 
achieves at least 20 percent removal 
per year and must have no LSLs, GRR 
service lines, or lead status unknown 
service lines remaining at the end of 
the five-year period. 
It is unclear what happens during this 5-year window, especially if a system continues to have 
action level exceedances. This is essentially permission to exceed and not address things, 
unless/until the system gets to the “next” step of 3 action level exceedances in a 5-year period 
and then need to provide filters.  A concern would be if the system does delay installation of 
OCCT and opt to remove LSLs, if they do not address premise plumbing that 5 years would pass, 
and the system would still have elevated lead and potentially repeated action level exceedances 
at the now lower action level.  While removing the lead/GRR services is important, a system will 
be better and have better water quality upon installation of OCCT. Waiting 5 years to say, “you 
need to install OCCT now” and then giving 2 more years or more is prolonging the situation too 
far.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
16 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
The treatment recommendation and 
CCT study process can take multiple 
years to complete. For systems with 
existing corrosion control, the system 
may be able to alter the existing 
treatment (e.g., increase pH and/or 
orthophosphate dose) without a new 
CCT study on a much faster timeframe 
rather than waiting for study results 
that may recommend that same 
change. EPA is requesting comment on 
whether there are situations and/or 
conditions where existing treatment 
modifications may achieve similar 
lead reductions rather than delaying 
new treatment for two-and-a-half 
years while a study is underway. 
While not attempting to minimize the importance of the corrosion control treatment process, it is 
quite easy and in Vermont we have found success with our approach, especially for our smaller 
systems. This process does not require a pipe loop study or extensive (and expensive) corrosion 
studies.  We rely on the Optimal CCT Evaluation Technical Recommendations for Primacy 
Agencies and Public Water Systems guidance published by EPA which boils things down into 
either 1) pH management, 2) corrosion inhibitor, or 3) both. To take 5-7 years on a study of pH 7.3 
water to assess how to make it less corrosive is wasting valuable time and will take a child from 
the critical developmental period from newborn to kindergarten. A corrosion inhibitor could be 
installed very quickly and then the 6-month monitoring and entry point and distribution WQP 
monitoring would clearly document whether it is working. Maybe there will be tweaks along the 
way, maybe not.  The pipe-loop study will arrive at a similar result, but perhaps many many years 
later. Because of the improvements of the LCR to date, many states are familiar with the best 
options already and could likely do a very quick desktop analysis to point to one of the three 
options identified above, in a far quicker fashion than a pipe loop study or other complicated 
piloting.  Ultimately the water will be better having had corrosion control installed, why delay that 
process? 
 
This would reduce the burden on systems and states, to have clear guidance from the experts, 
that works as a framework into which to insert data and out of which the corrosion method is 
produced.  
Compliance Alternatives for a Lead Action Level Exceedance for Small Community Water Systems and Non-Transient, Non-Community 
Water Systems 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
17 
 
EPA is proposing that small system 
flexibilities be limited to CWSs serving 
3,300 persons and fewer and all 
NTNCWSs for the remaining 
compliance alternatives of point-of-
use devices and plumbing 
replacement. EPA is seeking comment 
on whether the Agency should allow 
systems serving up to 10,000 persons 
(or another threshold) to be eligible to 
use the small system compliance 
flexibility provision. EPA is also seeking 
information, data, and analysis on 
whether point-of-use devices and 
plumbing replacement are as effective 
as OCCT at systems serving up to 
10,000 persons (or another threshold). 
Vermont DWGPD feels that a system size of 3,300 is impossible to manage under the small 
system flexibility aspect and would prefer a much lower number/threshold. Based on the 
systems of this size in Vermont, we do not see this as a viable option for a system of that size to 
oversee removal of all lead-containing infrastructure to 100% completion, nor can it manage a 
POU program of over 1,000 filters and 300+ samples annually.  
 
In Vermont a water system of 3,300 is one of our larger water systems, with large commercial 
centers, hospitals, schools, restaurants, etc. How can we be sure that every school updates 
every valve and lead-containing solder sufficiently so that the system is truly lead-free? It would 
create multiple different qualities of water throughout the system and lead to environmental and 
social justice concerns. This should be limited to systems that have access and/or ownership 
of100% of the plumbing infrastructure such as NTNCs and housing/condominium associations.   
 
Of the 5 water systems in Vermont that are just under the 3,300 population line, three of the 
systems only have a single operator. The remaining two systems have two operators. To expect 
these individuals to manage everything going on at the system, including surface water filtration 
at two of the systems, in addition to the small system flexibility requirements is not feasible.  
 
We are supportive of systems such as NTNCs which own/control their plumbing to be able to 
make plumbing changes and/or manage a POU program, but not for communities of 3,300.  
While it may seem “easier” than installing and maintaining corrosion control, it is our opinion 
that it would not be the case. As required, a system of 3,000 people would be approximately 
1,000 connections. This would require each kitchen in each living unit and every kitchen/food 
prep area in commercial areas. This is well over 1,000 filters. So, the system would need to 
replace filters on a quarterly basis, perhaps 6 months at best, based on manufacturers’ 
suggestions. For systems of this size, that is a full-time job. Then the need to sample from 1/3 of 
those locations (300+) is another full-time job. Then the burden of the deluge of data coming in to 
the state would present other workload issues. At approximately $25 per sample, 300 samples 
would mean $7,500 per year on the POU “efficacy” sampling, to say nothing for the operator’s 
time, travel to/from the lab and/or shipping of samples. This should be compared with the long-
term costs of similar sized systems providing central corrosion control.  
 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
18 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Vermont DWGPD has concerns about systems utilizing Reverse Osmosis (RO) widespread as 
POU. If systems worked to implement RO “under sink”, it would be very impactful on the quantity 
of water needed to supply the system due to the efficiency of RO and the waste stream it creates. 
While the rule seems to favor pitcher/tap filters which would imply GAC or some sort of carbon 
adsorption, there should be quality/scarcity concerns through wide-spread RO use. 
 
In Vermont in 2019 we had a condominium association water system investigate removal of all 
lead-containing infrastructure. For a system of 31 connections (among 7 different condominium 
cluster buildings) to remove plumbing entirely in each residence kitchen and bathroom, it would 
have cost over $615,000. There are concerns that lead-containing infrastructure may be behind 
walls painted with lead paint, contain asbestos insulation or other harmful materials and 
“simply” making plumbing replacements to remove lead solder may open a pandoras box of 
other health effects while pursuing plumbing replacement. And the system will not realize the 
cost almost until they mobilize and line up contractors to do the work.  
 
We are supportive of the flexibility options where it makes sense, for NTNC systems and 
community systems with total ownership and control of its infrastructure.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
19 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
EPA is requesting comment on the 
ability and practicality of point-of-use 
devices to address multiple 
contaminants. 
Reliance on POU for multiple contaminants will in reality have a net-positive effect, however, 
without careful sampling and analysis, it may be short-lived.  In Vermont, we have naturally 
occurring iron and manganese which have documented adverse impacts on GAC filtration 
media, greatly reducing their expected lifespans. When considering multiple contaminants, it 
needs to be a site-specific analysis including periods of water use and stagnation, which can and 
will lead to filter differences, which further leads to multiple different water qualities throughout 
distribution.  There is a reason we regulate so many contaminants at the entry point; because we 
can more closely control and regulate it. We cannot regulate individual homes, we cannot be 
assured that 100% of the filters will work 100% of the time, or if the filters will even remain 
installed in some locations. POU can be seen as a short-term or stopgap measure following 
service line removal or disruption, but relying on them as permanent lead or other contaminant 
treatment is not sustainable. 
 
Additionally, central water system treatment in many water systems is an SRF-eligible expense; 
provision of POU is likely not. It would benefit the system to bond/vote/fund a central project 
once as opposed to on-going POU upkeep. 
 
What will likely happen is that the users will grow disenfranchised with the filter approach, get 
tired of the slow trickle through the filters, and end up taking the filters off or possibly more likely, 
losing patience with the water system and resort to purchasing their own bottled water. 
Public Education 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
20 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
The proposed determination that the 
public education treatment technique 
is feasible and prevents known or 
anticipated adverse health effects to 
the extent feasible. 
If the public education process can be streamlined, templated, and put into plain language, 
Vermont DWGPD feels that a shorter timeframe is acceptable. Further, we feel that the Tier 1 
public notice within 24 hours to be followed likely within 60 days since many systems wait until 
the last minute to sample and get results after the monitoring period, that users will be confused 
about the different documents received and think that they represent different situations and 
occurrences. This effort should not be rushed, nor should it be duplicated.  It is likely that 
systems, especially those serving under 10,000 will not pursue a media campaign or other large 
initiatives and instead rely on direct mailing and outreach. Because of that, there should be an 
effort made to streamline the notice and education processes to not be burdensome on the 
operator or redundant for the reader. Consider having a very small/small/medium/large 
approach and associated timelines with a growing list of required outlets for the information as 
system populations increase. To expect a small mobile home park to do both public notice and 
then 30 days later to do public education is unreasonable and will do more harm than good in the 
long run.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
21 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Comment and supporting data on the 
capacity of water systems to conduct 
some or all of the required public 
education activities in 30 days, or 
another period of time that is less than 
30 or 60 days, after the end of the tap 
sampling period in which a 
systemwide lead action level 
exceedance occurs. 
Vermont DWGPD would like to propose that there be a sliding scale/population-dependent 
schedule of implementation, based on the size of the system and complexity of the education.  
Systems serving under 100 connections will not embark on a media campaign and because of 
that do not need as much time. In Vermont we have templated fill-in-the-blank education 
documents which both assist the system in ease in completion and assist in our review to make 
sure there is nothing confusing, there is no minimizing language, and the ppb/ppm discrepancies 
are addressed. Since approximately 2016 we have pushed systems to distribute this within 24 
hours of notification of the exceedance. If the education is a pamphlet or 1-2 page document in 
plain language, then it could be distributed quite easily and we recommend combining with the 
Tier 1 PN or replacing the Tier 1 PN for very small/small systems, while allowing larger systems to 
work on press releases and more formal media campaigns.  
 
The capacity to complete a public education campaign depends on the system size and 
expected means through which the systems develop their educational documents.  The 
preamble and rule assume that water systems are all municipally owned when in Vermont that is 
not the case. We have fire districts which are essentially sub-municipal entities with their own 
geographic boundaries, and we have numerous ski mountain/resort-related condominiums and 
housing associations.  Requiring a water system to send out a press release for “mass” media 
distribution will not have the subtleties required to identify service areas. In the case of ski 
condos, putting out a press release in Vermont will not reach either the out of state owners or the 
in-state short-term tenants who may only be in town for a weekend. It would require time and 
attention better-focused elsewhere. 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
22 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Data, analyses, and comments on the 
proposed determination that water 
systems are capable of providing 
consumer notices of individual tap 
sampling results within three calendar 
days of obtaining those results, 
regardless of whether the results 
exceed the lead or copper action level, 
or if a longer time frame is needed 
(e.g., three business days, seven 
calendar days, 14 calendar days). 
Vermont DWGPD’s suggestion would be to require the notice within 3 business days, not 
calendar days. In our experience, once it works through the QA/QC process in the lab, it may be 
later in the day/later in the week when the data are released from the lab. If that is late in the day 
on a Thursday or Friday, it essentially cuts it to 1 day for tap notice due to the weekend.  3 
business days is still sufficient to meet the goal and intent of the notice.  
Whether the proposed requirement for 
water systems to offer lead sampling 
to consumers with LSLs, GRR service 
lines, or unknown service lines in the 
notice of service line material is 
effective at reducing adverse health 
effects. 
As discussed elsewhere in these comments, Vermont DWGPD suggests either a “price not to 
exceed” or a “number of samples not to exceed” be established in the regulation, as a proportion 
of the overall connections or population served. Many of our small systems operate at a break-
even budget, something that we are working to improve, but is a situation faced, nonetheless. 
With the breakeven budget, there is not room for operator time or analytic costs should many 
users seek to have samples collected at the water system’s expense.  
 
While individual sampling can be indicative of a problem system-wide, if they are not thought out 
and sampled according to the tiering provisions of the rule, they are more reflective of premise 
plumbing and/or water age within the respective location being sampled, so it is more location-
specific than system health-protective. 
EPA is also requesting comment on the 
requirement for water systems to 
deliver consumer-initiated test results 
within three days of obtaining those 
results. 
If this can be clarified to include 3 business days AND the consumer can provide an email 
address to receive the results, then it should be manageable. If the requirement is to receive, 
print, and deliver/mail then there are many steps necessary, and more time is likely required.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
23 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Whether the types and timing of 
outreach activities proposed for 
systems failing to meet the mandatory 
service line replacement rate are 
appropriate and whether other 
activities should be considered. 
While well intentioned, explaining the calculation will be difficult. Especially if a water system 
gets off to a slow start but exceeds the number of lines required in the most recent year, 
conveying that succinctly will be difficult in absence of EPA-provided templates. 
 
The LCR implementation resources have been found to be very helpful thus far. The more EPA 
can do by way of putting templates together, in plain language, and in a size that is manageable 
by the consumer, will go a long way toward engagement in the various mechanisms of outreach.  
Whether EPA should require systems 
to annually notify consumers if they 
are served by a lead connector, in 
addition to notifications for sites with 
lead, GRR, or lead status unknown 
service lines. 
As discussed elsewhere in these comments, the number of annual certifications, notifications, 
and education documents required are very burdensome. While we do not disagree with their 
importance, any and every effort made to streamline, combine, and consolidate the various 
information required will be of great assistance. This includes provision of EPA templates and 
use of plain language. 
Whether EPA should require additional 
public education requirements to 
further encourage swift service line 
replacement faster than the 10-year 
replacement deadline. For example, 
should water systems that have LSLs, 
GRR service lines, or unknown service 
lines five years after the compliance 
date for the LCRI be required to 
increase the frequency of the 
notification of service line materials 
from annual to once every six months? 
We feel that reducing to 6-months, especially when nothing has “changed” would be 
burdensome on the operator/water system and potentially confusing to the system users. It 
would also require the system to complete updates more frequently and most likely, for the State 
to run queries and analysis to see those candidates who have/have not met their targets. This 
places a considerable burden and has cascading impacts since the State will not have the most 
updated information available.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
24 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Whether the Agency should require 
States, as a condition of primacy, to 
provide translation support to water 
systems that are unable to do so for 
public education materials to 
consumers with limited English 
proficiency 
There needs to be a clearer framework for this. What is a “large” population requiring translation 
by percent users served? There also needs to be a threshold expectation of effort for the water 
system, otherwise if the system does not translate and the State does, there is no turning back 
on State exhausting resources to do so. Having a “gray” option for the State to step in without 
certain attempts or justification by each system, established in the rule, would lead to many 
systems not bothering to do translation and defaulting to the State. Currently our State contract 
is $0.25+ per word for translation services which increases based on the complexity of the 
language. EPA should provide the federally required content in a translated manner to streamline 
and save every state needing to translate the same content. It should also be put into plain 
language to be more easily understood and translated further.  
EPA is also requesting comment on 
additional ways to streamline public 
education and associated certification 
requirements (e.g., combine deadlines 
for systems to conduct public 
education or submit information to the 
State). 
It is unclear what state health organizations and entities will do with the various information 
being sent their way, particularly the results/findings of the site assessments.  In Vermont the 
public drinking water program is run by the Department of Environmental Conservation, the 
Department of Health is separate. How are we to know what they receive and when they receive 
it? Those entities do not have access to SDWIS so there is nowhere to “log” this information. It is 
unclear whether this is something the health agencies are requesting, and if so, why it cannot be 
procured from the drinking water program. Putting something in a regulation enforced by an 
entity that has no knowledge of completion of the task is difficult to manage.  Additionally, what 
is the expectation of the health agency once they receive the documents? 
 
In Vermont we have very limited/non-existent county government. While there are district health 
offices that serve a portion of this role, this sort of information would likely be submitted to 
generically to the State Department of Health and without a clear process and need for the 
reporting; it will likely be received, sit, and go unviewed.  If this is information that is not being 
sought by health agencies, perhaps require that water systems maintain it and make it available 
upon request. 
Additional Requirements For Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
25 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Whether water systems should be 
required to take additional actions 
when the system exceeds the lead 
action level multiple times and if so, 
what actions are appropriate and 
feasible, and when these additional 
actions should be required under the 
LCRI. 
Vermont DWGPD is supportive of the additional actions (education, filters, etc.) prescribed by 
the rule, however, this is seemingly only a good fit for small systems that are all the same 
infrastructure/Tier.  When it gets to bigger systems or more diverse systems, provision of filters to 
every user may be unnecessary and as discussed elsewhere in these comments in reference to 
any other “filter first” approach, may lead to a false sense of safety, not knowing truly what else is 
in the water and what the efficacy of the filters would be.  We are concerned that poorly 
maintained filters can promote bacteriological growth (particularly in non-chlorinating systems, 
of which Vermont has many) and can also release elevated lead and other concentrated 
constituents into the water. Situations like supply chain problems and sourcing issues could 
eventually lead to greater public health concerns than the original reason the filters seek to 
address.  
Whether EPA should use three action 
level exceedances in a five-year period 
for identifying systems with multiple 
action level exceedances where 
additional action is warranted and, 
whether additional actions should be 
required sooner, or later, than the five-
year period, or whether EPA should 
use a modified metric (number of 
consecutive action level exceedances 
in a set time period) or a different 
metric entirely (i.e., based on one or 
more factors other than the number of 
action level exceedances in a set time 
period). 
The importance and severity of this timeline and approach seem to be at odds with a system’s 
ability to take 5 years to remove lead services and defer the installation of OCCT.  If the desire is 
to have these systems provide more education and filters and then eventually address the 
corrosion, allowing them 5 years to remove service lines affords them the 5 year timeline where 
they are doing everything “right”.   
 
If the 5-year OCCT deferral be removed, as Vermont DWGPD suggests elsewhere in these 
comments, then this approach is acceptable, however, it must be understood that it may take 
some time to have a passivating coating applied through corrosion inhibitors, so again, the 
system is doing everything “right” but still having an exceedance, which needs to be conveyed to 
users.  The likelihood is that with education and provision of filters the users will lose all 
confidence in the water system and think that the system is not addressing the situation.   
EPA is specifically seeking any 
information, data, or analysis on 
whether the proposed public 
education activities support 
preventing adverse health effects in 
this situation.  
See comment above; if a system is allowed to defer OCCT installation for 5 years, the approach 
should be able to explain that and document that work is being done to address the situation.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
26 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
EPA is also requesting comment on 
whether systems should be required to 
conduct more than one (e.g., two or 
three) of the public education 
activities proposed. 
The complexity, frequency, and extent of the public education should be based on the 
population/size impacted. Very small systems should only be required to do a single method, 
while large cities may need larger media campaigns.  It should not be the same expectation for 
all systems.  
Whether EPA should require water 
systems to make filters certified to 
reduce lead and replacement 
cartridges, along with instructions for 
use, available to all consumers within 
60 days of a system having multiple 
action level exceedances and whether 
there are any supporting or contrary 
data on whether the proposed filter 
requirement would be protective of 
public health. 
If there is new plumbing infrastructure in documented non-LSL or GRR service lines, are filters 
needed? It would be a better use of system resources to direct filters only where truly needed 
and not take a “filter first” approach. A tiered risk-based approach should be taken for the 
requirement of filters, especially in situations with a system with 3 exceedances in a 5-year 
period, especially if not all of the infrastructure and premise plumbing is the same.  
The proposed requirements for 
systems to develop a filter plan and 
submit to the State after the system 
has multiple action level exceedances 
for the first time, and whether EPA 
should require systems to take 
additional actions to facilitate filter 
distribution. 
Vermont DWGPD questions whether the filter plan is something that needs to go to the State for 
review and approval.  We are not in the business of procurement or purchasing equipment like 
this, so what is the value added in having that extra step? Can a system instead certify that they 
have 1) budget, 2) procurement, 3) distribution covered?   
 
If the State does need to review/approve these, the rule needs to have criteria so that every time 
it is not a judgement call. Who are we to say whether the price is right or the timeline is right? And 
as the market demands change and availability to procure filters changes due to competition, it 
will look like the State is allowing lesser protection and applying less stringent standards on 
certain systems, which is an uncomfortable situation to be in for a regulator.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
27 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Alternative requirements for systems 
with multiple action level exceedances 
to provide filters to their consumers, 
such as requiring water systems to 
provide filters and replacement 
cartridges to consumers served by an 
LSL, GRR service line, or unknown 
service line or to all consumers, or to 
require systems to consult with the 
State upon meeting the criteria for 
multiple action level exceedances, 
after which the State determines the 
appropriate action to reduce lead 
exposure. 
Vermont DWGPD would support a more targeted filtration requirement as established in the Rule 
and would prefer for the “gray” and discretion to not be up to the state. This could put us in an 
uncomfortable situation explaining why one neighbor receives filters and one neighbor does not.  
Consider LSL/GRR/Unknown and past sampling results with those homes that may be “lead 
free” or have been constructed/renovated post 2014.  
An additional provision providing 
discretion to States to allow systems 
with multiple action level exceedances 
to discontinue the proposed required 
actions sooner if the system takes 
actions (e.g., installs optimized or re-
optimized CCT, completes mandatory 
service line replacement) and is at or 
below the lead action level for two 
consecutive monitoring periods. 
Vermont DWGPD is supportive of the ability to discontinue the required actions following 
installation of OCCT/completion of the applicable small system flexibility option/removes LSLs 
sooner and documents through two sequential 6-month sampling periods that it was effective.  
Whether, in addition to the proposed 
requirements, EPA should provide 
States discretion to determine 
appropriate action following a multiple 
action level exceedance that is 
tailored to meet specific system 
needs. 
Giving states discretion to enforce the plan laid out in the LCRI, would assist States in several 
ways. NTNC systems that are struggling with action level exceedances but have provided 
alternative sources of water until treatment is installed would directly benefit from this. Affording 
small, rural water systems financial relief through flexibility while they install treatment reduces 
the financial burden placed on systems and communities that have already stretched 
themselves thin to install OCCT. 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
28 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities  
Whether CWSs should be required to 
collect more samples and/or to 
sample more frequently in schools and 
child care facilities.  
Vermont has an existing school sampling program whereby every tap in every school is required 
under state law to be sampled once every 3 years.  We intend to grant waivers for the school 
sampling requirements. 
 
We have required school sampling for lead since 2019. It has been a very successful program; 
however, it took considerable engagement from the state Department of Health, Agency of 
Education, and Department of Environmental Conservation.  The water system 
operators/municipalities are so far removed from the process, that placing the burden solely on 
the water system would likely not lead to the success that is sought. We suggest there be better 
integration with other stakeholders for that to be successful and not leave it up to the system to 
manage alone.   
The proposed provision to allow States 
to issue waivers to community water 
systems from the requirement for lead 
sampling in schools and child care 
facilities during the five-year period 
after the LCRI compliance date if the 
facility was sampled for lead after 
January 1, 2021 but prior to the LCRI 
compliance date and the sampling 
otherwise meets the waiver 
requirements of § 141.92(h). 
Vermont DWGPD asks EPA to reconsider the January 1, 2021 date. Considerable efforts have 
been made nationwide as part of the WIIN grants.  The preamble discusses impacts from Covid, 
however, if sampling pre-covid reflected normal operation and the state/governing entity 
overseeing the program has accepted and signed-off on the water quality results, then the data 
should be accepted and integrated into the program. Otherwise, it would be millions of dollars of 
wasted effort to at least perform the first sweep of sampling at schools that the WIIN grants 
provided. 
 
Vermont DWGPD would urge EPA to consider moving the date to January 1, 2014, as the 2014 
date coincides with the Reduction of Lead in Drinking Water Act. 
 
Should waivers be granted, it would be helpful to know which provisions of the LCRI would not 
apply – such as systems maintaining a list of schools and child cares, provision of public 
education, etc. as it could be redundant with existing state initiatives.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
29 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Whether or not to allow States to waive 
the requirements of § 141.92 for CWSs 
in schools and child care facilities that 
use and maintain filters certified to 
reduce lead, and if so, whether the 
waiver should only be allowed where 
schools and child care facilities are 
required by State or local law to install 
POU devices and maintain them. 
The difficulty in a “filter first” approach like this, without knowing the water quality and water use 
patterns is that too much is left unknown, and it provides a false sense of confidence in the 
filters. There is a difference between filtering out 11ppb vs 100ppb in terms of loading on the 
filter. Without having the water quality data, schools and systems would be guessing.  
 
Vermont has required school lead sampling since 2019 and in our experience, it is difficult 
getting filters for high-velocity kitchen fixtures, especially at larger schools which essentially are 
commercial grade kitchens that need high volumes of water. Opting to put on a filter where it is 
not needed will only frustrate the kitchen staff and reducing flow from 5gpm+ to much less due 
to the “trickle” that comes out of a POU filter will likely lead to their hasty removal from use by 
on-site staff or instead changing behavior and using what may have previously been a dish or 
handwashing only sink that has a high velocity to being incorporated into cooking; something of 
which the water system would have no knowledge.  
The minimum requirements for States 
to provide a waiver (e.g., should the 
waiver be limited to locations where 
the filter use is required by State or 
local law; should the waiver be limited 
to locations where State or local law 
requires periodic sampling or testing 
to ensure proper filter use). 
Vermont DWGPD will seek to implement waivers to entire systems given the existing state 
regulation for sampling in schools and child cares.  It would be preferential to have a state-wide 
waiver instead of system-wide, however, if the most “macro” scale would be system-by-system, 
presumably it would be easy to grant and track such waivers when we have a state-wide 
approach.  Vermont DWGPD supports the option afforded in 141.92(h)(4) for the one waiver for 
all community water systems subject to a state-wide sampling program. 
 
Whether EPA should require CWSs to 
make school and child care facility 
sampling results publicly available, 
and if so, how frequently and in what 
manner. 
Vermont has made all lead sampling data from our school sampling program public and will 
continue to do so (leadresults.vt.gov).  Because we have the existing framework it will not be an 
added burden to us, however, there is no reference to the receipt and management of that data. 
Is it expected to also live in SDWIS and be reported to EPA or otherwise be available as part of the 
SDWA program? There is reference to submitting it to the state within 30 days of receipt, but then 
what is the expectation on the State’s end? 
Reporting and Recordkeeping  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
30 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
EPA is requesting comment on the 
expansion of the inventory reporting to 
include lead connectors and non-lead 
service lines. 
If this is done, the due date for the initial inventory must be extended.  Making a system go back 
and do a lot of this ‘again’ is counterproductive. Many systems are working through this process 
right now and to change the expectations is not fair nor is it constructive.  If this information is 
sought, it should be done while there is BIL funding and support, not once the BIL funding is 
tapering off after the system has exhausted considerable resources to develop the initial 
inventory.  
EPA has heard concern over the ability 
of States to review all required site 
sample plans and provide approvals in 
time for the first tap monitoring period, 
and is requesting comment on 
whether EPA should consider a phased 
approach or alternate approach to 
reduce the burden on States following 
the rule compliance date. 
Yes, Vermont DWGPD shares this concern and asks that following the initial inventory that a 
prioritization scheme be created, assessing the biggest impact first. We have approximately 1.25 
FTE split between 2 staff who implement the LCR/LCRR/LCRI. Requiring so many sampling plans 
on a short run time with important public health information would lead to things being missed, 
especially if the related sampling schedules need to be updated in SDWIS too. 
 
Vermont DWGPD asks that both the sampling and sample siting plan review/approval be phased 
in based on vulnerability/public health protection, over a series of a few years, similar to the way 
other rules have been staged.  
 
Additionally, as a small state, Vermont has experienced difficulty procuring sufficient laboratory 
equipment for analysis. Wide-mouth bottles are hard to come by and with the potential re-
setting of standard monitoring and requiring 1st and 5th liter sampling, demands on bottles will 
rise exponentially.  Allowing a phased sampling approach will allow the market to respond to 
those demands.  It will also reduce that impact on the analytic laboratories who will see an 
increase in demand. 
EPA is requesting comment on 
whether States should be required to 
maintain records related to 
distribution system and site 
assessments conducted by water 
systems. 
If EPA can develop or suggest a template with the necessary information, it would make sense for 
that information to be submitted and recorded by the State.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
31 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
EPA is requesting comment on 
whether States should be required to 
maintain documentation of 
determinations of more stringent 
implementation, including but not 
limited to conditions or approvals 
related to reduced compliance 
monitoring and additional information 
required to conduct a review or 
designate OCCT. 
Vermont DWGPD is supportive of States maintaining documentation of topics where they may be 
more stringent. Presumably this may be included in special primacy considerations or the 
primacy application, but in absence of that, we support maintaining such 
records/documentation and for directing the water systems to maintain their own associated 
records.  
Compliance Dates 
Whether it is practicable for water 
systems to implement notification and 
risk mitigation provisions after full and 
partial service line replacement (§ 
141.84(h)), notification of a service line 
disturbance (§ 141.85(g)), and 
associated reporting requirements 
(§141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) upon the 
effective date of the LCRI.  
The pre-replacement notification for routine work is reasonable; there should be adequate 
flexibility for emergency work or other unplanned events.   
 
The annual notification in 141.90 (e) and (f) are discussed in more detail elsewhere in these 
comments, but we ask that wherever possible the EPA combine, consolidate and streamline the 
annual notifications, education, and certification requirements and provide templates of plain 
language to be easily understood by water systems, otherwise confusing or technical content 
will not be absorbed or understood and it will result in phone calls to both water system and 
State personnel. The CCR should be used for community systems and a consolidated/combined 
NTNC annual notice be created with as much required content as feasible.  
Whether earlier alternative 
compliance dates for LCRI are 
practicable such that water systems 
transition directly from LCR to LCRI in 
less than three years (i.e., one or two 
years) based on the assumption that 
water systems would comply with the 
LCR until the LCRI compliance date. 
Vermont DWGPD is not supportive of an earlier alternative compliance date, especially given the 
current workload under the LCRR (inventories) and anticipated forthcoming PFAS regulations, 
more time would be better as would the ability to stagger the initial sampling under the regulation 
based on vulnerability, as discussed elsewhere in these comments.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
32 
 
Request for Comment 
Vermont DWGPD Response 
Whether there are other LCRR 
provisions besides the initial inventory 
and notifications of service line 
material for which the October 16, 
2024 compliance date should be 
retained. 
Vermont DWGPD does not identify other provisions in need of being implemented sooner than 
the compliance date of the LCRI. 
Other Proposed Revisions to 40 CFR Part 141 
EPA is requesting comment on the 
proposed requirement for systems to 
provide an informational statement in 
the CCR about the school sampling 
requirements with the information that 
consumers can contact the school or 
child care facility about any potential 
sampling results. 
If there is a requirement to provide additional information about school sampling, there needs to 
be flexibility (up to state discretion) in the required content/language to discuss existing state 
sampling programs. If a state, school, or water system has a waiver due to existing sampling 
requirement, it would only confuse the matter to have the CCR advertising all the different 
options and requests for sampling, etc. Further, Vermont has a state-wide sampling program 
more stringent and robust than the LCRI, so we would be seeking to grant a waiver to all 
systems; in that case, we would seek to not be required to include reference to LCRI school 
sampling options and instead provide state-specific references and information such as the 
state website with school data and other associated resources.  
EPA is proposing to define a two-foot 
maximum length of connectors. EPA 
proposes that “connectors” that 
exceed two feet in length be treated as 
a service line. EPA is requesting 
comment on the defined length of a 
connector.  
 
While 2-feet seems arbitrary, Vermont DWGPD has not been informed by its water systems that 
this definition poses difficulty or hardship or that a different length is required.  However, as 
discussed elsewhere, Vermont DWGPD has concern that disregarding a 23-inch connector as 
not contributing as much lead as a 25-inch service line segment is counter to public health 
protection, especially if there is galvanized piping downstream of the respective 
connector/segment.  
  
 
 
 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
33 
 
Below are other comments that were not specifically asked for /addressed in the EPA request for comments but are based on Vermont 
DWGPD’s and are being submitted for EPA’s consideration: 
Subject 
Vermont DWGPD Comment 
Non-lead validation 
EPA is proposing that systems with 1,500 or fewer non-lead service lines in their validation pools validate at 
least 20% of lines in the pool. If two points of visual inspection are required, then this may be very 
burdensome for VT’s small CWSs. As discussed elsewhere, being in a northern climate, digging potholes or 
other work to visually inspect a service line will likely mean going 6-feet or deeper, which will be cost and time 
intensive and likely create disturbances for any lead lines found.   
Gender inclusivity 
Vermont DWGPD supports changing public health language from “women” to “people” or “persons”. 
 
Abbreviations, if used, should have an explanation included. The mandatory education statement doesn't 
explain what "IQ" is. Changing the word to "intelligence" communicates the point without having to elaborate 
or assume that the reader know what an "intelligence quotient" is. 
Access/Control  
Systems are required to make an attempt to get access for full LSL upon a location’s change in ownership. 
This is an undue burden on the water system to track purchase and sales. Instead, there should be 
information included as a statement as part of the annual notice/education/certification/CCR required for 
those with lead lines who are new owners and to engage with the system personnel should they have 
questions or wish to have their portion replaced.    
Inaccurate examples – 
small system impact.  
The preamble refers to Quincy Massachusetts as a small water system and their efforts to do public 
education, website content etc.  Quincy Massachusetts serves 103,000 people and this misses the mark for 
the capabilities of a truly small system and what their capacity is. It is unclear whether EPA assessed truly 
small or very small systems, such as a mobile home park cooperative serving 27 connections. That is a 
different scope and far less capacity than Quincy, MA.   
Maximum Stagnation Time There needs to be a maximum stagnation time established in the rule. Vermont DWGPD proposes 18 hours, 
consistent with the EPA’s 3Ts based on the research and analysis that went into that publication. It is not our 
desire to lean on this number to authorize us to invalidate high sample results, but more to steer operators 
toward good sample collection and explain, in regulation, why they should not be sampling at locations that 
do not see normal operation.  It would be more beneficial to issue a violation for improper sampling 
technique than it would be to have carte blanche authority to invalidate samples. If we don’t accept samples 
taken with greater than 18-hour stagnation, the hope is that eventually they will stop sampling those 
locations.  
 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
34 
 
Subject 
Vermont DWGPD Comment 
This is a real issue and one we face in Vermont due to the residential areas surrounding ski mountains. These 
locations may be vacant for considerable portions of the year, information the operator may not be aware of, 
until the sample comes back elevated, and the sampling may not reflect normal operation. 
 
Vermont DWGPD would support for “waiving” the maximum stagnation time if occupants collect samples 
under instruction from the operator and to set a maximum number or tap sampling periods for which 
samples could be invalidated due to exceeding the stagnation period, but especially in the tightened 
situation the LCRI creates with limited ability to “test out” of needing to install OCCT, we will continue to 
chase our tails over high results due to water that sat for too long.  
9-year sampling waiver 
Vermont DWGPD does not anticipate pursuing the 9-year sampling waiver. It is too burdensome for state and 
water system staff to maintain and adhere to.  
Previously replaced lead 
connectors 
There is discussion in the preamble about systems being required to identify locations of previously replaced 
lead connectors.  This can pose a significant burden and could essentially double the time required to 
complete the initial or baseline inventory. 
 
Instead, we suggest that the definition of Galvanized Requiring Replacement be amended to include 
galvanized that is currently downstream of a lead connector or if it is unknown whether it ever was 
downstream of a lead connector. Requiring a system to inventory something that is no longer present is 
confusing and will lead to data integrity issues when we have multiple entries for each service line of past vs. 
current infrastructure. 
Filtration after OCCT 
installation 
There needs to be a better-defined “offramp” through which a system that is either lead-free and/or installs 
OCCT where they previously relied on filters to address corrosion can remove/cease use of filters.  Vermont 
DWGPD recommends an unfiltered testing protocol or study to assess efficacy of OCCT and reduction of 
lead results.  Filters can be a very effective tool, but we feel that they are not a permanent option long-term. 
There needs to be consideration of the eventuality that OCCT is required.  
Data management needs 
As with every new regulation, there is the need for detailed data management instructions. Often these come 
sometime after the final rule promulgation but given the complexity and intertwined nature of the 3 active 
rules (LCR, LCRR, LCRI), these need to be done immediately.  There is reference to reporting a lead action 
level exceedance to the EPA within 15 days of the close of the monitoring period. This is not the standard data 
submission protocol employed, so how will this need to be done? 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
35 
 
Subject 
Vermont DWGPD Comment 
Laboratory 
Integration/improvement 
Currently many labs from which Vermont DWGPD receive data know to provide total coliform and E-coli 
positive data immediately. It may take up to 10-15 days to get completed lead/copper data. There are 
concerns with lab capacity and customer service or QA/QC capacity at laboratories to provide validated data 
to States in a very timely manner. It is confusing and misleading to require Tier 1 public notice for something 
that happened several weeks ago.  Lab availability must also consider other regulations, such as PFAS, which 
will have tremendous impacts on lab capacity. As stated elsewhere, these decisions must be made when 
assessing the capacity of the full program, not a single regulation.  
Financial impact of LSLR 
The preamble discusses that lead service line replacement is less financially impactful on a system than is 
installation of corrosion control treatment.  In Vermont we have experienced prices anywhere from $4,000 to 
$20,000 per building to replace a lead service line.  To say that this is cheaper/less impactful than installing 
corrosion control is off target. While not attempting to minimize the importance of replacing lead service 
lines, it is important to understand the context and relative prices.  If a system has only a handful of service 
lines that are on the higher end of the spectrum that we have experienced – meaning they would need to be 
re-located due to legacy trees or changes in building access etc. then it would cost more than installation of 
corrosion control, even factoring in the on-going expenditures associated with corrosion control treatment.  
Existing data 
The LCRI identifies that if a system has a second action level exceedance that the system will 
resume/complete the OCCT steps. However, there is no discussion in terms of how far to look back. Does 
this include data under the LCR? Is there a “window” in which the data is valid or invalid? Should there be a 
determination made based on the laboratory reporting level, which may have changed since 1991? 
 
Vermont DWGPD asks for clarity in how to integrate the existing rule with the future rule as it applies to 
triggers/thresholds for needing to install treatment. 
 
Additionally, during this time of transition from LCR to LCRR to LCRI, while the LCRR is still completely “valid” 
rule, there needs to be guidance or at least a determination about what happens TODAY if a system has an 
action level exceedance so that they may plot the correct course.  Does that need to be resolved under LCR 
framework, LCRR, or expected LCRI?  This is particularly impactful given the changes in small system 
flexibility eligibility and options.  When the RTCR was implemented, there was clear guidance that any 
action/activity triggered under the TCR must be resolved under the TCR framework. We have seen no such 
statements about LCR, LCRR, or LCRI implementation and especially as we approach October 16, 2024, are 
uncertain how to proceed following an action level exceedance.  

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
36 
 
Subject 
Vermont DWGPD Comment 
Customer requested 
samples 
There needs to be guardrails put on the requirements for customer-requested sampling and better 
information about who pays for the analysis of the sampling.  The rule is inconsistent about when certain 
things need to or do not need to be paid for by the water system; customer-initiated sampling is one such 
item in the rule.  Water systems cannot budget for an unknown and unanticipated volume of sampling. 
Occasional sampling may be able to be absorbed into a budget, but both the operator’s time and the analytic 
costs need to be paid for.  We suggest creating a ratio of % of service lines per year as a cap that can be paid 
for by the water system, with a “not to exceed” either number of samples or cost incurred. Otherwise, if there 
is another national news story and a renewal in attention and focus, systems will be buried with requests and 
budgets will be blown, leaving the response to be first-come first-served until the budget is drained and not 
being able to consider later requests at more vulnerable locations. 
 
There are also data management concerns pertaining to sampling points/sampling locations leading to 
confusion, especially with high volumes of samples. 
Water Quality Parameter 
monitoring framework 
Vermont DWGPD disagrees with the approach established in the rule under which small/medium systems 
that are not exceeding the action level do not need to monitor and report water quality parameters.  Sampling 
for Water Quality Parameters is the only way to know outside of required Lead/Copper sampling that the 
OCCT is working. We have found that it is an effective way to “catch” an issue before it arises in LCR 
sampling, especially when a system is on reduced monitoring.  It has been our practice to require continued 
entry point WQP monitoring for any system that implements pH adjustment or a corrosion inhibitor to ensure 
on-going efficacy of treatment. We will expect to continue to do so and encourage the complicated 
framework of when a system does or does not need to collect WQP be streamlined. 
Annual notice/certification Vermont DWGPD requests a review and change to §141.90. If a system will be updating its inventory annually, 
much of the annual certification information pertaining to things like lead connectors replaced, failing to 
meet customer-initiated replacement requests, completion of customer-initiated line replacements, 
updating the # of lead lines replaced, GRR replaced, unknown identified etc. as required by this section. It 
seems cumbersome to require individual certifications when this all could be incorporated into a line item in 
an inventory.   
 
Should this be the path forward, States will need somewhere for this data to “go”, presumably SDWIS with 
easy reporting information for EPA. 

Vermont Drinking Water and Groundwater Protection Division (DWGPD) Comments – LCRI EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
37 
 
Subject 
Vermont DWGPD Comment 
Site 
Assessment/Distribution 
Assessment 
Site assessments could be an invaluable tool for States to compel systems to really dig into exceedances 
whose causes are not immediately obvious. Instead, their requirement seems to unfairly burden small 
systems by treating every individual sample collected to a significantly reduced Action Level, as its own 
Action Level Exceedance, complete with WQP testing, special purpose Lead and Copper testing, CCT 
recommendation and follow up testing. 
 
States should have the discretion to forego this requirement of small systems where the underlying cause of 
the action level exceedance is readily apparent by examining monthly reporting, Entry Point WQPs, or 
occupancy status. 
NTNC Education 
requirements post-
exceedance 
Vermont DWGPD asks that EPA create templates/guidance for the creation of posters and pamphlets 
referenced in 141.85(b)(4)(a)(i) and (ii) 
OCCT 
The LCRR was very clear in the types of treatment that constitute OCCT and expressly stated that 
polyphosphate was not considered CCT. Similar statements/assertions should be included in the LCRI since 
that information is already “out” and may be misunderstood as states work to transition from LCR to LCRR to 
LCRI.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1854 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 of 2 
 
Viken Detection’s Comments on U.S. EPA’s Proposed  
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements Regulation 
 
DOCKET ID NO. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
Viken Detection is a leading technology provider with a longstanding history of protecting 
children and families from lead poisoning by contact with contaminated paint. Our PB200™ 
family of handheld lead paint analyzers have been on the market since 2015 and are used 
by thousands of housing inspectors to identify the presence of lead paint on and within 
building materials.  
 
We commend the Federal government and EPA for their efforts to mandate the detection and 
remediation of lead pipes in our drinking water systems.  
 
With our background and industry expertise in lead detection and passionate mission to 
children and keeping families safe from lead poisoning, we have several recommendations 
regarding the EPA’s role in offering guidance, regulations and potential funding to facilitate 
efficient use of technology to solve this public health problem.  
 
We believe the list of recommendations below will not only ultimately benefit public health, 
but also be beneficial to technology developers, the U.S. government, and the EPA, as well as 
the end users and agencies who will have a need to leverage innovative technologies to 
identify and remediate lead service lines in their communities as quickly, efficiently, and cost-
effectively as possible. 
 
We encourage the EPA to consider the following:  
• 
Exploring technologies capable of detecting lead pipes in the water system which do 
not require costly and disruptive excavation in private and public spaces. 
• 
Preparing guidance for technology providers to ensure a clear path for bringing EPA-
sanctioned tools and methodologies to market for widespread adoption. 
• 
Setting up and facilitating the execution of testing protocols at publicly accessible 
facilities, so that technology providers can rapidly determine the efficacy of new tools 
in development. 
• 
Funding field studies aimed at understanding the best current and proposed 
methods of lead detection and how to ensure safe drinking water after interdictory 
actions. 
• 
Allowing states and municipalities to qualify for available replacement funding if they 
are actively participating in trial or research study activities aimed at detecting lead 
pipe stock and taking later action to address the findings. 
• 
Publishing the results of EPA coordinated trials to facilitate increased adoption by 
state and regional users attempting to comply with the federal requirements. 
 

2 of 2 
 
In parallel with the EPA’s proposed changes to the Lead and Copper Improvement regulation, 
Viken Detection is continuing our development efforts committed to keeping children and 
families safe from the effects of lead poisoning. We are seeking partnerships from academic 
institutions, research foundations, state and municipal public works agencies, and any other 
interested parties for field evaluations and potential applications for funded use case 
research to determine the efficacy of new technologies in this area. 
 
About Viken Detection 
Viken equips public safety organizations, including customs and border protection agencies, 
law enforcement agencies and the public with effective, safe, and affordable detection tools 
to thwart imminent threats. The company’s innovative suite of handheld x-ray imagers, 
chemical analyzers, vehicle scanners and elemental analyzers are proven and reliable in 
their respective markets. Viken Detection is headquartered in Burlington, Massachusetts. For 
more information, please visit www.vikendetection.com.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0775 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
January 31, 2024 
 
 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington DC   
 
 
 
Subject: 
The Lead and Copper Rule Improvements regulation, Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Dear EPA Assistant Administrator for Water Radhika Fox: 
 
The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) maintains primacy for implementation of the Safe 
Drinking Water Act (SDWA) in the state of Wisconsin. Except where noted in the letter below, WDNR is writing 
to express its strong support for the comments submitted by the Association of State Drinking Water 
Administrators (ASDWA), developed in collaboration with state drinking water primacy agencies on the 
proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) during the public comment period between 12/05/2023 – 
2/5/2024. In addition to expressing our general support of the comments in the cover letter and Appendices A and 
B submitted by ASDWA, in the text below we highlight, expand upon, clarify, and in a few cases disagree with 
ASDWA’s comments.   
 
General Requirements and Action Levels (§ 141.80) 
 
The WDNR emphasizes its agreement with ASDWA’s recommendation that EPA dedicate additional resources to 
support state primacy agency administration of the LCRI. Throughout the ASDWA comment package, there are 
numerous requests for the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to provide clarification on rule requirements, 
and for EPA to develop and provide states with implementation support and guidance. WDNR suggests that EPA 
consider meeting with ASDWA and states to clarify the rule ahead of its final promulgation. Additionally, 
WDNR suggests that EPA collaborate with ASDWA and states to develop the recommended implementation 
guidance prior to the rule compliance date.  
 
Lead 90th percentiles should be calculated using the highest lead results, regardless of sampling site tier. It will be 
difficult for states to calculate lead 90th percentiles and for systems to understand how 90th percentiles are 
calculated if the process requires picking and choosing results based on tiers. It would also be difficult to justify to 
the public why the highest lead results are not included in the calculation. Using only the highest results from the 
required number of sampling locations will both simplify the 90th percentile calculation and better protect public 
health [§ 141.80 (c)].     
 
Definitions (§ 141.2) 
 
WDNR highlights the ASDWA requests for clarification from EPA on the definitions listed below.  
 
Clarify the definition of “connector” to indicate whether anything over the defined length (currently two feet) 
is considered a “service line”. This has a significant impact on what is considered a “galvanized requiring 
replacement service line” and should be clear in the definition.  
 
 
Tony Evers, Governor 
Adam N. Payne, Secretary 
 Telephone 608-266-2621 
Toll Free 1-888-936-7463 
TTY Access via relay - 711 
State of Wisconsin 
DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES 
101 S. Webster Street 
Box 7921 
Madison WI  53707-7921 
 dnr.wi.gov
wisconsin.gov 

Page 2 
 
Clarify that the definition of “service line” includes systems that do not have water mains. This change would 
make the definition of “service line” consistent with Exhibit 4 on p. 8 of EPA’s 2023 Developing and 
Maintaining a Service Line Inventory: Small Entity Compliance Guide. The proposed LCRI defines a 
“service line” as a portion of pipe that connects the water main to the building inlet. By contrast, Exhibit 4 of 
EPA’s 2023 guidance shows examples of systems without water mains, where the service lines include pipes 
that deliver water from a wellhouse to a building inlet; from a pressure tank to a building inlet; and from one 
building to another building. If the proposed LCRI definition of a service line remains unchanged, most non-
transient, non-community water systems (NTNCWS) and many non-municipal community water systems 
(CWS) will not have any service lines because they do not have water mains in their distribution system. As 
such, these systems would not be subject to the any LCRI service line inventory or replacement requirements. 
Additionally, it would not be clear how to assign a tier to compliance monitoring sites based on service line 
material in systems where no service lines exist. Additionally, Wisconsin has already invested significant 
resources into inventorying pipe material that meets the EPA 2023 guidance but does not meet the definition 
of “service line” in the proposed LCRI. 
 
The WDNR emphasizes its support for the ASDWA comments below.  
 
The definition of “small water system” should be the same for all parts of the LCRI in order to eliminate 
confusion.  WDNR agrees with ASDWA that the definition should be consistent with the original lead and 
copper rule (LCR), i.e., water systems serving a population of 3,300 or fewer persons. 
 
The definition of “connector” should be increased from two feet to three feet. 
 
Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) (§ 141.81) 
 
WDNR highlights the ASDWA requests for clarification from EPA on the issues listed below.  
 
Clarify the meaning of “started to install CCT” in Exhibit 1 – FR 84890 of the Preamble which states that 
“Systems with P90 lead level > 0.010 mg/L: No CCT: Must complete CCT installation regardless of their 
subsequent P90 levels if the system has started to install CCT. " This is also an important clarification for 
when a small or medium system without corrosion control treatment that does not exceed the action levels for 
two consecutive six-month monitoring periods may stop completing the CCT steps, as it is determined by 
when the system “starts” to install OCCT. [§ 141.81(g)] 
 
Clarify how CCT and optimal water quality parameter (OWQP) requirements apply to systems that have 
installed CCT but have not previously been “deemed optimized” because they have not had an ALE.  Are all 
systems with CCT that are not currently deemed optimized expected to be deemed optimized and subject to 
OWQP requirements? If so, what is the expected timeframe for implementing this requirement? [§ 141.80 
(a)(1)(i) and §141.81] 
 
Clarify when consecutive systems are subject to OCCT and OWQP requirements at entry points where 
treatment is not added. For example, in Wisconsin, there are many water systems that do not add treatment 
but that purchase water from another water supplier that does add treatment.  Are consecutive systems 
required to monitor for their wholesaler’s OWQPs and subject to excursion violations when their wholesaler 
gets an ALE [§ 141.82(g)]?  
 
Clarify that systems with installed CCT cannot cease CCT to pursue a shorter LSL (lead service line) 
replacement schedule [§ 141.81(f)(1)(I)(A)]. 
 
Clarify § 141.81(d) and § 141.81(a) to clearly state that water systems are required to re-optimize as often as 
required by the state and remove references to one time re-optimization.  
 
Clarify that the shortened LSL replacement compliance option does not apply to systems addressing a copper 
ALE [141.81(f)].  
 
 
 

Page 3 
WDNR highlights its support for ASDWA’s request that EPA provide guidance, training and other resources in 
advance of the LCRI compliance date in the areas listed below. 
 
EPA should develop comprehensive decision-trees, flowcharts, and/or schematics clearly depicting the 
regulatory triggers and steps for CCT optimization, re-optimization, and optimal water quality parameter 
(OWQP) designation. These tools should be developed and shared with primacy agencies as soon as possible 
to aid in state rulemaking, compliance determinations, and training. With so many conditional statements and 
complexity throughout these sections, it will be difficult for primacy agency staff to communicate, administer 
and enforce these requirements without these tools.  
 
EPA, ASDWA and states should work together to develop comprehensive guidance and training on how 
states should consider the impact of proposed CCT on other drinking water contaminants, as well as how 
states should consider the impacts of proposed source and treatment changes on CCT. For example, 
Wisconsin recently received an engineering report that asserted that a systems’ designated CCT would 
increase disinfection byproduct (DBP) formation.  
 
EPA should develop CCT training and guidance covering conditions under which a system should be allowed 
to stop CCT following complete replacement of LSLs and galvanized requirement replacement (GRR) service 
lines and any steps that should be taken when this occurs. 
 
WDNR also adds emphasis to the ASDWA comment that there are situations and conditions where modifying a 
water system’s existing CCT may be more beneficial than delaying a change for two-and-a-half years while a 
system conducts a study. EPA should give states the authority to allow systems - under certain circumstances and 
with state prior approval - to make treatment changes consistent with EPA OCCT guidance to optimize CCT 
concurrently with performing a study [§ 141.81(d)]. 
 
WDNR is concerned about the proposed option that would allow water systems to delay OCCT until after the 
system has replaced all of its LSLs and GRR service lines, while the system achieves at least 20 percent removal 
per year.  In addition to the concerns expressed in the ASDWA letter, WDNR is concerned about situations where 
an ALE results from a water system’s 1st liter sample results, thereby indicating that premise plumbing, rather 
than lead service lines, could be the primary source of high lead levels in drinking water [§ 141.81(f)]. 
 
Wisconsin agrees with ASDWA that states should have the discretion to allow small systems to conduct a desktop 
CCT study, rather than always requiring systems of all sizes to conduct the pipe loop study.  However, Wisconsin 
supports requiring pipe loop studies for medium and large systems under certain conditions [§ 141.81(d) and § 
141.81(e)]. 
 
Lead Service Line Inventories and Replacement (§ 141.84) 
 
The WDNR emphasizes its support for the ASDWA comments described below.  
 
Clarify § 141.84(d)(5)(iv) to explain what factors for a state should consider when deciding whether it is 
feasible for a system to replace LSLs at a faster rate. 
 
Remove the requirement in § 141.84(a)(2)(ii)(B) for water systems to identify where lead connectors have 
been replaced in the past, and instead make the “replaced lead” connector category optional. It is more 
efficient to allow water systems to focus their time and resources on higher priority inventory and 
replacement activities such as lead service line removal and replacement, and identification and removal of 
galvanized service lines currently and formerly downstream of lead service lines. However, if connectors are 
required to be included in inventories, it would be helpful if the rule specified which connectors (i.e., only the 
connection to main) must be included in the inventory. 
 
Require all water systems update their inventory when service lines previously categorized as non-lead are 
subsequently determined to be lead or GRR, instead of leaving it to the states to determine what “additional 
actions” are appropriate to address the inaccuracy [§ 141.84 (b)(3)].  

Page 4 
 
Give states the flexibility and authority in § 141.84(b)(5)(i) & (ii) to allow a single point of inspection where 
an entire service line is under the same ownership. For example, at most NTNCWS and many non-municipal 
community water systems, all portions of all service lines are entirely owned by the water system.  Requiring 
two-point verification of these service lines would be unnecessarily burdensome and unlikely to improve 
inventory accuracy.  
 
Wisconsin disagrees with the ASDWA comment that EPA should establish a deadline for systems to identify all 
unknown service lines prior to their service line replacement deadlines. As long as all unknown service lines are 
included in a water system’s lead service line replacement plan, it does not make sense to require water systems to 
excavate twice – once to visually confirm that the service line material is lead, and a second time to remove the 
service line.  
 
Public Education and Notification (§ 141.85) 
 
WDNR emphasizes ASDWA’s request that EPA provide clarification on the issues listed below.  
 
Clarify the circumstances under which a state can grant an extension [§ 141.85(b)(7)]. Can all requirements 
be extended, or only certain requirements based on the justification provided by the water system?   
 
Clarify what is meant by the term “offer” in § 141.85(c)(1) & (2), and whether a public notice including 
content described in § 141.85(e)(3)(i)(d) would be sufficient. Additionally, EPA should clarify who is 
responsible for the cost of customer-requested sampling. 
 
WDNR also emphasizes its support for ASDWA’s request that EPA provide guidance, training and other 
resources in advance of the LCRI compliance date in the areas listed below. 
 
EPA should develop guidance and draft templates for each public education and public notice requirement in 
advance of the LCRI compliance date.  
 
EPA should establish guidance and expectations for the required filter plan under § 141.85(j). 
 
The WDNR highlights its support for the ASDWA comments listed below.  
 
The LCRI should require systems to submit a communication strategy at the start of the LCRI rule. The 
public education requirements are highly complex and developing a plan in advance will help systems avoid 
incurring violations for missing a requirement they misunderstood or did not adequately plan for. 
 
The EPA should streamline and combine post-ALE deadlines and reporting requirements, including the filter 
plans required under § 141.85 (j)(3).  Many due dates and associated certification requirements do not align. 
Recommend that EPA work with ASDWA to streamline deadlines for states and PWSs in the final rule. 
 
The EPA should keep the 60 days period after the sampling period to complete public education 
requirements; we do not think EPA should shorten this timeframe. It would be difficult for systems to 
complete all requirements and undertake the necessary printing and mailing within any shorter timeframe. 
The 60-day timeframe will also reduce the likelihood of water systems incurring a violation due to delayed 
receipt of sampling results [§ 141.85 (b)].  
 
EPA should consider giving public water systems more than three days to provide consumers with tap 
sampling results [§ 141.85 (d)]. Most small water systems in Wisconsin have limited staff with contracted 
operators responsible for multiple water systems. A three-day deadline would be difficult for small systems to 
comply with.  
 
WDNR disagrees with the ASDWA comment stating that EPA should consider not requiring public water 
systems to send public education materials to local health departments. We appreciate that the proposed LCRI 
requires notification and partnering with local public health departments when water systems exceed the lead 
action level [§ 141.85 (b) (2)]. Local public health departments play a key role in protecting public health from 
the harm posed by lead. Strong collaboration between water systems and health departments ensures effective and 
timely public education, especially for those groups most at risk. 

Page 5 
 
Compliance Monitoring (§141.86)  
The WDNR takes this opportunity to emphasize and/or elaborate on its support for the ASDWA comments 
described below.  
 
Annual monitoring requirements should be conducted at the reduced number of sites, rather than standard 
number of sites. This is both more cost-effective for water systems and more protective of public health in 
systems with fewer available Tier 1 and Tier 2 sampling locations than required number monitoring sites, as it 
reduces the likelihood that 90th percentile calculations will be diluted with the results from lower tier sites [§ 
141.86(d)(2)(i)].  
 
EPA should clarify what evidence or documentation a water system must provide to the state to prove a 
sample meets the invalidation criteria of § 141.86(f)(1)(ii). For example, what evidence or documentation is 
required when a water system claims, after receiving a high lead result, that the sample was taken from a site 
that did not meet the site selection criteria of § 141.86(a)(4). Or what evidence or documentations is required 
when a system claims a sample with a high lead result was collected in a manner that did not meet the sample 
collection criteria of § 141.86 (b)(1)?  
 
WDNR agrees with EPA’s proposal to not establish a maximum stagnation time in the LCRI because of concerns 
that samples will be invalidated solely because the sample result is high. Thus, WDNR strongly disagrees with the 
ASDWA recommendation to establish a maximum stagnation time of 18 hours. However, if EPA were to follow 
ASDWA’s recommendation and establish a stagnation time, then WDNR recommends that EPA require water 
systems report the stagnation time of every tap sampled at the time of sampling (such as on the lab slip), so that 
water systems cannot claim a site exceed the stagnation time after the fact as a justification for invalidating a 
sample with a high result.  
 
Data and Reporting (§ 141.90) 
 
The WDNR takes this opportunity to emphasize and elaborate on its support for the ASDWA comments 
described below.  
 
Reduce the number of required certifications.  This will help make the rule less complex. There are now 24 
certifications in the LCRI.   
 
A 10-day timeframe following the end of each sampling period [§ 141.90(a)(2)] for reporting for lead and 
copper tap samples, will not be feasible for many water systems to meet. Samples collected during the last 
weeks or days of a sampling period cannot be shipped, analyzed and reported in 10 days.  In Wisconsin, 
samples taken near the end of a monitoring period are typically not analyzed and reported until up 45 after the 
end of the sampling period.   
 
Allow a phased-in approach for the review and implementation of updated sampling plans in § 141.90 (a)(1). 
WDNR agrees with ASDWA that EPA should give large systems three years after the effective date of the 
final LCRI to update and obtain approval of their LCRI sampling plan. We further agree that EPA should 
allow medium and small systems four and five years respectively from the effective date of the final rule to 
update their sampling plans. Under the current rule, a high level of effort is necessary for systems to update 
their sampling plan, and significant follow-up with the system is often required before the sampling plan can 
be approved. WDNR has been working with community water systems on updating their sampling plans in 
accordance with existing lead and copper rule requirements since 2020, and this ongoing effort is still in 
progress, with approximately 90 percent complete. Under the current rule, systems have struggled to 
inventory premise plumbing material, determine the presence of a softener or filter, and assign the correct tier. 
Under the proposed LCRI, this will be further complicated by the need to inventory and consider lead 
connectors when prioritizing and assigning tiers to monitoring sites. 
 
Clarify when the 24-hour clock starts in § 141.90(j)(1). Within 24-hours of receiving results from who? What 
if results are received over the weekend or on a holiday? 
 

Page 6 
Monitoring in Schools and Child Care Facilities (§ 141.92)  
 
WDNR emphasizes ASDWA’s request that EPA provide clarification on the issues listed below.  
 
Clarify the definition of childcare facility in § 141.2 and how to categorize mixed-use buildings. For example, 
how should daycares that offer pre-school be categorized? Is there a minimum population served to qualify 
for either definition? How do mixed-use buildings that include childcare factor into these definitions, for 
example a high rise with a day care on one floor of the building? Should childcare providers operating out of 
their residence be included? 
 
Clarify in § 141.92 (b) that the list of schools and childcare facilities should exclude those with full plumbing 
replacement and those constructed after January 1, 2014 (or the date the State adopted standards that meet the 
definition of lead free in accordance with section 1417 of the Safe Drinking Water Act).  
 
The WDNR emphasizes its support for the ASDWA comments described below.  
 
EPA should not allow states to waive the requirements of § 141.92 for CWSs in schools and childcare 
facilities that use and maintain filters certified to reduce lead. 
 
Secondary schools should have the same monitoring requirements as elementary schools and childcare 
facilities, because secondary schools often have programs serving younger children at their facilities [§ 
141.92 (c) (2)]. 
 
WDNR disagrees with ASDWA’s suggestion that the responsibility of sharing and delivering monitoring results 
from school and childcare facilities should fall upon the school or childcare facility. State primacy agencies’ 
authority and enforcement is oriented around the public water systems, not the customers.  
 
Small Water System Compliance Flexibility (§ 141.93)  
 
The WDNR takes this opportunity to emphasize and elaborate on its support for the ASDWA comments 
described below.  
 
Small system flexibilities in § 141.93 should remain as drafted and be limited to CWSs serving 3,300 or fewer 
persons and NTNCWSs. 
 
Point-of-use device and plumbing replacement compliance alternatives allowed under § 141.93 (c) should be 
limited to NTNCWSs and non-municipal CWS that have control over all plumbing in all buildings that it 
serves water to.  
 
WDNR looks forward to further engagement with EPA as we work together to implement the Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements regulation. 
 
Please contact me (steve.elmore@wisconsin.gov, 608-259-6100) if you have questions or would like to discuss 
these comments. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Steven Elmore, Director 
Drinking Water and Groundwater Program

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1131 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Randy E. Hayman, Esq., Water Commissioner 
February 5, 2023  
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
 
To Whom It May Concern:  
 
On behalf of the City of Philadelphia, the Philadelphia Water Department (PWD or Department) 
appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI), published at 88 Fed. Reg. 84,878 (Dec. 6, 2023). PWD 
has been a long-standing supporter of local, state, and federal efforts to minimize the levels of lead 
in drinking water and reduce the risk of lead exposure to our City’s residents.  
 
Since the promulgation of the original Lead and Copper Rule (LCR), PWD has supported and 
participated in research and studies to improve the water industry’s management and reduction of 
lead in drinking water. PWD supports the implementation of science-based policies and regulations 
that are both effective and feasible. PWD is an adamant supporter of efforts to reduce lead exposure 
through drinking water. PWD also supports EPA’s goal of removing all lead service lines across the 
country and making efforts to help our customers remove their lead service lines across Philadelphia. 
However, PWD has several concerns regarding the feasibility of the proposed rule with regards to the 
proposed timeline for completion of the service line inventory and lead service line replacement 
program, the costs of the proposed rule, the modifications to the treatment technique, and various 
other technical aspects.  
 
PWD has the following overarching comments regarding the LCRI for your consideration. These 
comments, with additional minor comments, are detailed in the following pages.  
 
1. EPA should immediately delay all Lead and Copper Rule (LCRR) requirements that are 
proposed to be delayed by the LCRI.  
2. EPA and Congress should provide additional funding for water systems to be able to complete 
the proposed service line inventory and lead service line replacement requirements.  
3. EPA’s proposed timeline for 100% lead service line replacement (LSLR) is infeasible and the 
proposed method for determining compliance with this provision is flawed.  
4. EPA’s cost analysis contains large amounts of uncertainty and is annualized over too long of 
a timeframe.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
5. EPA has not demonstrated that the proposed treatment technique is feasible under the newly 
proposed provisions.  
6. EPA should provide clarity on several aspects of the proposed sampling requirements.  
7. EPA should reduce the amount of unnecessary administrative burden on water systems.  
 
PWD appreciates the opportunity to contribute to the regulatory process through the submission of 
these comments. PWD greatly appreciates EPA’s commitment to protecting public health and 
reducing the risk of lead exposure through drinking water.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Randy E. Hayman, Esq. 
Commissioner & Chief Executive Officer 
Philadelphia Water Department 
 

 
 
General 
 
1. EPA should immediately delay the LCRR provisions that LCRI proposes to delay, ensuring 
that Community Water Systems (CWS) aren’t left unprepared if the LCRI is not finalized by 
October 16, 2024. 
 
Given the very short time between the end of the proposed LCRI comment period and the 
compliance deadline for the LCRR, PWD requests that EPA immediately issue a final rule 
postponing the components of the LCRR that the LCRI proposes to delay. This will allow 
water systems to focus already limited resources on the components of the LCRR that begin 
in 2024 and allow more time for systems to receive additional and needed guidance from the 
EPA and states on implementation of the other requirements that would now be delayed. 
Without the delay, water systems are faced with the choice of allotting significant resources 
to prepare for requirements that may be delayed, or potentially face non-compliance. 
 
2. EPA needs to provide more funding to support the replacement and identification of Lead 
Service Lines (LSLs) and Galvanized Requiring Replacement (GRRs), given realistic 
replacement costs.  
 
The cost of service for PWD’s drinking water, wastewater, and stormwater improvements are 
borne by the rates and charges paid by customers. Current estimates for replacing lead 
service lines outside of existing infrastructure work in Philadelphia (i.e. not during water main 
replacement) range from approximately $12,000 to $15,000 per service line, approximately 
$6,000 higher than what EPA has estimated in the rulemaking. PWD believes that these costs 
will result in a total program cost for LSL replacement between $400 and $500 million, based 
on current estimates of LSLs and GRRs in our systems. These costs are reflective of the 
complications of doing this work in a dense urban environment, and include extensive 
restoration of sidewalk concrete, where the bulk of curb stops are located. These costs are in 
line with a 2022 American Water Works Association (AWWA) commissioned report that 
included a detailed engineering analysis of actual service line replacement programs that was 
provided to EPA during the LCRI federalism comment period1. In Philadelphia, where the 
service line is owned in entirety by the property owner, the LCRI would require PWD rate 
payers to shoulder that cost through rate increases in the absence of additional, significant 
federal investment. Rate increases are already necessary to support replacement of aging 
infrastructure and compliance with multiple new rulemakings. In conversations with the PA 
State Revolving Fund (SRF) program, PWD does not anticipate more than $5-$10 million a 
year in grant availability for this program for Philadelphia, while PWD estimates LSL 
replacement to cost $40-$50/year over a 10-year period. A lack of funding to support 
replacing LSL and GRR will only increase the cost burden on the rate payer. 
 
3. EPA should consider affordability more broadly when determining a utility’s ability to pay 
for unfunded and underfunded mandates.  
 
1 AWWA. 2022. Lead and Copper Rulemaking Improvements Rulemaking. Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0813 
(Federalism Comments). CDM Smith. Final Report. Considerations when Costing Lead Service Line Identification 
and Replacement, November 2022.   

 
 
 
PWD is faced with many obligations and regulatory initiatives that require the expenditure of  
operating and capital dollars. Current planned investments include increasing water main 
replacement targets to 42 miles per year2, increasing  planned sewer main rehabilitation to 
eight (8) miles per year2, comprehensive water and wastewater revitalization plans to renew 
and rehabilitate existing assets, a Long-Term Control Plan Update (LTCPU) Consent Order and 
Agreement (CO&A), forthcoming new NPDES permit requirements at all three Water 
Pollution Control Plants (WPCPs), forthcoming new Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System 
(MS4) permit requirements, as well as evaluating and future-proofing facilities in the face of 
major climate impacts. Beyond planned investments in existing infrastructure and imminent 
permit requirements, EPA is establishing three new rules in 2024 that will have major financial 
impacts to the Department. The first is the LCRI, which will require significant investments by 
the Department to locate and replace all LSLs and GRRs the system (The Department’s system 
includes approximately 511,000 service lines). Shortly following the draft LCRI, the EPA  
published a proposed rule to revise the aquatic life designated use and dissolved oxygen 
water quality criteria applicable to a portion of the Delaware River. This regulation will compel 
PWD to make significant capital investments at all three of the Department’s wastewater 
treatment plants to remove ammonia3. Finally, the final PFAS Maximum Contaminant Level 
(MCL) is expected to be issued this year, which is likely to propose requirements for PWD to 
install expensive PFAS treatment technologies in at least two of three large drinking water 
treatment plants. These three rules in combination will require PWD to spend billions of 
dollars in the coming years to tackle these three issues simultaneously, with minimal 
opportunities currently for federal assistance. If PWD is forced to make investment decisions 
on how to spend ratepayer dollars based on these combined rulemakings, the failure to be 
able to invest in other asset groups may risk our services and public health and safety in 
other ways. PWD concludes that EPA should take a holistic view of the regulated industry and 
consider the potential impacts of all regulations.   
 
 
Corrosion Control Treatment (CCT) 
 
4. EPA should remove requirements for large CWSs to re-optimize Corrosion Control 
Treatment (CCT) in the absence of an action level exceedance. 
 
The LCRI CCT requirements as per the proposed §141.81(a)(1)(ii - iii) include a provision 
which states that larger water systems “may be required by the state” to complete the 
re-optimized Optimized Corrosion Control Treatment (OCCT), in instances where they 
have an existing CCT strategy and a 90th percentile result that are below the action 
level. This provision should be removed from the final rule for at least three reasons. 
First, given the aggressive timeline for service line replacement, and the reduced action 
level, it does not add any practical value or additional public health protection in this 
 
2 City of Philadelphia.2023. Water and Wastewater Revenue Bonds Series 2023B, available at 
ttps://www.phila.gov/media/20231003113936/Water-and-Wastewater-Revenue-Bonds-Series-2023.pdf. 
3 See 88 Fed. Reg. 88,315 (Dec. 21, 2023). 

 
 
instance to require a system to go through re-optimization. It takes a significant amount 
of time and effort to plan and execute a valid OCCT study at a large system, and then to 
implement the results of that study. If a system has previously conducted those studies, 
there should be no reason to replicate them in absence of an action level exceedance. 
 
Second, it should also be noted that States continue to retain the authority to require 
additional action above and beyond federal law, so the inclusion of such language 
seems unnecessary. 
 
Third, this requirement will result in similar levels of confusion that were caused by the 
trigger level introduced in the LCRR. The EPA intentionally removed the trigger level to 
reduce complexity and remove the confusion caused by having two different levels 
triggering or potentially triggering different actions. The EPA should continue to avoid 
this type of complexity by not requiring actions based on 90th percentile values greater 
than the Practical Quantitation Limit (PQL) but less than the Action Level. 
 
 
Lead Service Line Replacement 
 
5. EPA should revise the definition of “control” in the LCRI. 
 
PWD agrees strongly with AWWA’s comment that EPA should return to the definition 
of “control” it adopted in the LCR revisions in 2000, that “control” is based on 
ownership. The definition of what is “under the control” of water systems as described 
in the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) does not include piping unowned by the water 
system, even when the actual owner uses their control to grant access to a water 
system. EPA’s authorizing statute, then, does not authorize the Agency to require water 
systems to replace service lines not owned by the water system.   
 
6. EPA should consider a longer timeline for the replacement of all lead service lines. 
 
The 10-year replacement timeline for all LSLs and GRRs as per the proposed §141.84(d)(4) is 
not feasible due to financial concerns, limited resources, and competing regulatory priorities. 
The rule should provide additional mechanisms for CWSs to evaluate a longer timeline for 
their replacement schedule.  
 
With the limited federal funding available, many systems, including PWD, may need to delay 
necessary capital work and/or need to cut programs or defer maintenance in our operating 
budget to meet the 10-year timeframe, delaying necessary improvements and creating 
additional community impacts that may increase risk of service and other public health and 
safety concerns. See Comment #3, above, for more details on PWD’s other commitments and 
infrastructure needs. None of the programs highlighted within the rule text could have 
completed their replacement schedules on accelerated schedules without the additional 
external subsidies they received (See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84,912-913). It is also unlikely that those 

 
 
systems would have been able to accelerate their replacement schedules when competing 
with every other water system for contractors and consultants to complete this work.  
 
PWD is also concerned that the amount of skilled labor needed to perform these 
replacements will not be available at the level necessary to meet the established replacement 
timeframe. For instance, the Associated Builders and Contractors (ABC), an organization that 
tracks the construction industry, has found that there is an 8.5-month backlog on projects as 
of December 2023. These trends remain unchanged for the last several years, indicating that 
this problem is likely to not abate4. 
 
Additionally, PWD recommends that EPA remove the language in §141.84(c)(5)(iv). The 
entirety of this section that begins with "Shortened deadline and associated replacement 
rate” should be removed. States already have the authority to create guidance and 
regulations that are more stringent than those adopted by the EPA. Placing language in the 
LCRI proposed rule that authorizes States to establish shortened replacement schedules is 
not only unnecessary but also means many states will approach their own programs assuming 
that EPA wants them to adopt shorter replacement schedules. Given the complications with 
executing a 10-year replacement schedule, any language that intimates that shortened 
schedules can be met should be removed. 
 
7. “Unknowns” should not be included in the replacement rates. 
 
By requiring water systems to include service lines defined based on state or federal adopted 
service line inventory guidance as unknown (hereafter referred to as “Unknowns”) in the 
replacement calculations as per the proposed §141.84(d)(6)(i), EPA is forcing many utilities to 
grossly accelerate their lead service line replacement rates, especially in the early years of the 
program. Using current PWD service line information, the following example showcases the 
issues with these rate calculations. 
 
One scenario, using PWD’s estimate of lead services and assuming a baseline inventory with 
10% Unknowns in a system of 511,000 connections, exemplifies the problem of including 
Unknowns in EPA’s replacement rate calculation. PWD is currently anticipating approximately 
a 4% rate of lead and a 0.5% rate of galvanized service lines in the system. As it is currently 
written, the LCRI could require  the Department to meet a 31% replacement rate averaged 
across the first three years of compliance to meet a required replacement rate in this 
scenario. This equates to a replacement of almost 7,200 services in the first year of 
compliance, and the highest projected number of replacements required in the program at 
a time when the program is still being established, issues are being resolved, and 
contractors are being engaged and ramping up their own workforce. If the Department has 
greater than 10% Unknowns in its baseline inventory, the calculations become even more 
untenable for reasons outlined in Comment #6 above. See Table 1 below for the details 
regarding this scenario. 
 
4 ABC. 2023. ABC’s Construction Backlog Indicator Inches up in November, Contractors Remain Confident. Dec 
12,2023. 

 
 
Table 1: PWD Replacement Program with 10% Unknowns 
 
 
The requirement to include Unknown service lines in replacement rate calculations 
unnecessarily complicates LCRI compliance for many utilities. Many utilities with Unknowns 
will be forced to front-end replacements in their program, when a more sensible approach 
would be to ramp up replacement rates over the first few years as the program develops and 
the workforce adjusts. There are other ways EPA could ensure utilities are making adequate 
progress, such as: 
A. Allow utilities to define their own program metrics in their required lead 
service line replacement plan. Utilities know their individual systems, 
contractor pools, and workforces best. If a replacement plan commits to 
identifying and removing all LSLs and GRRs in the 10-year compliance period,  
this should meet the intent of the rule, especially in cases where utilities have 
low tap sampling results and OCCT in place. This is PWD’s preferred approach. 
B. Consider establishing separate rates for reducing Unknowns and removing 
known LSLs and GRRs. 
C. Completely remove Unknowns as a factor in the annual replacement pool 
calculations. 
 
At a minimum, EPA should change the replacement pool calculation to allow for a percentage 
of Unknowns to count as suspected LSLs or GRRs, based on the makeup of the systems known 
services. This will still allow utilities to plan for meeting the 10-year compliance requirements, 
while removing the potential for accelerating replacements in communities without 
document lead-in-water public health issues. 
 
8. EPA should count disconnected services toward replacement goals in instances where a 
local or state ordinance prevents those services from being reconnected. 
 
Pursuant to the proposed §141.84(d)(6)(iii)(B), a full replacement is counted where a LSL or 
GRR is disconnected from the water main. As proposed, the pipe being replaced will also have 
to be disconnected from the customer’s side of the connection. PWD supports counting 
Year (i)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
Initial  Replacement Pool
Known Lead 
20696
21041
21386
21731
22076
22421
22766
22996
22996
22996
Unknown
51100
Total
71796
21041
21386
21731
22076
22421
22766
22996
22996
22996
Updates (BOY)
Initial Number of Unknowns
51100
43435
35770
28105
20440
12775
5110
0
0
0
Number Eliminated
7665
7665
7665
7665
7665
7665
5110
0
0
0
Remaining Unknowns
43435
35770
28105
20440
12775
5110
0
0
0
0
Required Replacements
Replacement Pool (BOY)
71796
64476
57156
49836
42516
35196
27876
22996
22996
22996
Percent Replacement
10%
10%
10%
10%
10%
10%
10%
10%
10%
10%
Lead Lines Left from Previous Year
13516
7414
2043
0
0
0
0
0
0
Pipes to Replace
7180
6448
5716
4984
4252
3520
2788
2300
2300
2300
Percent Known Lead Replaced
35%
31%
27%
23%
19%
16%
12%
10%
10%
10%
Avaliable Pipes in Replacement Pool (EOY)
64616
49286
35519
22483
12775
5110
0
0
0
0
Lead Lines Left (EOY)
13516
7414
2043
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

 
 
disconnected services toward replacement goals, and as is the case in abandoned and 
unused properties, it is often true that services in such properties are disconnected at the 
main but remain connected to internal plumbing. 
 
9. EPA’s decision to allow the continued use of partial service line replacements during 
emergency or planned infrastructure work is vital to allowing utilities to complete 
necessary work to keep systems operating. 
 
PWD generally agrees with EPA that while replacing only part of a lead service line is not 
preferential, it remains a necessary industry practice. Since 2017, PWD has been replacing 
lead and galvanized service lines as a standard practice on capitally funded water main 
replacement projects. To fully replace a service line, PWD must obtain written authorization 
from the property owner, and the owner and/or resident must allow access to the property 
on the day of replacement. Because such authorization and access are not always granted, 
not all homes receive a full service line replacement. Thus, PWD supports the exemptions for 
emergency repair or planned infrastructure work as per the proposed §141.84(g). 
 
PWD’s standard practice during water main replacement is to replace all services up to the 
curb stop, so every service, regardless of material type, is partially replaced. In instances 
where PWD cannot obtain authorization and/or be granted access from the property owner 
for a full lead service line replacement, the service line is replaced up to the curb stop and a 
dielectric coupling is installed. If EPA prohibits the partial replacement of lead service lines in 
instances like this, it will complicate systems’ efforts to replace water mains. Barring a water 
system the ability to reconnect the service during planned infrastructure work would lead 
to discontinuation of service to existing inhabited structures with non-cooperating or non-
responsive property owners. Discontinuation of service in such instances creates a public 
safety and public health hazard, as well as potentially deepening environmental justice issues. 
 
10. EPA should revise notification requirements following a LSL or GRR replacement. 
 
Currently, the proposed §141.84(h)(3) would require notice be provided to “the owner of the 
affected service line, or the owner’s authorized agent … as soon as possible but no longer than 
24 hours following completion of the replacement”. In many instances, the owner does not 
occupy the premises, nor is present to receive materials. As EPA is aware, LSLs and GRRs can 
be associated with rental properties, some of which include difficult to reach absentee 
landlords. PWD agrees with leaving instructions and notification, along with risk mitigation 
measures, following a LSL or GRR replacement, with the occupants of the properties. By 
requiring notice to the owner in lieu of residents in such a timeframe detracts from getting 
that information into the hands of those who would be most impacted by the service line 
replacement (i.e. those who use the water at the property on a day-to-day basis). EPA should 
eliminate the need for expedited risk communications to property owners and focus on 
occupants first. 
 
11. EPA should remove the requirement to provide outreach for service line replacement 
following a change of ownership. 

 
 
 
Currently, the proposed §141.84(d)(3)(ii) would require water systems to offer a full 
replacement within six months of change in ownership of a property. However, this 
requirement presumes that water systems have available information on property ownership 
changes within six months. In Philadelphia, property records can take up to a year to update 
in internal systems. Additionally, even when the account holder changes on a water bill, it 
does not indicate that ownership has changed, and a lack of update to the account holder 
also does not mean ownership has not changed. In short, this requirement as written will 
put utilities in non-compliance through no fault of their own and should not be finalized. 
 
 
Lead Service Line Inventory 
 
12. The inclusion of connectors in the inventory is unnecessary and likely to create confusion 
amongst the general public. 
 
PWD agrees that requiring the replacement of connectors during planned service line 
replacement is a sound policy. When a full lead service is replaced, that replacement should 
start with the water main and, in Philadelphia’s case, generally end at the meter in the 
resident’s house. However, PWD concurs with the AWWA comment that the tracking of lead 
connectors should be an element of the system’s materials evaluation (i.e., §141.42(d) as 
referenced in proposed LCRI at §141.86(a)(i)) rather than an element of the inventory as 
described in the Proposed Rule at §141.84. Requiring utilities to inventory connectors would 
simply be cost prohibitive, as the primary way of identifying them will be through excavation, 
and given that lead connectors are not considered a primary source of lead contamination in 
drinking water. 
 
Requiring the publication of connector material in the public facing database would be 
confusing to customers and potentially harmful towards maintaining the customer’s trust. 
For instance, customers who have a known service line material, but unknown connector 
type, would be less trustful that their service line was properly identified, or was being 
accurately handled by the utility. To require notification to customers about the presence or 
potential presence of lead connectors would detract from the goals of removing lead services 
and draw customer attention away from more actionable and meaningful measures. This 
creates much more uncertainty and issues with communicating to the public, which is 
contrary to EPA’s goal in the LCRI to “simplify the rule relative to the 2021 Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR)”.  
 
13. EPA should strengthen the use of the validation pool for inventory validation. 
 
PWD agrees that requiring validation is a great way to ensure accuracy of information, build 
trust, and allow for the implementation of new service line identification technologies. EPA 
should consider a pathway for accepting additional verification methods that may use 
new/emerging technologies. EPA could incorporate language in the rule that allows the use 
of novel identification technologies for validation purposes, provided those technologies have 
an acceptable level of accuracy to visual verifications. 

 
 
 
Additionally, it is important that EPA clearly communicate the expectations of the validation 
study to the states, along with other expectations for inventory development and what is 
considered acceptable practice. It would be important to codify the fact that records-based 
service material determinations can be reflective of a community, neighborhood, or other 
area, and not only for each individual service line. 
 
Finally, EPA should consider proposing clear language for when water systems fail their 
initial validation study. In the table included in the proposed rule §141.84(b)(5)(ii), EPA 
correctly assesses the sample size for a validation study. However, the language is unclear as 
to a water systems’ responsibility when the validation study deviates from a 95% confidence 
interval. As such, EPA should include clearer direction, such as including a third column in the 
table that is reflective of the number of additional samples to be drawn to reassess the 
validation pool. This clarification is necessary both for water systems to adhere to and for 
states to understand how to approach an initial validation study that may not meet the 
prescribed confidence interval.  
 
14. EPA should consider simplifying inventory reporting requirements. 
 
With the inclusion of property address in the required public facing inventory, EPA should 
consider utilizing the public facing inventory as a submission to the state, along with summary 
reporting of the inventory characteristics. It would be more efficient and avoid duplication 
of effort for states and water systems to rely on the required public facing inventory, rather 
than create yet another separate deliverable to upload in various state reporting systems. 
The current requirement as outlined in §141.90(e)(8)(i) and §142.14(d)(9) is overly 
burdensome from a data transfer and data storage standpoint for states and water systems. 
A simple, summary report would be more beneficial for all parties, with all the information 
currently anticipated to be required for reporting to be publicly available through the public-
facing inventory portal. 
 
Cost/Benefit Analysis 
 
15. EPA’s cost and benefit model appears subject to large amounts of uncertainty and potential 
inaccuracy.  
 
In the development of any model, it is important to recognize that there will be uncertainty 
in the results regardless of how accurate the input data is. This inherent uncertainty can 
normally be accepted if the model can be tested against known outcomes to verify its 
accuracy. However, the uncertainty in a model’s result is made far worse when the input data 
being used is either inaccurate or not representative of the population that the model is being 
used for. With EPA’s Economic Analysis for the LCRI, the level of uncertainty associated with 
almost every single input is enough to raise significant doubt in the model’s outcome. When 
all of the uncertainty from these various inputs are combined, it makes it difficult to 
understand how this model can be trusted to accurately assess the cost of this rulemaking. 
In its economic analysis, EPA makes it clear that they are unaware of how these uncertainties 
will impact the model. To be clear, not only are the assumptions or data inputs into the model 

 
 
filled with uncertainty, but there is also additional uncertainty as to how the uncertainty of 
these assumptions and inputs will impact the model. EPA chooses to only account for a few 
of these uncertainties with high and low estimates, but this seems insufficient given the scope 
and impacts that this regulation will have on the country’s water systems. Additionally, PWD 
was unable to assess how changes to any assumptions would impact the model results 
because the model and the directions provided by EPA for using it did not work as written.  
Given the significant financial scale of this regulation, EPA should not be leaving these 
important considerations up to this level of uncertainty.   
 
16. EPA should utilize an appropriate analysis period for estimating incremental costs 
proportional to the proposed timelines of the LCRI. 
 
Under the LCRI, one of the major changes is the shortened timeline for the requirement to 
replace lead service lines. Under this proposed rule, water systems will be required to replace 
all lead service lines within 10 years of the compliance date of the regulation. EPA estimates 
that this effort will drastically reduce lead levels in drinking water and provide long term 
health benefits. EPA also estimates that the number of systems that will have lead action level 
exceedances will drastically decrease once lead service lines are removed, with only 4.3%-
8.6% of systems with no LSLs expected to have an action level exceedance compared to an 
estimated 21.1%-39.1% of systems with LSLs (Exhibit 4-5 of EPA’s Economic Analysis). With 
the requirements for service line inventories and lead service line replacements all occurring 
within 10 years and the costs associated with action level exceedances expected to 
significantly decrease after lead service lines are removed, the majority of the costs 
associated with this regulation will be borne by the water systems, states, and ratepayers 
over the first 10 years. However, despite the shortened timetable for these costly 
requirements being a cornerstone for this regulation, this shorter timeline was not carried 
forward into the economic analysis proposed by EPA.  
 
In section 4.2.3.3 of EPA’s Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis, EPA states that it utilized a 35-
year period to estimate the incremental costs of the proposed LCRI. This is explained further 
in section B.2.4 of the Appendices for this Economic Analysis, where EPA states that this 35-
year period will allow EPA to “full capture the costs of the rule since it may take over 30 years 
for many CWSs to complete their service line replacement program under the LCRR.” PWD 
would agree that a 35-year analysis period is appropriate for estimating the annualized costs 
of the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions. As such, in this economic analysis, it is appropriate for 
the baseline annualized costs to be estimated over a 35-year period. However, given the 
proposed requirements regarding lead service line replacement timelines, using a 35-year 
period to estimate the costs of the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements is incorrect . While 
water systems may be able to use debt funding for LSLR costs, under the proposed LCRI, water 
systems will bear most of the remaining costs from the LCRI in the first 10 years following the 
compliance date. By providing annualized costs over a 35-year period, EPA is drastically 
underestimating the annualized costs of this regulation. Using the equation provided in 
chapter 6 of EPA’s 2010 Guideline for Preparing Economic Analyses for calculating annualized 
values, utilizing a 35 year period rather than a 10 year period would result in a cost estimate 
that is only 42% of the actual annualized costs of the components of the rule that cannot be 
debt funded.  

 
 
 
PWD recommends that EPA update their economic analysis by calculating the incremental 
cost differences between the LCRR (with costs estimated over a 35-year period) and the LCRI 
(with costs estimated over a 10-year period) to reflect the drastic changes in regulatory 
timelines between the two regulations.   
 
17. EPA should account for the impacts of other ongoing regulatory agenda items in their 
estimations on how many systems will make changes to treatment processes over the life 
of this regulation. 
 
EPA is currently pursuing many major regulatory agenda items that directly impact public 
water systems. It is critical that EPA consider the combined impacts of these regulations, 
especially from a financial perspective. EPA should consider the impacts that each of these 
regulations will have on each other, regardless of if they are finalized, when evaluating the 
cost and benefits of these regulations. In addition to this LCRI, EPA is currently in the process 
of finalizing its landmark National Primary Drinking Water Regulation establishing a drinking 
water MCL for PFAS compounds, with the final rule being submitted to the White House’s 
Office of Management and Budget on December 15, 2023 for final interagency review. This 
PFAS rule is expected to result in one of the largest nationwide investments in water 
treatment upgrades if the proposed MCL levels are maintained in the final regulation. 
However, in section 3.3.9.3 of the cost analysis for the LCRI, EPA estimates the percentage of 
systems that will change treatment each year based on historical data and do not seem to 
consider at all the significant increase in systems making changes due to the PFAS MCL 
regulation. Under the LCRI, anytime the State deems these treatment changes “to be 
significant”,  the water system will revert to standard monitoring and be required to do 
extensive piloting and pipe loop studies to confirm the impact on lead release are minimized. 
With two of the three proposed Best Available Technologies (BATs) for PFAS treatment, 
Granular Activated Carbon (GAC) and Ion Exchange (IX), expected to potentially impact 
corrosion rates, it is likely that almost all implemented PFAS treatments will trigger these 
additional LCRI requirements.  
 
PWD recommends that EPA should consider the percentages of systems likely to make 
treatment changes due to PFAS MCL exceedances and how that would impact the costs 
associated with the LCRI requirements before and after treatment changes are implemented.  
 
 
Tap Sampling Protocol 
 
18. EPA has not demonstrated that the proposed LCRI’s treatment technique’s OCCT 
component is feasible from a technical standpoint.  
 
Through the LCRI, the EPA is proposing several changes to the rule’s treatment technique 
including lowering the action level to 10 ppb, modifying the sampling protocol for homes with 
lead service lines, and revising the sample pool for systems with lead service lines and 
galvanized requiring replacement service lines. While making all these changes, EPA has 
maintained that high-dose orthophosphate or pH/alkalinity adjustment will be the 

 
 
anticipated optimal corrosion control technology. EPA’s assessment fails to reliably 
demonstrate that the proposed corrosion control treatment technologies will enable 
systems to reliably meet the new action level under the newly proposed sampling 
requirements, especially given the large number of water systems that will need to make 
treatment changes (to meet the pending PFAS MCLs) that may affect corrosion rates.   
 
First, EPA directly states in the preamble in section E.1 that “EPA anticipates more systems 
could exceed the lead action level even when re-optimized”. If EPA is readily expecting that 
even with optimized corrosion control installed that systems will be unable to meet the newer 
action level, how can they deem that the proposed treatment technologies are effective? 
While PWD agrees with the proposed provision to not require systems to continually re-
optimize corrosion control if a system has subsequent Action Level Exceedances (ALEs) 
following initial optimization or re-optimization, there are numerous actions triggered by ALE 
that will continue to be in effect even if the ALE occurs while the system has already done its 
due diligence in installing optimized corrosion control treatment. EPA continues in section E.1 
of the preamble by stating that “EPA recognizes that there may be some instances where 
systems would be unable to meet the proposed lowered lead action level of 0.010 mg/L 
because tap water lead levels can be influenced by other factors.” This statement clearly 
demonstrates that EPA recognizes that, under the proposed conditions, there will be 
situations where systems, for reasons unrelated to corrosion control efficacy, will exceed the 
action level. This makes the proposed solution infeasible by EPA’s definition.  
 
Second, EPA has extremely limited empirical data on how many systems will or will not be 
able to meet this requirement and the feasibility of optimizing or re-optimizing corrosion 
control at these systems. EPA utilized only historic first-draw lead levels and static 
multiplicative factors to try to estimate the impacts on the change in sample methodology 
would have on systems exceeding the new action level. This method is flawed and provides a 
weak estimation at best. Under the proposed LCRI, EPA is requiring all systems to revert to 
standard monitoring as their historic data is not considered valid in demonstrating that their 
90th percentile lead levels are below the action level. If these historic first-draw lead levels 
are not valid for a system to demonstrate that it is reliably below the action level, then it is 
inconsistent for EPA to then use that same data to estimate how many systems will or will 
not be able to meet their newly proposed requirements.  
 
Finally, the inclusion of galvanized iron plumbing as a separate tier in the LCRI’s sample 
location tiering system introduces the corrosion of iron plumbing materials as a key factor in 
compliance even after all lead service lines are removed. Corrosion control treatment has 
been optimized to prevent or minimize lead release from lead service lines and leaded solder 
on copper plumbing. EPA has not demonstrated that the proposed corrosion control 
treatment strategies are able to effectively control lead release from these galvanized lines.  
 
In the preamble, EPA requests comment on the proposed action level of 0.010 mg/L and 
potential alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L. PWD believes that EPA has not 
adequately demonstrated that the newly proposed action level of 0.010 mg/L is feasible 
under the proposed treatment technique and that is even more true of a more stringent 
action level, such as 0.005 mg/L. PWD recommends that EPA reassess the feasibility of this 

 
 
newly proposed action level and if it cannot effectively demonstrate this feasibility that it 
then must retain the current action level of 0.015 mg/L. It is important to not lose sight of the 
lead action level being a treatment technique and not a health-based limit. Although water 
systems should continue to maintain optimized corrosion control treatment, LSL replacement 
is the component of this updated rule that will most effectively address exposure to lead by 
completely removing this major source of lead to customer drinking water. 
 
19. EPA should select only the 1st liter or 5th liter data for LSL homes and 1st Liter data for non-
LSL homes in the calculation of 90th percentile values. 
 
In section V.A (Regulatory Approach) of the LCRI’s preamble, EPA discusses its previous 
decision to utilize a treatment technique rather than establishing an MCL for Lead. In this 
section EPA concludes that the justification for using a treatment technique is still applicable 
today and that it would maintain this regulatory approach. In this discussion, one of the 
reasons for utilizing a treatment technique is that “SDWA precludes the Agency from 
promulgating a ‘regulation that holds a [public water system] liable for conditions that are 
beyond it’s control’ and that ‘EPA posited that an MCL would not be considered ‘feasible’ if a 
significant number of water systems would be in noncompliance due to conditions outside of 
their control.’” The science is clear that uncontrolled water corrosivity, which is a condition 
that can mostly be controlled by the water system, can lead to increased metals release from 
plumbing materials, including lead-bearing materials, within customer’s homes. To this point, 
EPA states in section V.C of the LCRI’s preamble that “EPA designed the tap sampling 
requirements in the LCR primarily to evaluate the corrosion of lead and copper sources present 
in the distribution system”. PWD supports the goal of the LCR, LCRR, and LCRI to better 
understand and control the corrosion of plumbing materials to prevent exposure to these 
metals in drinking water. However, while EPA states that the goal of the tap sampling protocol 
is to assess corrosivity and that feasibility should be assessed by factors that are within the 
control of the water system, the discussion in the preamble of the LCRI suggests that the 
additional requirement to sample the 1st and 5th liter at LSL homes and using the higher value 
for compliance was implemented primarily with the goal of causing more systems to have 
90th percentile results above the action level. In section V.C, EPA describes two scenarios 
where they would expect the 1st liter sample to be higher than the 5th liter sample in homes 
with LSL. For the first scenario, a system where scale in the LSL is uncontrolled, PWD agrees 
that a system would likely see high 1st liter results, however, it would seem logical that this 
system would likely see high 5th liter results as well and the 1st liter probably wouldn’t be 
needed to cause the system to exceed the action level. For the second scenario, EPA describes 
a situation where a system has effectively formed lead scale and inhibited lead release from 
lead service lines stating that then they may find higher lead in other premise plumbing 
materials, likely in the form of particulate lead. While PWD appreciates that the situation 
described in scenario #2 is possible, if a system is effectively passivating lead release from the 
largest source of lead in a home’s plumbing, then it would seem logical that it is controlling 
the corrosivity of their water, which is the aspect of lead corrosion that is within the control 
of the water system. While PWD supports efforts to reduce and remove all sources of lead in 
plumbing materials, these legacy materials will continue to exist in various aspects of home 
plumbing that are outside the control of the water system. By requiring water systems to 
collect multiple samples from a single home and then only selecting the samples with the 

 
 
higher result with the clearly stated expectation that this will “result in more systems that will 
be required to optimize or re-optimize corrosion control treatment and provide notification 
and public education”, EPA is going against its own definition of what is feasible based on 
factors that are within the control of the water system. 
 
Further, if the goal of lead and copper tap sampling is to assess the efficacy of corrosion 
control treatment as stated, then EPA has not made it clear how the newly proposed sampling 
methodology is a more effective measurement of the effectiveness of corrosion control. In 
the LCRR, EPA stated that it was switching to 5th liter sampling for homes with LSL because 
the “data gathered from the fifth liter samples to calculate the 90th percentile is a better 
indicator of the effectiveness of corrosion control treatment in a system.” EPA should more 
definitely state why this determination has changed in terms of assessing corrosion control 
efficacy.  
 
PWD suggests that EPA maintain the finalized LCRR sampling protocol utilizing 5th liter data 
for homes with LSL and 1st liter data for homes without LSL or revert back to 1st liter data 
for all samples. EPA should clearly identify the sample they believe to be most representative 
of corrosion control efficacy and remain consistent in how tap sampling results are utilized.    
 
20. EPA should be less prescriptive in how liters 2-4 are collected in sampling protocol outlined 
in 141.86(b)(ii). 
 
PWD supports EPA in providing a clear definition of what it considers to be a “wide-mouth” 
bottle. However, in 141.86(b)(ii), EPA states that during the collection of 1st and 5th liter 
samples from homes with lead service lines that “[t]o collect a first and fifth liter paired 
sample, systems must collect tap water in five consecutively numbered, wide-mouth, one-liter 
sample bottles.” While PWD does not dispute the requirement for using wide-mouth bottles 
for the 1st and 5th liter of these consecutive sample bottles, EPA should not mandate how a 
system chooses to collect the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th liter of water so long as the three liters are 
adequately accounted for before the collection of the 5th liter sample and it is approved by its 
primacy agency. For example, PWD implemented 1st and 5th liter sampling during its 2022 LCR 
monitoring period and used two different bottle types for its sample kits. For the 1st and 5th 
liter bottles, a wide-mouth, one-liter bottle was used. However, for the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th liter 
bottles, the Department used a differently shaped one-liter bottle with a slightly smaller 
mouth. The purpose of the two different bottle types was to further reinforce to the customer 
which bottles were meant to be kept for analysis and which were to be dumped. The bottles 
for the 1st and 5th liter sample were shipped with lids while the bottles for the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th 
liter were not shipped with lids and the lids from the 1st and 5th liter bottles would not fit on 
the other three. This sample kit design was done to minimize potential confusion associated 
with collecting multiple samples. While the mouth of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th liter bottles were 
smaller than the now prescribed 55 mm wide-mouth definition, these bottles still had 
sufficiently wide mouth that they would not inhibit sample collection from a tap running at 
full flow. This is just one example of how these sample kits can be made in different ways to 
promote sample collection accuracy given the increase in complexity with this sample 
method. Given the magnitude of samples that will have to be collected using this method, 
EPA should not restrict how systems collect liters 2 through 4 during this sample collection. 

 
 
For example, if a water system finds that it is easier to fill a 3-liter container between the 1st 
and 5th liter sample, then EPA should not restrict them from doing that.  
 
PWD suggests that the wording in 141.86(b)(ii) be updated to read “To collect a first and fifth 
liter paired sample, systems must collect the first five liters of water following the required 
stagnation period with the first and fifth liter collected in wide-mouth, one-liter sample 
bottles”.   
 
21. EPA should modify the definition of “wide-mouth bottle”.  
 
As stated, PWD supports EPA providing a clearer definition of “wide-mouth bottle”. However, 
the proposed definition may present a bottleneck around the number of available bottles for 
water systems performing lead and copper tap sampling. With the intention of this definition 
being to prevent the use of small-mouth bottles for lead and copper tap sampling, which 
would require a lower flow to accurately fill the bottle, PWD believes that EPA could still fulfill 
the spirit of this requirement with a less stringent definition of “wide-mouth”. A  less stringent 
definition would reduce the supply chain burdens in procuring these bottles. PWD suggests 
that EPA modify the proposed definition of “wide-mouth” bottle from “outer diameter at 
least 55 mm wide” to “inner diameter at least 40 mm wide”.  
 
22. EPA should clarify whether sampling requirements defined in 141.86(b)(1) now apply to 
voluntary customer sampling programs that are not included in LCR monitoring. 
 
In section 141.86(b)(1), the proposed LCRI states that all tap samples analyzed for lead and 
copper, except for those collected as part of Distribution System and Site Assessments, must 
be collected in a one-liter, wide-mouth bottle after six hours of stagnation. However, in 
section H.4 of the proposed LCRI preamble, EPA states that, in the event that a system 
exceeds the action level and must offer a “supplemental” customer requested sample 
program, “EPA is proposing to maintain flexibility for water systems to determine the sampling 
protocol for this supplemental monitoring.” PWD requests clarification on whether CWSs 
that implement a voluntary customer requested lead sampling program, without exceeding 
any action levels, would also have flexibility in the methods used for collecting these 
samples or would these systems be required to collect samples following the procedures 
described in 141.86(b)(1).  
 
In addition, if a system is required to offer a customer requested sampling program, the 
proposed LCRI would also require the system to notify the customer of the results from their 
sampling within 3 days of the system getting the results. PWD asks that EPA clarify whether 
this 3-calendar day notification would also apply for any voluntary customer requested 
sampling programs that were not established as a response to an action level exceedance, 
regardless of whether the sampling procedure specified in 141.86(b)(1) was followed. If a 
CWS offers a voluntary customer requested lead program and the proposed 3-calendar day 
result notification requirement is applied to this type of program, it will act as a disincentive 
for systems to offer this service to their consumers. This requirement will likely result in less 
free lead testing across the country so that CWSs are not putting themselves at risk of 

 
 
regulatory violation due simply to administrative issues and the burden of meeting a 3-
calendar day notification requirement.    
 
23. EPA should not include results collected outside of the regulatory monitoring program in 
water systems’ compliance calculations.  
 
EPA is requesting comment on whether samples from non-LSL homes that have higher lead 
concentrations than homes with LSL should be included in the 90th percentile calculation and 
whether these higher lead concentrations from non-LSL homes should replace lower 
concentrations from LSL homes in the calculation. PWD believes that samples that were 
collected outside of the planned compliance monitoring program should not be included 
simply because they have an elevated lead level. The goal of the compliance monitoring 
program and the accompanying sample pool are very specifically to assess the lead levels in 
homes that are most at risk to evaluate the efficacy of the corrosion control treatment at the 
water system. Auxiliary monitoring program samples are likely being collected for far 
different reasons, with different goals and requirements for participation, and would not be 
designed with the same goal of evaluating corrosion control treatment. EPA acknowledges in 
section 141.82(j)(2) of the proposed rule that including samples from site assessments in 
compliance calculations would inaccurately bias systems towards re-optimization. The same 
is true for monitoring programs such as post-lead service line replacement or disturbance 
sampling, for which monitoring is offered because of the known issue, unrelated to corrosion 
control efficacy, that replacements and disturbances can temporarily increase lead levels. 
Additionally, this requirement would disincentivize systems from offering any type of 
customer requested sampling program. In addition to the added risk of finding high lead 
levels, caused by any number of reasons unrelated to corrosion control efficacy, water 
systems would then be forced to perform far more intensive site characterization of any home 
participating in the customer requested sample program. EPA should not be taking steps to 
disincentivize water systems from offering these types of programs from their customers due 
to added risk of non-compliance. Finally, through the tiering system proposed within this 
regulation and the new proposed requirement that all homes included in the compliance 
monitoring pool be Tier 1 and Tier 2 homes, EPA is clearly stating that they believe that the 
homes best suited for evaluating the efficacy of corrosion control are those with lead service 
lines. If EPA believes that the sampling pool should be comprised of only homes with lead 
service lines, then the Agency should remain consistent in that assessment and not include 
higher values from unrelated monitoring programs with different goals; this would  increase 
the number of systems that are in a state of non-compliance, and for reasons unrelated to 
system corrosion control optimization.  
 
24. EPA should remove the requirement for water systems to provide an explanation for 
changes to their sample locations from round to round. 
 
Since the promulgation of the LCR in 1991, PWD has completed 15 distinct lead and copper 
tap monitoring periods. Lead and copper tap monitoring, unlike any other regulatory 
monitoring program, is conducted at locations that are entirely out of the control of the water 
system and the water system must rely on customers’ voluntary participation. For each of 
these monitoring periods, one of the most time consuming and difficult tasks is the 

 
 
recruitment of willing participants who meet the sampling criteria for the program. EPA 
should be making every effort to reduce the burden on water systems who are acting in good 
faith to find  qualifying homes that are willing to participate. The requirements defined in 
141.86(b)(2) state that a “water system must collect tap samples from the same sampling 
sites” and that a water system “must include an explanation of why sampling sites have 
changed” unnecessarily add administrative burden to the lead and copper tap monitoring 
programs, which are already onerous as discussed here. PWD agrees with the Pennsylvania 
Department of Environmental Protection’s comments on Docket No EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0813 
that it is not necessary for a water system to report or explain that they have sampled at a 
different location from previous monitoring rounds.  
 
During the first six (6) of PWD’s lead and copper monitoring periods, from 1992 to 1999, PWD 
was able to continue with the same pool of customers while still meeting the minimum 
number of required samples. However, over those 6 monitoring periods, the number of 
participants dropped consistently from 162 to 57. This shows that even at the beginning of 
the program it was difficult to maintain a static sampling pool for this monitoring program. In 
the monitoring periods since then, and especially since only LSL were included in the sampling 
pool in 2016, PWD has had to continually supplement its sample location pool, with new 
sampling locations comprising, on average, 41% of the sample pool each round. Over time, 
customers can stop participating for any number of reasons such as change in owner, lead 
service line replacement, or lack of interest, all of which is outside of the control of the 
water system. Due to constant issues with retaining willing, qualifying participants, PWD has 
had to introduce monetary incentives to meet the minimum number of participants. In PWD’s 
most recent monitoring period, every previous participant with a LSL was contacted via mail 
and, when available, email as part of the recruitment process. In total, 215 previous 
customers were contacted and only 77 (35%) responded to PWD’s outreach efforts, of which 
only 58 (27%) completed the sampling process. Customers who had participated in a recent 
sampling round (2019) were more likely to respond, but even that cohort only had 66% of 
participants respond. This example demonstrates a common response rate that PWD 
observes even with monetary incentives for participants. To supplement the sampling pool 
to meet 100 homes, PWD reached out to additional homes identified as having or suspected 
of having LSL to participate in this sampling program.  
 
PWD acknowledges the need for the water system to inform the State, through its sample 
siting plan, which homes are included in the sample location pool, including new locations. 
However, it is an unnecessary administrative burden for water systems to have to justify 
every change in sampling location. PWD recommends that EPA remove the requirement for 
water systems to provide an explanation of why the sample locations changed between 
monitoring periods.  
 
25. EPA should provide large water systems with lead levels consistently below the action level 
with a clear path to reduced monitoring. 
 
Under the proposed language of the LCRI, any system, regardless of size, that completes two 
consecutive 6-month monitoring periods with both rounds having a 90th percentile less than 
or equal to 5 ppb moves to triennial monitoring. If any system completes the first two 6-

 
 
month monitoring periods with both rounds having a 90th percentile less than or equal to 10 
ppb, but either round having a 90th percentile greater than 5 ppb, then the system moves to 
annual monitoring. In the event that a system falls into this second category, the current 
wording of section 141.86(d)(2) doesn’t clearly provide a mechanism by which a large system 
on annual monitoring can ever move to triennial monitoring. EPA provides a mechanism for 
small and medium water systems on annual monitoring to move to triennial monitoring if 
they complete 3 consecutive years of monitoring with no lead or copper ALE. However, this 
mechanism is not extended to large water systems with no clear justification provided. EPA 
should modify the language in this section of the regulation to include large systems. If a large 
system is on annual monitoring and demonstrates for three consecutive monitoring periods 
that its 90th percentile level is less than or equal to 10 ppb, then it would make sense to 
allow the system to move to triennial monitoring similar to small and medium systems.  
 
PWD recommends that the wording of 141.85(d)(2)(ii) be revised to “Any water system that 
does not exceed the lead and copper action levels during three consecutive years of 
monitoring (standard monitoring completed during both six-month periods of a calendar year 
will be considered one year of monitoring) may sample at the reduced number of sites for lead 
and copper in accordance with this paragraph (d) and reduce the monitoring frequency to 
triennial monitoring.” 
 
PWD recommends that the wording of 141.85(d)(2)(iii) be revised to “Any water system that 
demonstrates for two consecutive six-month or annual tap monitoring periods that its 90th 
percentile lead level calculated under 141.80(c)(3), is less than or equal to 0.005 mg/L and the 
90th percentile copper level, calculated under 141.80(c)(3), is less than or equal to 0.65 mg/L 
may sample at the reduced number of sites for lead and copper in accordance with paragraph 
(C) of this section and reduce the frequency of monitoring to triennial monitoring.” 
 
 
Action Level Exceedances 
 
26. EPA should be less prescriptive in requirements for systems with multiple action level 
exceedances. 
 
In section 141.85(j)(2), EPA mandates that a water system that has three action level 
exceedances under the newly proposed sampling protocols and action level within a five-year 
period will be required to offer pitcher filters to every consumer in their system. This section 
details five key issues related to the scale, costs, and timelines of this requirement that are 
minimized, underestimated, or not considered in both the proposed rule and the associated 
economic analysis. 
 
First, EPA estimated how many systems this would impact by evaluating stagnant first liter 
data collected from homes with and without LSL under the LCR from 2012-2020. Using static 
multipliers, EPA estimated how many of these systems would have potentially exceeded the 
lower action level of 10 ppb under the new sampling protocol where compliance is based on 
the higher lead level from the first- and fifth-liter sample at a given home. This estimation 
method compounds numerous assumptions that boil complex distributions into single 

 
 
numbers, such as the impact of only sampling from homes with LSL and collecting first and 
fifth liter samples. The level of uncertainty is unaccounted for outside of a “high” and “low” 
scenario which do not adequately account for all of the possible variation in the data. As such, 
EPA has not demonstrated effectively that it knows how many systems are likely to be 
affected by this new mandate. Additionally, with many systems reverting to standard 
monitoring, systems will be collecting samples far more frequently than in the period 
analyzed which could lead to a higher number of systems that have multiple action level 
exceedances under the newly proposed sampling method and action level.  
 
Second, from the estimation method discussed in the previous paragraph, EPA detailed which 
systems it expected to trigger this provision. However, it appears that EPA opted not to 
include the few very large systems that were estimated to trigger this provision in its cost 
analysis. The national annualized cost of this provision was estimated between $6.9M and 
$9.7M. While PWD was not estimated to be at risk of triggering this provision, there were 
multiple systems of equivalent or larger size that were. Using PWD’s size as an example, with 
a population of 1.6 million people and an average household size of 2.34, PWD can judge the 
number of consumers (defined by EPA in this provision as the number of households rather 
than services) to be approximately 685,000. Using all the same assumptions described in 
section 4.3.6.4 of the economic analysis, PWD’s annualized costs alone for this type of 
program would be between $2.2M and $3.6M. With EPA’s own analysis predicting that 
multiple systems of the same size as PWD would trigger this provision, there is no clearly 
presented reason to exclude these large systems from the economic analysis. Any very large 
water system that triggers this provision is likely to push the national costs of this provision 
well past the costs EPA suggests in the economic analysis. 
 
Third, in its economic analysis, EPA assumes that only 20% of consumers will request these 
pitcher filters. EPA has provided no justification for this assumption and if underestimated, 
would cause the cost and feasibility of this provision to be drastically underestimated. If this 
provision is triggered by a water system, the water system will have issued three separate 
Tier 1 public notifications to all of its consumers saying that it has elevated lead levels. The 
mandated health language associated with these notices, the urgency of their delivery, and 
the repeated notifications will ensure that consumers in these systems are on high alert for 
lead in drinking water.  EPA should provide more clarity about how this assumption was 
derived and how it is applicable to the proposed provision.  
 
Fourth, the requirement that this program be established within 60 days of the third action 
level exceedance is not feasible. While the system may be able to develop and provide the 
educational materials associated with this provision within this time, the materials associated 
with the pitcher filter portion of the provision cannot be procured reliably in this timeframe. 
Water systems will be required within 60 days to determine which filter to use, where to store 
these filters, how to procure them, and how to track this process. This also leaves water 
systems at the mercy of pitcher filter providers to have the necessary number of filters to 
meet the demands of this program. If PWD were to trigger this provision and following EPA’s 
assumption that 20% of consumers requested filters, then PWD would need to procure more 
than 130,000 pitcher filters within 60 days. This large demand is likely to be replicated 
elsewhere putting an extreme strain on the national availability of these pitcher filters. This 

 
 
is made worse by the fact that, with every system across the country reverting to standard 
monitoring in 2028, it is likely to create a mad dash for pitcher filters at the end of the 3rd 
standard monitoring period. EPA estimates that as many as 30% of systems will exceed the 
action level, it holds that many of those will exceed it multiple times. With many systems all 
needing to procure a large number of filters at the same time, there will be supply chain issues 
inhibiting the ability of systems to establish this program in such a short period of time. 
Skyrocketing demand and low supply will also result in individual costs of these filters rising 
significantly as manufacturers know that these systems have no choice but to purchase their 
filters.  
 
Finally, the proposed revision would require that water systems make these filters available 
to all consumers rather than those with lead service lines. This requirement will confuse 
residents who are at very little to no risk of lead exposure from their water if they do not have 
lead plumbing. If EPA maintains a version of this provision in the final rule, the focus should 
be on providing, upon request, pitcher filters to customers with lead service lines.  
 
This provision is overly prescriptive and assumes a one-size-fits-all approach will work for 
systems that are experiencing multiple action level exceedances. This provision is also likely 
to distract water systems with multiple action level exceedances from the important work of 
replacing lead service lines. EPA should instead modify the requirements for systems with 
multiple action level exceedances to review their existing corrosion control and 
replacement plans with their primacy agency and give the primacy agency the discretion to 
determine if additional actions are needed, such as this type of pitcher filter program.  
 
 
Public Education and Notification 
 
27. EPA should not overly burden water systems with strict administrative requirements 
regarding sample result notification for sample results below the proposed action level. 
 
In section 141.85(d)(1)-(4) of the proposed LCRI, EPA is proposing that all lead and copper tap 
results must be provided to consumers within 3 calendar days of receiving the results, 
regardless of the lead and copper levels at the home. While PWD understands the 
importance of timely communication of these sample results, the proposed 3 calendar day 
notification timeline is not feasible for CWSs due to both the large number of samples 
required to be collected with this notification requirement and the level of effort that would 
be required to meet this requirement.  
 
Under the proposed LCRI, medium and large CWSs will be collecting large quantities of lead 
and copper samples under various portions of the rule (e.g. Lead and Copper Tap Samples, 
Customer Requested Programs, Risk Mitigation Measure sampling following LSLR). The sheer 
number of samples that must be collected will result in the water systems having to generate 
these notices constantly and will add a significant administrative burden without a clear need 
for a faster timeline.  During the first year of LCRI compliance, PWD will be required to collect 
at least 200 paired 1st and 5th liter samples for regulatory compliance. PWD regularly collects 
approximately 100 customer requested samples per year (which will likely increase with all 

 
 
the public education required under the LCRI), and with the mandated replacement rates, 
PWD could collect as many as 2,000 post replacement samples. In total, this results in up to 
2,300 customers that will require notification on an annual basis, which equates to nearly 200 
notifications per month. The current 30-day notification requirements for results less than 
the action level is already a significant administrative challenge. However, with a 30-day 
notification timeframe, water systems are more effectively able to batch communications to 
reduce the amount of time that is needed on any single result notification. However, if the 
timeframe for providing these notifications becomes 3 calendar days, it would make this 
requirement infeasible for water systems. This burden is further exacerbated by proposed 
sample methods that require both 1st and 5th liter samples to be analyzed and results 
communicated with the customer. Depending on how the labs batch and analyze samples, 
that may result in the water system receiving results for just one of the two samples at a given 
home and then having to make two separate notifications to the customer, doubling the 
administrative burden on the system.  
 
In section V.H.3 of the preamble of the LCRI, EPA states that “Based…on the fact that water 
systems have a long history of demonstrated ability to provide consumer notices within an 
even shorter time frame of 24 hours in other contexts, water systems should be capable of 
providing these consumer notices no later than three days after the water systems learns of 
the results”. While PWD does not dispute the fact that water systems have shown the ability 
to meet 24-hour notification requirements following a Tier 1 Public notification event, this is 
not a valid comparison to routine tap sample result notifications. First, a situation triggering 
a Tier 1 PN, requiring a notification to all affected customers within 24 hours, is not a routine 
event for most water systems. An event triggering this level of notification is an all-hands-on 
deck situation in which water systems are dedicating large amounts of resources to delivering 
these notifications. This is especially true in medium to large scale systems where the 
notification has to be delivered to hundreds of thousands or millions of people. In addition, 
these types of 24-hour notifications are not routine operations and may only occur once every 
few years, if even that often. PWD has only ever had to issue one 24-hour notification since 
the promulgation of the public notification regulation. Second, the water system  distributes 
the exact same information to all affected customers for a Tier 1 PN. Conversely, lead sample 
result notifications are unique and targeted communications to each individual resident. 
These are vastly different modes of communication. Third, 24-hour notifications are typically 
reserved for acute health risks. For example, if an E. coli MCL is exceeded, a Tier 1 PN is issued 
for consumers to boil their water because consuming the water may put people at risk of 
immediate gastrointestinal illness. In the preamble, EPA justifies the 3-calendar day 
notification requirement by stating that since there is no safe level of lead exposure, even 
results that are less than the action level require immediate notification. While PWD agrees 
that there is no safe level of lead exposure, EPA has not demonstrated that water lead levels 
below the proposed action level would constitute an acute health risk. This is especially true 
when the sample results show lead below the method reporting limit. There is no justification 
for requiring a 3-day notification for a sample result that indicates that the consumer is at no 
identifiable risk of lead exposure. While PWD supports a 3-business day notification for 
sample results over the action level, as those consumers are at a greater risk of lead 
exposure, it is infeasible to extend that requirement to all sample results. This is especially 
true for sample results that do not have any detectable level of lead found. Overall, PWD 

 
 
believes it is inappropriate to compare these types of rare, high consequence situations (e.g., 
boil water notices) to routine laboratory result notifications, especially for results that are 
below the proposed action level.  
 
Finally, if water systems are forced to expend exorbitant amount of time on routine, non-
emergency notifications, then resources will be diverted away from providing effective one-
on-one public education to customers who have lead levels above the action level and are at 
higher risk of lead exposure from their water. While it is important to provide effective public 
education to all consumers, it is also important to provide more in-depth information to those 
who may have a higher risk. EPA should not put in place requirements that will inhibit a water 
system’s administrative ability to provide customers with lead levels above the action level 
more highly targeted and in-depth public education.  
 
PWD suggests that EPA implement a 3-business day notification requirement for sample 
results that have a lead level above the action level but maintain the 30-day notification 
requirement for lead levels that are below the action level.  
 
28. EPA should provide clear language that absolves water systems of any liability due to 
ineffectiveness of pitcher filters that are provided as part of mandated actions from EPA.  
 
Under the LCRI, all water systems are being mandated, under several scenarios, to provide 
customers with pitcher filters that are certified to remove lead. This mandate to provide 
commercial products in such a public-facing manner inherently implies that the water system 
is also certifying that these pitcher filters meet their lead removal claims. It is outside of the 
purview of water systems to serve as a commercial product certification entity. As such, 
EPA should develop language that water systems can use that will clearly absolve the water 
system from any potential liability associated with these filters not meeting the removal 
claims of a third-party manufacturer.  
 
29. EPA should allow more flexibility on the amount of required language in public education 
documents. 
 
In section 141.154 of the proposed rulemaking, EPA has increased the amount of required 
language through the form of both informational language and health language. The 
informational and health effects language are large blocks of text that are 254 and 115 words 
long, respectively, for a total of 369 words. This is an increase from the LCRR requirements 
which had a combined word count of 269 words. Mandating this large amount of text that 
must be used verbatim in public education materials gives water systems no flexibility in 
making effective and clear communication materials for their consumers. PWD takes great 
pride in outreach and communication efforts with customers across all facets of the water 
system. There are many ways to create effective communication materials, and, often, large 
blocks of text are not at the top of the list. By forcing water systems to present this 
information in this specific manner, it reduces that ability for the water system to innovate in 
how effectively it is providing this information.  
 

 
 
EPA should limit the amount of mandated language to as small a word count as possible and 
provide the remaining information through guidance that is left open to water systems being 
able to take that information and present it in a more effective manner.  
 
30. EPA should allow more flexibility in the order of public education materials. 
 
In section 141.85 of the proposed rule, EPA states that systems must include all the 
information detailed in sections 141.85(a)(1)(i)-(iv) in the exact order they are presented in 
the regulation and for three of these subsections with the exact wording. In mandating the 
order in which information is presented in public education, EPA is restricting the water 
systems ability to present this information in easier to understand and graphically digestible 
formats. PWD suggests that EPA provide the required information and through guidance 
suggest the general order that these topics should be covered. However, EPA should allow 
water systems, under the assumption that these systems will be acting in good faith, the 
flexibility to develop effective communication materials that convey all the required topics.  
 
 
Schools and Childcare facilities 
 
31. EPA requests comments on whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples 
and/or sample more frequently in schools and childcare facilities. 
 
EPA states in their preamble that the goal of the schools and childcare facilities is to raise 
awareness of the risks of lead plumbing in these facilities. PWD agrees that educating schools 
and childcare facilities of the risks of lead plumbing and assisting them reducing the risk of 
lead exposure provides a crucial public health benefit. However, PWD does not believe that 
the burden for providing extensive water sampling at these private, commercial businesses 
should fall solely on CWSs. Schools and large childcare facilities can have dozens, and 
sometimes over 100, potable water taps in their buildings. If EPA were to increase the 
required number of samples at these facilities to cover the entire 3T’s requirement of all 
drinking water and food preparation taps, it would significantly increase the burden and cost 
of this program. Any increase in the number of required samples would both increase the 
analysis costs associated with this program as well as the complexity in the required sample 
plans and thus the amount of time and effort the CWS will have to invest into each facility. 
EPA should also not add any additional sample types, such as 30 second flush samples, or 
require any follow up samples because of elevated lead levels within a facility. PWD believes 
that these can be provided as best practice recommendations in future guidance, but 
additional investments into these programs by a CWS should be left to the discretion of the 
CWS.  
 
In addition, EPA should not increase the frequency at which these facilities must be sampled. 
In Philadelphia, there are approximately 400 elementary schools and 1600 childcare facilities. 
At the current five-year sample window, PWD will be required to sample from 80 elementary 
schools per year and 320 childcare facilities per year. At the current rate, PWD will be required 
to facilitate sampling at an average pace of approximately 8 facilities per week. Compared to 
the standard monitoring requirements for lead and copper under LCRI, this requirement, as 

 
 
proposed, is already a much larger sampling requirement. Under standard monitoring, PWD 
will be required to collect two samples from 100 homes over two six-month monitoring 
periods for a total of 400 samples. Under the currently proposed school and childcare 
sampling requirements, PWD will be required to collect up to 1,040 samples per year. 
Increasing the sampling frequency requirements to anything shorter than 5 years will 
significantly increase the burden on CWSs and put systems at risk of failing to meet sampling 
requirements.  
 
Given the extensive number of resources that are already required of CWSs under this 
regulation, PWD believes that EPA should maintain the current proposed requirements 
regarding the number and frequency of samples collected.  
 
32. EPA should strongly emphasize the use of waivers for schools and childcare facilities that 
have previous sample results.  
 
PWD agrees with EPA that facilities with sample results meeting the minimum requirements 
of the LCRI that are collected after 1/1/2021 and prior to the LCRI compliance date should be 
exempted from the first five-year sampling cycle. While this is left to the discretion of the 
individual state, it would be beneficial to CWSs for EPA to strongly encourage states to grant 
waivers for these cases. This should be especially true for any systems that choose to start 
their school and childcare monitoring program prior to the compliance date, thereby allowing 
systems more time to complete the first five-year sample cycle as the program gets off the 
ground. Furthermore, in the EPA’s cost analysis, EPA assumes that many of the public 
elementary schools and childcare facilities will be granted waivers based on Water 
Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation (WIIN) Act grant funded sampling programs. If 
states opt to not grant waivers for these programs, then the costs associated with sampling 
school and childcare facilities will be drastically underestimated.  
 
33. EPA should not require CWSs to publicly publish the lead levels of private schools and 
private childcare facilities.  
 
Many of the schools and childcare facilities that will be sampled under the LCRI’s sampling 
program will be privately run, corporate organizations. While the CWS may be providing these 
facilities with water testing, it should not be the responsibility of the CWS to publicly share 
the information of a private corporation. It is the responsibility of the facility to disseminate 
this information to any affected parties. The EPA should not place CWSs in the middle of 
potential public health disputes between facility management and its customers (i.e. 
parents) for an issue that is driven by the privately owned plumbing within the building, 
which the water system has no ownership over. If the CWS is required to publicly share this 
data, it would likely result in the CWS having to field numerous questions from concerned 
parents and require the CWS to act as intermediary between these private facilities and their 
customers. Even in the case of public-school districts, the CWS and the public school district 
are separate entities, and it should be the responsibility of the school district to share the 
results from individual district schools.  
 

 
 
In addition, sharing this data publicly could put CWS at risk of litigation from these private 
corporations if they believe that the sharing of the results led to the loss of customers to their 
business. EPA should not place CWS in the path of potential litigation issues.  
 
PWD recommends that EPA provide communications materials that CWS can provide to 
facility owners regardless of their lead levels to help the facility owners communicate this 
issue with the parents of the facility.  
 
34. Public education requirements specified under 141.85(a)(1) are not all applicable for annual 
education provided to schools and childcare facilities.  
 
Section 141.92(c)(1) of the proposed rule specifies that the annual education that community 
water systems deliver to all schools and childcare facilities be “consistent with the content 
requirements of section 141.85(a)(1).” However, section 141.85(a)(1)(i) is written in the 
context of a water system that exceeds the lead action level system wide. The paragraph in 
section 141.92(c)(1) should specify that section 141.85(a)(1)(i) is not directly applicable for 
the purpose of annual education materials delivered to schools and childcare facilities. If a 
water system were to exceed the lead action level, all customers (including these facilities) 
would receive specific public education material for a lead action level exceedance that 
includes section 141.85(a)(1)(i) exactly as written.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1861 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
US Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460  
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
We are writing as members of Project TENDR (Targeting Environmental Neuro-Development Risks), 
an alliance of scientists, health professionals, and children’s and environmental advocates 
concerned about the contributions of environmental chemicals to neurodevelopmental disorders 
such as intellectual and learning disabilities, autism spectrum disorder, and attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder. Some of the world’s most recognized experts on the dangers of early life 
lead exposure participate in Project TENDR and published the attached consensus paper (Bellinger 
et al. 2017) to inform on and advocate for adequate protections based on decades of strong 
scientific evidence.  
 
We are writing both to express our support for the proposed National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (“LCRI”) and to encourage EPA to add further 
provisions that will do even more to reduce lead in drinking water and the harm that comes from 
that exposure.  
 
Over many decades, lead has been found to be causal in neurodevelopmental detriment for 
multiple indicators including cognitive and academic performance (Lanphear et al. 2000), 
sensorimotor development (Dietrich, et al. 1985, Bellinger et al. 1991), behavior (Needleman, et al. 
1996), and attention regulation (Davis, et al. 2004) for many populations. Moreover, scientists now 
recognize that lead does lasting harm to children even at extremely low exposure levels. In 2012, 
the National Toxicology Program concluded that blood lead concentrations below 5 µg/dL have 
adverse effects on academic achievement, IQ, and attention-related behaviors. As noted later in 
this letter, several authoritative bodies have gone further, concluding that no harmless level of lead 
exposure has been identified for children. 
Furthermore, there is growing evidence that the adverse effects of lead are most severe in Black 
and Hispanic children (Evens, et al. 2015, Amato, et al. 2013) and low-income children (Marshall, et 
al. 2020). This suggests that socioeconomic disadvantages can worsen the impact of lead exposures. 
 
The U.S. EPA has long recognized there is no safe level of lead exposure for children. Likewise, in 
2012, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) moved away from a “level of concern” 
for lead – which would imply that there is a “safe” level below which no adverse effects are 
expected to occur- to a population-based guidance level in children that represents a sample of 
children at higher blood lead levels than the rest of the children in the nation. This move was 
motivated by the fact that no safe level of lead has been found over decades of research and 
hundreds of scientific publications. The population-based guidance level, referred to as a “reference 

value,” was set at 5 µg/dL in 2012, which at the time was the 97.5 percentile of the distribution of 
blood lead levels in U.S. children.  The CDC further reduced the blood lead reference value to 3.5 
μg/dL in 2021 to reflect the population exposure trend over time (CDC, 2021). Therefore, it is urgent 
and necessary that EPA eliminate sources of environmental lead at every potential opportunity.  
 
Restrictions and phasing out of lead in gasoline, paints, and other consumer products have resulted 
in decreasing blood lead concentrations in U.S. children. But lead exposure remains a major 
preventable cause of neurodevelopmental morbidity. Protective environmental health policies, like 
this proposed rule, are necessary to prevent adverse impacts of lead exposure.  
 
Neurodevelopmental harm is particularly concerning because of its intergenerational impacts 
throughout people’s and families’ lives. (Washington HA, 2019). Neurodevelopmental impacts 
hinder school success, job readiness, language transfer to children, and are associated with 
adjudicated delinquency, lost lifetime earnings, and other life-altering effects. Therefore, it is 
appropriate that the EPA finalize this proposed rule, as it is well supported by Executive Orders 
12898 (59 FR 7629) and 14096 (88 FR 25251) that require EPA to enact policy to incorporate 
Environmental Justice into their programs and policies, and Executive Order 13045 (62 FR 19885) 
that requires EPA to enact policy to protect children from environmental health risks and safety 
risks. Reducing the amount of lead in drinking water will benefit all children but especially children 
of color and those in low-income communities that are disproportionally exposed to lead. 
 
There are six ways in which EPA should strengthen this proposed rule: 
 
Lower the action level for drinking water to 5 parts per billion: Given that there is no safe level of 
lead and the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends a 1 ppb maximum lead level for drinking 
water in schools, we propose that the current action level of 15 be reduced to 5 rather than the 10 
ppb currently in the proposed rule. The FDA limit for lead in bottled water is 5 ppb.  
 
Use incentives to help utilities and other entities lower the levels of lead in drinking water in day 
care centers and schools. These incentives should include frequent tap testing, the replacement of 
lead containing faucets and fixtures, and use of filters certified to remove lead.  
 
Prioritize the communities that have the most lead service lines instead of providing exceptions 
to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate. Other cities can replicate the success of Newark, NJ 
that replaced all 23,000 of its known lead service lines in under three years.  
 
Require that federal funding and other public financing mechanisms cover the full cost of lead 
service line replacement. As it is currently written, the rule advantages communities where 
residents own rather than rent their homes and have the financial means to pay for the lead service 
line replacement costs.  
 
Address the issue of access to private property.  EPA defines the term “lead service line” as the 
“portion of pipe that is made of lead, which connects the water main to the building inlet.” To reach 
the stated goal of removing all lead service lines, EPA must change the proposed rule’s requirement 
that utilities must only remove those service lines to which a utility has “access,” a potential 
loophole that could severely limit the number of lead service lines that are replaced.  

Prevent regrettable substitutions and pollution from removed lead pipes:  EPA should require 
water systems to replace lead pipes with copper instead of plastics such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC), 
chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC), PEX or HDPE pipes. Plastics have known adverse impacts to 
human health and children's development; replacing one hazard with another will create a new set 
of health hazards for generations to come. A harmful stew of chemicals can leach from plastic pipes 
into drinking water, and these pipes are more vulnerable to thermal degradation from wildfires 
than copper pipes. In addition, micro- and nanoplastics can be released from the pipes into drinking 
water.  Plastic pipes also put fenceline communities at risk during the production and disposal 
phase, when toxic substances can be released into air and water.  For example, when PVC/CPVC 
pipes are incinerated, they can release highly toxic dioxins into the environment. EPA should also 
address end of life considerations for lead pipes and require that those removed are recycled in a 
safe and environmentally sound manner. 
Despite notable successes in reducing the blood lead concentrations of the U.S. population in 
recent decades, lead exposure remains a major preventable cause of neurodevelopmental 
morbidity in children. A voluminous body of research documents unequivocally that no level of lead 
exposure is safe for a fetus or young child. This conclusion has been endorsed by numerous 
authoritative bodies in addition to U.S. EPA that have evaluated this evidence, including the World 
Health Organization (JECFA, 2011), the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, 2012), 
the U.S. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR, 2020), the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA, 2023) and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA, 2010). A stronger set of 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements will be an important step in protecting children from harm 
and ending this public health injustice.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Jerry P. Abraham, MD MPH CMQ* 
Family & Community Medicine Physician & Injury Epidemiologist  
Hearing Board Physician Member, South Coast Air Quality Management District AQMD 
Representative, National Hispanic Medical Association (NHMA) 
 
John R. Balmes, MD*  
Prof. of Medicine, UCSF; Prof. Environmental Health Sciences, UC Berkeley  
Director, Northern Calif Center for Occupational & Environmental Health  
UC Berkeley-UC Davis-UCSF  
 
David C. Bellinger, PhD, MSc*  
Research Director, Boston Children’s Hospital  
Professor, Harvard Medical School and Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health  
 
Linda S. Birnbaum, PhD, DABT, ATS*  
Scientist Emeritus and Former Director 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences and National Toxicology Program 
Scholar in Residence, Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University  
 

Asa Bradman, PhD, MS* 
Professor, Department of Public Health  
University of California, Merced 
 
Joseph M. Braun, PhD, MSPH, RN*  
Professor, Department of Epidemiology  
Director, Center for Children's Environmental Health  
Brown University 
 
Charlotte Brody, RN* 
Executive Director 
Healthy Babies Bright Futures  
 
Carla Campbell, MD, MS*  
Former Medical Director, The Lead Evaluation Clinic 
The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia 
 
Jeanne A. Conry, MD, PhD*  
President, Environmental Health Leadership Foundation  
President-Elect, International Federation of Gynaecology & Obstetrics  
 
Nathaniel DeNicola, MD MSHP FACOG* 
Environmental Health Expert 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists  
 
Brenda Eskenazi, PhD*  
Professor Emeritus 
Director, Center for Environmental Research and Children's Health (CERCH)  
School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley  
 
Robert M. Gould, MD*  
Associate Adjunct Prof., Program on Reproductive Health and Environment,  
UCSF School of Medicine 
Past President, Physicians for Social Responsibility  
 
Russ Hauser, MD, ScD, MPH*  
Frederick Lee Hisaw Professor of Reproductive Physiology,  
Professor of Environmental and Occupational Epidemiology, 
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health 
Professor of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Harvard Medical School  
 
Irva Hertz-Picciotto, PhD, MPH* 
Director, UC Davis Environmental Health Sciences Center 
Professor, Dept. of Public Health Sciences & Medical Investigations of Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders (MIND) Institute, University of California, Davis 
 

Deborah Hirtz, MD*  
Professor, Neurological Sciences and Pediatrics  
University of Vermont School of Medicine  
 
Arthur Lavin, MD, FAAP*  
Pediatrician 
Cleveland, Ohio 
 
Carmen J. Marsit, PhD* 
Rollins Distinguished Professor, Ganagarosa Dept. of Environmental Health 
Executive Associate Dean for Faculty Affairs and Research Strategy 
Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University 
 
Francheska M. Merced-Nieves, Ph.D.*  
Assistant Professor, Dept. Pediatrics and 
Dept. Environmental Medicine & Public Health 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai 
 
Pamela Miller, MS*  
Executive Director, Alaska Community Action on Toxics  
Co-Chair, International Pollutants Elimination Network  
 
Mark A. Mitchell MD, MPH, FACPM*  
Co-Chair, Commission on Environmental Health  
National Medical Association  
 
Frederica Perera, DrPH, PhD*  
Professor of Public Health; Director, Translational Research 
Founding Director, Columbia Center for Children’s Environmental Health,  
Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University  
 
Beate Ritz, MD, PhD* 
Professor of Epidemiology, Environmental Health, and Neurology 
Fielding School of Public Health and School of Medicine 
University of California Los Angeles 
 
Leslie Rubin, MD*  
Assoc. Prof., Dept. of Pediatrics, Morehouse School of Medicine  
Co-director, Southeast Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit, Emory University Founder, 
Break the Cycle of Health Disparities, Inc.  
 
Susan L. Schantz, PhD*  
Professor Emeritus of Toxicology and Neuroscience  
Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology  
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
 

Veena Singla, PhD*  
Adjunct Assistant Professor, Environmental Health Sciences 
Columbia University 
Associate Director, Agents of Change in Environmental Justice 
 
Jennifer Sass, PhD* 
Senior Scientist, Natural Resources Defense Council 
Professorial Lecturer, George Washington University 
 
Maureen Swanson, MPA*  
Director of Environmental Risk Reduction & Project TENDR  
The Arc of the United States  
 
Tanya Khemet Taiwo, PhD, CPM, MPH*  
Assistant Professor, Department of Midwifery 
Bastyr University  
 
Robin M. Whyatt, DrPH*  
Professor Emeritus, Department of Environmental Health Sciences  
Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University  
 
R. Thomas Zoeller, PhD*  
Professor Emeritus, Biology Department  
University of Massachusetts Amherst  
 
 
*Affiliations are provided for identification purposes only and do not imply institutional 
endorsement or support.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1123 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
VIA THE FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC  20004 
Re: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 – National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements  
To Whom It May Concern: 
The City of New York writes in connection with the Environmental Protection 
Agency’s newly proposed rule, amending 40 C.F.R. Parts 141 and 142, that will require water 
systems to replace lead service lines and make other changes in connection with drinking water.  
The City, like the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), is fully committed to the reduction 
and ultimately the elimination of lead exposure.  The City lauds the goals underlying this proposal, 
and submits the following comments for EPA’s consideration. 
Minimum Replacement Rates and Timeframe 
The most significant element of the EPA’s newly proposed rule is the requirement 
that community water systems replace all lead service lines within 10 years, at least to the extent 
that this timeframe may be read to pertain to the lead service lines that are not owned in whole or 
in part by the City.  Among other things, EPA seeks comments on whether that timeframe should 
be shorter still.  The City submits, in the strongest of terms, that it should not.  While the City 
understands the importance of reducing lead exposure and is actively engaged in the effort, the 
scale of this undertaking cannot be overstated.  The New York City Department of Environmental 
Protection (DEP) estimates that the total lead service lines and unknown service lines in the City 
is approximately 340,000.  Virtually none of these lines are owned in whole or in part by the City.  
As such, the City will not be able to meet a ten-year replacement program, much less a program 
 
 
 
HON. SYLVIA O. HINDS-RADIX 
Corporation Counsel 
THE CITY OF NEW YORK 
LAW DEPARTMENT 
100 CHURCH STREET 
NEW YORK, NY 10007 
 

 
2 
 
 
that imposes a shorter period of time.1  The City thus does not, and cannot, support a shorter 
timeframe, and urges EPA to ensure that the timeline is flexible.  The City is implementing a 
program by which it will begin replacements prior to the Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
(LCRI) compliance date.  But no matter when we begin, the City will be unable to complete all 
replacements by 2037. 
EPA also proposes that community water systems replace 10% of their lines 
annually.  While the City will make every effort to maximize the number of service lines replaced 
annually, given funding constraints and the availability of material and qualified contractors, it is 
highly unlikely that the City will be able to replace 34,000 lines each year.  Further, the City’s 
estimate of 340,000 total service line is only an estimate.  DEP (like other utilities) does not yet 
have enough data to determine an annual replacement rate that is feasible.  The City will gather 
additional information and data in the coming years and is prepared to coordinate with the State of 
New York to develop a feasible replacement plan.  As part of the revised rule, EPA should grant 
states the authority, and the flexibility, to work with individual utilities to develop workable 
replacement plans.2  Additionally, EPA should support proactive programs, and credit utilities that 
effect replacements while performing other work. 
Inventory Requirements 
There are multiple new components related to lead service line inventory in the 
proposed rule, including those that require tracking, reporting and certification within short 
deadlines.  EPA should allow the City, and other localities, to rely, at least in part, on reliable data 
that has already been collected.  Per Local Law, DEP developed and posted an interactive map on 
“LeadFreeNYC”3 where customers can check to see if their service lines might be lead.  In addition 
to the interactive map, DEP has a database of service line materials for the City that are based on 
tapping card records.  While DEP is redeveloping its service line inventory, this is a major 
undertaking requiring funding and staffing.  In the interim, the existing database can be used for 
the initial inventory. 
The LCRI requires the material of all connectors to be included in the inventory, 
though DEP has never tracked information on connectors.  The City does not recommend requiring 
the material identification of all connectors as the effort to comply far exceeds any risk reduction 
and will only detract from the efforts to identify and replace lead service lines. 
The LCRI requires utilities to statistically validate assumptions used to classify 
non-lead service lines without actual records.  DEP can reasonably assume that after 1961 all new 
service line connectors were not lead and that all service lines reconnected under a water main job 
done after 1961 also were not lead.  DEP should be permitted to base its inventory, in part, on 
 
1 Similarly, the City does not support the imposition of shortened deadlines connected to the 
compliance date. 
2 As noted throughout this letter, the City supports granting discretion to states to implement the 
LCRI.  EPA must, however, clarify criteria a state must use to “tailor” requirements. 
3 See https://www.nyc.gov/content/leadfree/pages/maps. 

 
3 
 
 
these assumptions.  Under the new rule, DEP will have to randomly select 384 properties that were 
classified as non-lead based on assumptions (and conduct a 2-point visual inspection to confirm if 
the assumptions were accurate).  The City supports this method of validation, and recognizes that, 
based on the results, DEP may be required to update its inventory to account for inaccuracies or 
weaknesses in the underlying assumptions. 
Along with the baseline inventory, the proposed rule requires community water 
systems to submit and make publicly available a service line replacement (SLR) plan in 2027.  In 
addition to the replacement cycle/time frame to complete all replacements, the plan must include 
a strategy for determining the material of unknowns, standard operating procedure (e.g., means 
and methods for procurement of materials or contractors) for conducting full replacements, 
communication strategy for full or partial replacements, flushing procedures, strategy for 
prioritization of replacements, funding strategy, communication strategy for the replacement 
plan/program, and finally the identification of any laws, regulations and/or tariff agreements that 
affect the City’s ability to gain access to conduct replacements including those that require consent 
or authorization.  This extensive information should be required for the initial plan only.  EPA 
should reduce the burden for subsequent updates by requiring updates only for regulatory or policy 
changes that impact the SLR plan.  
The Impact of Revised Definitions 
The LCRI proposes to update the mandatory lead health effects language from 
“Exposure to lead in drinking water can cause serious health effects in all age groups” to “There 
is no safe level of lead in drinking water.”  This proposed language would undermine public 
confidence in drinking water, as even with the removal of all lead service lines and the optimization 
of corrosion control, lead-containing plumbing components on premises will contribute some level 
of lead to tap water.  This language is also without precedent, even for regulated substances with 
a maximum contaminant level (MCL) and a maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG) of zero. 
While the replacement of lead service lines will improve lead levels in drinking 
water for homes with lead service lines, there will still be homes with premise plumbing (e.g., 
fixtures, solder, piping) that may contain lead.  Thus, homes with and without lead services lines 
will continue to have the potential for lead exposure.  Further, the proposed LCRI public 
notification and education materials would encourage consumers to consider bottled water as an 
alternative to tap water, without disclosing that there is an allowable 5 ppb limit of lead in bottled 
water.  While EPA is requiring point-of-use filters in the case of action level exceedances, EPA 
should also acknowledge the less stringent standards for bottled water and that increased use of 
bottled water would lead to increased detrimental environmental impacts from the production, 
distribution, and disposal of plastic bottles.  Additionally, the City’s extensive City-wide free 
residential at the tap sampling data (over 43,600 samples from the past 13 years) demonstrate that 
flushing consistently provides greater protection, with flushed samples having a P90 of 2 ppb.  
The presence of lead in premise plumbing, the potential for increased use of bottled 
water and the effectiveness of flushing at the tap must be considered in the final rule to maximize 
public health protection.  

 
4 
 
 
The City also recommends that the EPA return to the definition of “control” it 
adopted in the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) in 2000, i.e., that “control” is based on 
ownership.  The definition of what is “under the control” of water systems as described in the Safe 
Drinking Water Act (SDWA) properly excludes piping not owned by the water system.  This is a 
better, and more realistic definition of “control,” and the SDWA recognizes that control is not 
transferred even when an actual owner exercises their “control” to grant “access” to a water system. 
The EPA also proposes to revise the definition of “connector,” including that 
connectors are defined as “not exceeding two feet.”  Per the New York City Code, a connector has 
been defined for decades to have a minimum length of three feet and a maximum length of five 
feet.  As EPA provides no specific scientific basis for the proposed maximum of “two feet” other 
than a manufacturer’s specification, the City urges instead that the definition should be revised to 
“not exceeding five feet.” 
Corrosion Control and the Proposed Revised Treatment Technique 
The treatment technique, as proposed in the LCRI, includes a new sampling 
protocol for homes with lead service lines, and a revised sample pool, and it retains high-dose 
orthophosphate addition as the anticipated optimal corrosion treatment.  The LCRI also proposed 
to lower the lead action level to 10 µg/L.  The Corrosion Control Program implemented by DEP 
has enabled the City’s system to consistently comply with a lead action level of 15 µg/L; however, 
the 90th percentile compliance data have never been below a lead action level of 10 µg/L.  
Lowering the action level while incorporating lead observations from a 5th liter 
sample in compliance tap samples makes control of particulate lead more critical.  EPA has not 
provided analysis demonstrating that known corrosion control treatment (CCT) methods including 
orthophosphate can control particulate lead sufficiently for community water systems to reliably 
achieve required lead concentrations.  DEP has initiated studies to evaluate optimizing the City’s 
corrosion control treatment by increasing orthophosphate levels and our data clearly demonstrate 
that the lower action level is not achievable.  
Moreover, the results of DEP’s ongoing Optimization Corrosion Control Study 
demonstrate that increasing the orthophosphoric acid dose will not reduce the 90th percentile lead 
concentration of the 5th liter samples collected from the compliance pool with lead service lines 
below the proposed Action Level of 10 ppb (see Figures 1 and 2 below). 
 

 
5 
 
 
 
Figure 1 – Projections from Home Lead Profile Study 
 
 
 
Figure 2 – Projections using LCR Compliance Data  
 
It should be noted that the results of an on-going Home Profile Study, summarized 
in Figure 1, have a 1st liter 90th percentile lead concentration of 5 ppb, which is more than 50% 
lower than the 90th percentile lead concentration of 11 ppb that has been historically calculated for 
DEP’s compliance pool.  
The projections shown in Figure 2 are based on the percent increase in the 90th 
percentile lead concentrations established using sample data observed, when switching from 1st 
liter to the 5th liter sampling using the City’s Catskill/Delaware water supply, as collected in the 
Home Profile Study. The study results demonstrate a 270% increase in 90th percentile lead 
concentrations for an orthophosphate dose of 2 ppm.  An orthophosphate dose of 4 ppm lowers 
the 90th percentile lead increase by approximately 160%.  This reduction will not lower the 90th 
percentile lead concentration below the Action Level of 10 ppb.  

 
6 
 
 
While pH adjustment may offer some additional reduction of lead concentration, 
the 90th percentile lead concentrations will still likely be greater than the proposed Action Level. 
Also, increasing the pH to achieve this additional reduction will increase total trihalomethanes and 
result in other negative water quality impacts and compliance issues in the water system. 
Corrosion control should be assessed through a thoughtful analysis that documents 
current conditions and evaluates alternatives.  There are many instances in which making a 
corrosion control change that seems logical can have unintended consequences.  Ideally, corrosion 
control modifications will not involve major changes in corrosion control strategy, which would 
necessitate more extensive implementation timeframes.   
The LCRI proposed § 141.82(c) describes corrosion control studies broadly, and it 
is possible to prioritize analysis and data collection more efficiently than is reflected in the 
proposed rule text.  Also, and importantly, a robust training program will be needed for state and 
federal regulators, consulting engineers, and water system operators. 
The City agrees with what EPA expressed in the LCRI preamble: that expertise in 
the sector to determine CCT is limited.  The answer to this challenge is not to create a regulatory 
framework that encourages corrosion control changes without a proper analysis.   
Sampling 
The LCRI proposal returns the role of lead action level exceedances to its primary 
focus: optimizing corrosion control.  With that role in mind, the first-draw, the stagnant-water 
sample, remains the most reliable and appropriate trigger for revised corrosion control.  
EPA acknowledges in the proposed LCRI preamble, correctly, that actual lead 
occurrence is significantly impacted by other factors, in particular the amount and timing of 
ongoing water use in a structure.  Neither the 1st nor the 5th liter lead observations are representative 
of actual exposure.  Accordingly, use of a 1st liter-only protocol that does not introduce the 
additional site-to-site variability associated with 5th liter samples would be preferrable.  It also 
affords the economy of being a single sample for both lead and copper compliance data.  
EPA should not include supplemental samples collected outside of the compliance 
pool, such as samples collected in City’s Free Residential Testing Program or as part of a lead 
service line or connector replacement.  The City distributes over 10,000 lead test kits to customers 
per year as part of the Free Residential Testing program.  These customers are provided with 
sample collection instructions that do not match compliance sampling requirements, and inclusion 
of these data would not be appropriate for guiding decisions made regarding corrosion control 
treatment.  The City does not support the inclusion of supplemental sampling in the 90th percentile 
compliance calculations for lead concentration. 
Regulatory language should be revised to allow states the flexibility to direct who 
must conduct the testing (not necessarily the utility), who makes the data available, who reports 
data to the state and where data is posted.  If reporting must be included in the Consumer 

 
7 
 
 
Confidence Report (CCR), it should be minimized to providing a link to where the data are already 
provided.  Failure to conduct school sampling, meanwhile, should not be a Tier 3 violation.4 
Lead Action and Trigger Levels 
In lowering the lead action level, a lead exceedance under the LCRI at 10 μg/L will 
trigger both Tier 1 public notice and public education.  While using the action level to trigger 
public notice and public education simplifies the regulation, EPA has significantly expanded the 
public education components of the LCRR, and many of these components are now disconnected 
from the lead action level.  Additional public education requirements burden systems and would 
consume resources better applied to removing lead service lines as efficiently as is feasible. The 
following steps would simplify the public education requirements: 
• Public education requirements should apply only to homes with lead service lines 
rather than City-wide.   
• States should retain the ability to grant time extensions (beyond 60 days) for the 
delivery of public education materials.  Significant mailings outside of DEP’s 90-
day billing cycle would be required to complete public education in shorter 
timeframes; those mailings would be done at a significant cost without much 
benefit to actually reaching and educating the public.  
• Request that the property owner retain the responsibility for distributing (i.e., 
posting) public education materials in multi-family dwellings.  
• Allow more flexibility in developing public education materials.  Under the 
LCRR and newly proposed LCRI, requirements for public education brochures 
and pamphlets do not facilitate effective communication.  Additionally, the 
current regulatory text does not provide the flexibility that is needed for effective 
communication via electronic communications media, should EPA elect to 
facilitate use of a broader array of communication tools. 
Under the LCRI, educational materials must include the statement “Lead in 
drinking water is primarily from materials and parts used in service lines and in home plumbing. 
DEP is responsible for providing high quality drinking water and removing lead pipes but cannot 
control the variety of materials used in the plumbing in your home.”  This ambiguous language 
implies that DEP has the responsibility for removing all lead service lines and not just the lead 
service lines and galvanized requiring replacement service lines under its “control.” 
Following an action level exceedance, the City recommends that EPA require 
community water systems to re-optimize only once, and allowing re-optimization based on past 
CCT studies.  As the trigger for additional action (e.g., the lead action level, targeted sample pool, 
sampling protocol, exceedance calculation, and monitoring frequency) becomes more sensitive, 
 
4 The New York City Public Health Law § 1110 went into effect December 22, 2022.  Pursuant to 
this provision, the New York City Department of Education (DOE) commenced a new testing 
cycle in 2023, which will conclude in December 2025.  The DOE will test at least a third of its 
buildings every year on a cyclical basis.  These results will be collected in the window between 
January 1, 2021, and the LCRI compliance date. 

 
8 
 
 
further adjustments to CCT practice become more challenging.  This result is especially true for 
systems like the City’s that are facing multiple, simultaneous compliance challenges (e.g., 
Disinfection Byproducts control). 
The LCRI should not require additional actions based on multiple action level 
exceedances.  Based on the study results set forth above, DEP will not be able to comply with the 
proposed action level of 10 ppb of lead but will have few if any actions available that can feasibly 
be implemented. 
The LCRR and now the LCRI contain public education measures that inform the 
public regularly about additional risk reduction steps that individuals can take.  Because EPA is 
choosing to lower the action level, multiple exceedances, particularly in the initial implementation 
period, will simply reflect the sensitivity of the new trigger for that additional focus, not a new 
health concern.  Additional public education measures are an administrative burden that neither 
affords additional health risk reduction nor accelerates improvement in corrosion control practice. 
Receiving three violations within a rolling five-year period requires additional 
actions including making available, within 60 days, “to all consumers” American National 
Standards Institute (ANSI) accredited Point of Use (POU) devices with a six-month supply of 
cartridges, and replacement cartridges every six months thereafter.  DEP estimates needing up to 
3.35 million pitcher filters (2.63 residents per household).  To meet the filter requirement, DEP 
would be required to submit a POU filter plan to the State within 30 days to outline the operation 
of distribution facilities, delivery mechanisms for filters, and barriers to obtaining filters.  DEP 
would also be required to conduct additional community outreach, at least one activity every six 
months, which may include Town Halls, community events, phone, text, email, door hanger 
messages, use of social media, etc. 
EPA should not require water systems that exceed the lead action level multiple 
times to make filters available to all consumers (see below for a fuller discussion on this potential 
requirement).  If EPA finalizes the rule including such a requirement, it should make every effort 
to minimize the burden the multiple action level exceedances requirement places on water systems.  
For example, most systems in this situation will be exceeding the action level based on a dataset 
drawn from a subset of service line / plumbing material characteristics that are not necessarily 
typical of the lines in the service area.  Consequently, if filters were to be made available, there 
should be a focus on that subset of households rather than “all consumers.” 
Potential Requirement to Provide Filters and Replacement Cartridges 
EPA should not require water systems that exceed the lead action level multiple 
times to make filters available to all consumers.  There may be instances where filters are 
warranted, but that decision should be made based on site-specific facts by the state in 
collaboration with the community water system.  The costs of a program providing filters to all 
consumers are substantial, and these resources could be better applied to lead service line 
replacements. 
 

 
9 
 
 
In 2015, to ensure that any filters recommended or provided to residents were 
effective at removing lead from the City’s tap water, DEP undertook a study to evaluate the 
effectiveness of different brands of pitcher filters.  The brands evaluated were tested using 
certification requirements equivalent to the 2019 National Sanitation Foundation (NSF)/ANSI 53 
standard levels of less than 10 ppb lead, which translates to 93% removal if the influent lead is 150 
ppb.  
DEP tested 4 pitcher filters that are NSF/ANSI 53 certified for lead reduction, and 
three (3) not NSF/ANSI 53 certified for lead, using influent solutions of three different 
concentrations of lead: 50 ppb, 100 ppb, and 150 ppb.  The study demonstrated that the average 
lead reductions per brand ranged from 50% lead removal to 93% lead removal and only one pitcher 
filter repeatedly achieved both percentage removal above 93% and lead less than 10 ppb in filtered 
water (see Figure 3).  Additionally, a drop in lead reduction was consistently observed as the 
volume of water put through each filter increased to the 13th liter.  Filters were rated for a life 
expectancy between 20 gallons and 120 gallons, depending on the brand.  Providing a filter with 
a shorter than expected life, could result in higher lead levels to the customer even if the 
manufacturer’s specifications are followed. 
 
Figure 3 - DEP Pitcher Filter Study Lead Reduction 
 
EPA has agreed that flushing is an effective alternative to filters for reducing lead 
levels in both non-lead service line residences and homes that have completed a lead service line 
replacement.  According to City’s Free Residential Lead Testing Program, lead levels in City 
residences without a service line are relatively low (90% of results are below 3 ppb in the first 
draw) and flushing for 1-2 minutes further reduces lead levels (i.e., 90% of results are 1 ppb or 
lower).  Additionally, samples collected during a New York State grant-funded pilot lead service 
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
BB
DC
ED
BB
AA
BB
CB
DC
ED
EE
FF
50
100
150
Pb % Reduction 
Pitcher Filter Brand
Influent Solution Pb Concentration (ppb)
Lead (Pb) % Reduction Rates
Min
Avg
Max
NSF/ANSI 53

 
10 
 
 
line replacement program demonstrate that 75% of 1–2-minute flush (1-2MF) samples were 
consistently 0 ppb four weeks after a lead service line replacement, and 90% of 1-2MF samples 
were ≤1 ppb collected between 30 and 60 days post-replacement.  These data are summarized in 
Figure 4 and Figure 5 below.  
 
Figure 4 - Distribution of Lead Concentrations up to Eight Weeks LSLR* 
* Outliers are not shown. 
 
 
Figure 5 - Distribution Lead Concentrations from Residences without a LSL and homes 
sampled 30-60 days after a LSLR*  
*Outliers not shown.  

 
11 
 
 
Non-lead service line residences were tested as part of the City’s Free Residential 
Lead Testing Program and are known to have a non-lead service line based on historical records 
(20,074 residences).  Lead service line replacement homes were sampled as part of a State grant-
funded lead service line replacement program (252 residences). 
Complexity of Regulatory Approach, Education, and Reporting 
EPA asked if the LCRI could be simplified and any of its attendant burdens 
reduced.  DEP believes that the LCRI reporting requirements can be simplified by reducing the 
requirements to an annual submittal of the service line replacement rate, and by removing the need 
to report lead connectors in the inventory.  Annual inventory data updates would be made available 
to the public, and inventory data documentation could be reported to oversight agencies at the State 
level (in the City’s case, to the New York State Department of Health, where data could be 
maintained online and be available for State audits). 
The public education requirements could include preparation and submittal of a 
single public education plan rather than EPA’s current public education reporting requirements. 
That single plan would be subject to State review and approval prior to the first compliance date, 
and DEP would certify annually compliance with the plan as approved. 
Regarding public notice requirements, Tier 1 notifications require: Within 24 hours 
notify the State Department of Health and EPA, and provide to as large a distribution as possible 
a public notice with mandatory health effects language approved by the Department of Health; 
disseminate through press releases, radio and TV, website, social media; target/reach out to entities 
that can connect to the most vulnerable people, e.g., children and pregnant women, etc.  Then 
every 90 days, distribute more information through public education materials to all customers, 
not just homes with lead service lines, including ways to reduce risk of exposure.  As the 
notification would be citywide, many residents whose plumbing does not contain lead may believe 
there is something wrong with their water when there is not.  This will undermine public 
confidence in the quality of the water supply.  In addition to the public notification, there will be 
ongoing public education and public outreach requirements every 90 days and annually.  To the 
extent that public notification requirements remain in the final rule, EPA should allow states to 
retain flexibility to grant an extension on public notice requirements. 
City-wide, 24-hour public notification based on action level exceedance is an 
excessive requirement.  The Action Level is not a Maximum Contaminant Level, it’s the 90th 
percentile value of samples from the highest risk pool of homes, collected to capture the highest 
level of lead – not what anyone would routinely or consistently be exposed to. 
Meanwhile, the presence of lead connectors does not warrant annual customer 
notification.  DEP does not have records on connector material, and would be forced to make 
conservative generalizations, resulting in required annual notification to the majority of service 
connections.  To require notification of customers about the presence (or potential presence) of 
lead connectors would misdirect limited resources and draw customers’ attention away from 
actionable risk reduction measures.  EPA was correct in proposing the LCRI without including 
lead connectors in the definition of a lead service line, and this should be reflected in the 
notification requirements.  

 
12 
 
 
Further, the City submits that it is not practicable for water systems to implement 
notification and risk mitigation provisions after full and partial service line replacement, 
notification of a service line disturbance, and associated reporting requirements upon the effective 
date of the LCRI.  Earlier alternative compliance dates for LCRI are also not practicable such that 
water systems transition directly from LCRR to LCRI in less than three years (i.e., one or two 
years) based on the assumption that water systems would comply with the LCRR until the LCRI 
compliance date.  Regarding whether there are other LCRR provisions besides the initial inventory 
and notifications of service line material for which the October 16, 2024 compliance date should 
be retained, the City submits that the October 16, 2024 date should be retained only for those 
provisions.  Relatedly, EPA must clarify, prior to the promulgation of the final LCRI, whether the 
City must still comply with provisions of the LCRR that EPA does not intend to continue under 
the LCRI (and if so, when must the City comply). 
The LCRR and LCRI introduce a new requirement if an individual home’s Lead 
level is > 10 ppb.  DEP will be required to sample within 5 days, within ½ mile of the home, testing 
for water quality parameters, orthophosphate, pH, and alkalinity.  Additionally, the customer’s tap 
must be resampled within 30 days, and DEP must conduct an inspection.  The cause (such as non-
optimal water quality from the system or local area water quality issue) of the high lead 
concentration must be documented.  If a distribution issue – DEP would have to identify and 
implement a corrective action; if an internal condition – the property owner would have to correct 
the condition, or DEP would have to document the customer’s refusal or non-response to allowing 
the follow-up sampling.  If DEP determines that there is no cause for the high lead at the sampling 
tap, then no further action is needed.  If, however, the elevated lead is due to corrosive water, then 
DEP must address and submit recommendations to the State within 6 months.  All of these 
activities will require more resources, money and staff, and staff will need training.  
DEP needs to have discretion on Distribution System and Site Assessment (DSSA) 
sampling locations.  As part of our robust distribution monitoring program, which has supported 
our ability to provide stable corrosion control treatment, DEP uses dedicated sampling stations 
which are more than ½ mile apart.  As DEP already monitors at more than twice the required 
number of sites, we would not need to add these DSSA sites to our water quality compliance 
monitoring.  DEP needs flexibility to be able to continue to use and comply through sample stations 
which support all our compliance monitoring. 
The requirement to communicate all monitoring sample results with customers by 
mail within 3 calendar days of learning of results is not feasible in New York City.  Timely delivery 
could be assured, and paperwork burden reduced by lengthening the period to 5 business days, 
limiting expedited schedule to reporting results to customers with results greater than the lead 
action level (10 μg/L), limiting delivery to the customer who conducted the testing, and allowing 
delivery via electronic means (i.e., email, text, data portal access) when the timing of 
communication with the customer can be logged for subsequent audit. 
NYCDEP does not currently provide information about sampling or results for 
samples collected at schools or childcare centers in our CCR.  DEP does not feel that all the NYC 
schools and child-care centers should be reported in this document. The LCRI compliance 
monitoring data should only be reported in the CCR. 

 
13 
 
 
Downstream Connectors and Galvanized Service Lines 
The City does not recommend including the lead connectors or galvanized service 
lines that are or were downstream of a lead connector as part of mandatory replacement.  Inventory 
and Replacement requirements should be focused on potential risk of lead exposure.  Removing 
service lines that have been abandoned or used for non-potable application such as fire service will 
not reduce lead exposure.  Moreover, New York City Plumbing Code requirements and permitting 
mechanisms prohibits their reconnection.  
Partial Service Line Replacements 
The proposed rule contemplates banning partial lead and galvanized service line 
replacement, unless they are done as part of emergency or planned infrastructure work.  EPA seeks 
comment on whether partial replacement should be prohibited when performed as part of planned 
infrastructure work.  It should not.  Article 7 of the City of New York Standard Construction 
Contract requires contractors to protect the work and neighboring properties during construction 
and to repair any damage they cause during construction.  When a contractor is intentionally 
cutting lead service lines as part of their means and methods in performing non-routine street work 
(i.e., emergency repair contract work), there should be no prohibition on cutting and reconnecting 
service lines if they cannot conduct a full-service line replacement. 
Deferred Service Line Replacement  
The City does not support imposing any additional requirements on systems 
conducting deferred service line replacements. 
Dielectric Coupling 
While the use of a dielectric coupling as described in the proposed rule is good 
practice and is consistent with established field practice, per ANSI/American Water Works 
Association C810 - Replacement and Flushing of Lead Service Lines, and the use of dielectric 
coupling should be encouraged, EPA should not require its use or suggest that it is impermissible 
to take advantage of other techniques.  SDWA regulations do not specify specific design and 
construction standards because identifying specific technologies forecloses systems’ taking 
advantage of improvements in technology.   
Obtaining Property Owner Consent 
The proposed revised rule provides that community water systems will make four 
attempts to engage property owners regarding service line replacements.  EPA requests comment 
as to whether a “reasonable effort” should be more attempts.  The City submits that four attempts 
is ample.  Four attempts already places a significant resource burden on the City and should be 
deemed sufficient to meet regulatory compliance obligations.  This element of the proposed rule 
must be considered in the context of the entire requirement.  The City will be required to contact 
hundreds of thousands of property owners to undertake replacement.  Property owners are not 
under a legal obligation to reply to this outreach, and the City’s experience with the State grant-
funded lead service line replacement program shows that property owners are unlikely to respond, 

 
14 
 
 
regardless of the number of attempts.  The City notes that the proposed regulatory text provides a 
reasonable list of communication strategies that can be utilized for these efforts. 
Potential Shortages of Workers and Materials 
The City is concerned about contractor availability and the supply of materials, 
particularly filters.  Given the contemplated national effort, there is a risk of potential shortages, 
which will impact our ability to comply with the regulations.  The regulations should reflect 
alternatives, including triggers for extending deadlines, if market corrections are not sufficient to 
address labor and material shortages. 
Modifications to Improve Compliance 
The proposed rule could be modified to better promote compliance by clarifying 
that a records-based service line material determination can be considered a relevant documented 
service line construction as included in a non-lead validation study and consistent with EPA’s 
Guidance for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory (Chapter 4).  The adequate 
demonstration of service line materials of construction must be clear not only to water systems, 
but to state and EPA enforcement staff. 
Support for American Water Works Association Comments 
It should be noted that DEP is a member of and participant in the development of 
comments from American Water Works Association (AWWA), the New York Section of AWWA, 
and the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies.  The City supports the comments prepared 
and submitted by these organizations.   
Thank you for your consideration of the City’s comments. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
       s/ 
Andrew J. Rauchberg 
Assistant Corporation Counsel

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1111 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0856 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
No text found

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0841 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 
The Honorable Michael Regan 
February 5, 2024 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
For electronic delivery to the docket via https://www.regulations.gov/ 
RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (Docket 
Id#: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
On behalf of Manchester Water Works, in conjunction with the state New Hampshire Water Works Association, 
and Our regional organization New England Water Works. We are pleased to provide the following comments to 
the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). Our organizations 
represent drinking water professionals throughout the New England states. 
We collectively applaud the U.S. EPA for its efforts in developing a rule that will provide important, positive 
changes that will lead to further reduction of lead in the nation’s drinking water. Doing so will involve substantial, 
collaborative efforts between state and federal agencies, utilities, and the general public, where all will need to work 
together and conduct due diligence to minimize lead exposure. We recognize that while significant progress has 
been made over the past several decades in reducing children’s exposure to lead in their environment, that even 
small exposures may result in detrimental health effects. The Lead and Copper Rule Improvements offer the 
opportunity to make further progress in reducing potential lead exposure from drinking water. 
Upon review, we and our organizations offer the following comments to the below key items within the proposed 
rule, and endorse the much more detailed comments being offered by the American Water Works Association. In 
addition to our comments on the substance of the proposed rule, we wish to focus your initial attention on an 
important issue of rule scheduling and compliance that should be resolved immediately. 
EPA must immediately provide regulatory clarity and certainty about LCRR requirements 
and deadlines. We support EPA’s approach of eliminating confusion and unnecessary 
expenditures of resources by deferring compliance with many aspects of the LCRR until the 
compliance date of LCRI.  However, until the LCRI is finalized, water systems have no 
assurance of what will be in it, and there is concern that even if we assume that the final rule will 
contain the deferral of LCRR deadlines, any delay in issuance leaves systems vulnerable to non- 
compliance. NEWWA will be providing training and guidance on the LCRI in upcoming courses 
BOARD OF 
WATER COMMISSIONERS 
HAROLD R. SULLIVAN 
President 
GARY HAMER 
Clerk 
Ex Officio 
HON. JAY P. RUAIS 
Mayor 
PHILIP W. CROASDALE 
Director 
MANCHESTER WATER WORKS 
281 LINCOLN STREET • MANCHESTER, NEW HAMPSHIRE 03103 • (603) 
624-6494

2 
 
and at our spring and fall conferences. At present, we cannot in good faith provide specific 
advice on whether systems should continue to assume compliance with LCRR by October 2024. 
COMMENTS ON THE LCRI PROPOSAL: 
The following sections provide specific recommendations on the proposed rule provisions and 
responses to some of the related EPA requests for comments. A number of NEWWA members 
participated in the development of the American Water Works Association and Association of 
Metropolitan Water Agencies’ comments, and we urge you to carefully consider those as well. 
 
 
LCR AS A TREATMENT TECHNIQUE: 
NEWWA supports the continued use of the Safe Drinking Water Act’s (SDWA’s) Treatment 
Technique framework for reducing the risk of lead in drinking water. 
 
 
LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT 
REQUIREMENTS: 
EPA has overstepped its authority in saying that access equals control: NEWWA supports 
the timely full removal of all lead service lines (LSLs1). However, we have serious concerns 
that EPA has overstepped its authority under the Safe Drinking Water Act. EPA has presented 
contorted logic in attempting to demonstrate that having an owner allow access equals actual 
control. We do not agree that this is the case. Many of our water systems are actively working 
with their customers to voluntarily replace service lines on private property, often with 
substantial local funding, but the emphasis in those programs is that participation is voluntary. 
Water systems are not asserting that they have control, but rather are requesting access from the 
owner who has control over their property. Water systems do not control customer-owned 
portions of their plumbing and therefore cannot force customers to remove lead fixtures or 
plumbing materials without major changes to terms and condition agreements and methods to 
address legal liability implications. 
Federal Funding is Essential: EPA must make additional targeted funding available if 
communities across the nation are to succeed in eliminating LSLs within a decade. NEWWA 
members have serious concerns that the federal government’s financial commitment falls far 
short of the funds needed to complete the job nationwide, and that much of EPA’s public 
rhetoric on funding deliberately understates what a small fraction of the total cost will be 
covered by current federal commitments. 
 
 
1 Unless specifically stated, for simplicity we are referring to both lead service lines and galvanized requiring 
replacement as LSL 
 Failure of the federal government to step up and provide adequate resources will either result in 
communities being unable to meet the deadlines in the LCRI, or will affect their ability to meet 

3 
 
other regulatory requirements and system maintenance needs. Proposed PFAS standards, 
suggested changes in the disinfection byproducts rules, and concerns about aged infrastructure 
will all require attention and funds at many of our member’s systems. Many systems are already 
challenged by existing state rules for PFAS, and will befurther challenged if EPA finalizes its 
PFAS rule as proposed. New England has many of the oldest water systems in the U.S., and 
much of the oldest infrastructure in need of the most resources is in our poorest communities.  
EPA’s own estimates2 of need for Drinking Water State Revolving Fund-eligible infrastructure 
projects that are necessary over the 20-year period for water systems in New England to continue 
to provide safe drinking water to the public exceeds $28 billion. Unless the federal government 
increases its support, the burden of resolving the decades or centuries old issue of lead service 
lines will be borne by our most vulnerable ratepayers. 
Accelerated Replacement and CCT: NEWWA supports EPA’s use of incentives to 
accelerate LSL replacement, particularly the provision to defer construction or re-optimization of 
corrosion control treatment if a system can replace all its LSLs within 5 years of exceeding the 
proposed new lead Action Level. Both the LCRR and the LCRI recognize that lead service lines 
represent the most significant source of lead when they are present, and emphasize this by 
requiring that salvaged lead service lines be included in any evaluation of corrosion control. 
Requiring a focus on modifying carefully balanced treatment objectives, even as LSLs 
are beinging replaced, is inappropriate. NEWWA believes that EPA has struck an 
appropriate balance with this provision of encouraging that LSL replacement be 
conducted faster. 
Ten Year Deadlines: EPA should separate the metrics for replacing LSLs from those for 
resolving lead status unknown services. The current combined 3-year rolling average metrics 
for monitoring compliance with LSL replacement and resolution of unknowns are unworkable, 
and will almost inevitably result in unavoidable non-compliance for many if not most water 
systems. Systems with many more unknowns than confirmed LSLs, which appears to be the case 
for many systems in the preliminary inventories we have seen, will quickly exhaust the pool of 
LSLs to replace. And even if that were not an issue (for example, in a system with mostly 
confirmed LSLs and relatively few unknowns), the 3-year rolling average may discourage efforts 
to initially replace LSLs quickly. Replacing or resolving more than 10 percent for several early 
years will prevent compliance in later years with the proposed 3-year rolling average mechanism. 
NEWWA recommends that EPA revise this requirement by instead requiring a cumulative 
10 percent average beginning in year three for replacement of LSLs and a separate cumulative 10 
percent average for resolving unknowns. 
 
 
2DRINKING WATER INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT 7TH REPORT TO CONGRESS – September 
2023:  https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-09/Seventh%20DWINSA_September2023_Final.pdf 
 
Counting Refusals: NEWWA also recommends that the final rule clarify how homes with 
LSLs where the owner has refused access to their private property and declined participation in 
the system’s LSL replacement program are accounted for in progress reporting. It is clear that 
some owners will simply refuse access, even at no cost, leaving some properties with a LSL in 

4 
 
place. EPA’s proposal provides an appropriate provision that refusal after four attempts indicates 
that the property is not within the control of the water system. What is left unclear is whether a 
system can count that towards its annual 10 percent progress, and more importantly, whether the 
system would be in compliance at the end of 10 years (or five in the case where a system is 
availing itself of the incentivized deferral of corrosion control treatment provision). The final 
rule must make it clear that the replacement obligations are only applicable to those LSLs where 
the owner has allowed access. 
Partial Replacements: NEWWA supports the provision to allow partial replacements when 
they are conducted as part of an emergency repair or in coordination with planned infrastructure 
work. While the proposed exclusion of partial replacements during planned infrastructure work 
relative to LSL replacement projects is intended to prevent systems from intentionally 
conducting partial replacements, it does not account for customer refusal and further impedes 
lead removal. If a system is implementing a LSL replacement project in a neighborhood and a 
customer refuses to participate, prohibiting a partial replacement prevents the removal of the 
public-portion of the LSL and would require remobilization and additional costs to conduct the 
replacement in the future. EPA should remove this prohibition or at a minimum include language 
permitting partial replacements in these cases. 
SYSTEMS WITH MULTIPLE ACTION LEVEL 
EXCEEDANCES: 
Requiring filters: EPA should revisit the requirement to offer filters to all customers if a 
system has multiple Action Level (AL) exceedances. With the lower proposed AL and the 
changes in sampling and reporting protocols, many systems will likely exceed the AL. Even in 
our older region, for many of the systems that have lead service lines, they account for less than 
one percent of the total number of service lines in the system. If filters are needed at all, the 
focus should be on those buildings with LSLs. Providing filters to buildings without a LSL will 
confuse the public and dilute the focus on replacing LSLs where they exist. Providing them to 
buildings with LSLs could reduce the owner’s impetus to replace the LSL. EPA should 
eliminate this provision in its entirety, or at a minimum focus the offer on only those buildings 
with LSLs. 
Availability of certified filters: There are likely to be substantial issues with availability of 
appropriately certified filters if this becomes a nationwide mandate. We have already heard from 
systems that are proactively making filters available as part of LSL investigations and 
replacements that they are having difficulty purchasing even lots of a few hundred filters, let 
alone the thousands that would be needed for larger systems if this requirement were to be 
implemented. 
 
If EPA chooses to retain any part of this requirement, it must clarify what the term “make 
filters available” means in practice, as the preamble states that the system must only make them 
available at “no direct cost” for low-income customers which implies that for all others, they 
could be offered to the customer at cost3. EPA should consider the feasibility of creating a 
national program, similar to the COVID test kit program, where EPA would directly provide 
certified filters to consumers. This would simplify the requirement and make it nationally 

5 
 
uniform. 
 
We also believe there will need to be an aggressive public outreach campaign conducted by EPA 
on the proper maintenance of POU filters. Filters need to be regularly changed to ensure that 
water quality is maintained.  Our members are concerned that improperly maintained filters 
could lead to unintended negative public health impacts due to biological growth, etc. 
 
 
SAMPLING AND RESULTS REPORTING 
REQUIREMENTS: 
Rejecting inappropriate samples: EPA should further clarify when a system can reject an 
inappropriately collected sample. The rule preamble discusses ways a system can identify and 
avoid analyzing inappropriately collected samples, but there is no parallel rule. EPA should 
either provide additional language in the rule itself, or at a minimum develop explicit 
guidance that buildings that are not currently occupied or samples with stagnation times in 
excess of 12 hours should be discarded and new samples collected. 
Sample reporting requirements: Requiring that sample results be provided to the sampler 
within three calendar days presents systems with the substantial risk of inadvertent and 
potentially unavoidable non-compliance.  Analysis and reporting of results typically takes several 
weeks from when the sample is collected - one or two additional days to provide the results is not 
a crisis. Monday holidays and shortened Friday work hours mean that when results are received 
on a Friday, there may well be no one to receive and respond to the data during that entire three-
calendar-day period.  Water system staff have many varied responsibilities to actively and safely 
manage their systems; there is not a dedicated staff person awaiting results, ready to jump into 
action to immediately generate and distribute letters. EPA should change the rule to allow at a 
minimum, 5 business days and more ideally 7 business days, and limit rapid data 
transmittal to samples over the Action Level, retaining the current 30-day notification for all 
other samples. Requiring as EPA proposes in the LCRI that all samples receive rush delivery 
notification defeats the purpose of quickly delivering elevated results. 
When a result is over the AL, water system staff should be able to prioritize directly connecting 
with and educating those samplers (and beginning the process of working with the resident to 
begin the required Distribution System and Site Assessment). 
3 This requirement is clearly distinguished for the language related to replacement of LSL or disturbances of LSL 
which requires that the system “provide filters and replacement cartridges”. 
 
Sampling schedules: EPA should consider staggering implementation of standard monitoring. 
In prior rules, EPA has staggered certain requirements for monitoring with larger systems going 
first, and smaller systems staggered behind. This allows for some lessons to be learned, and 
mitigates overload of laboratory capacity and primacy agency attention. 
Sample Collection Frequency: Systems with no LSLs with current sampling results below the 
AL that have qualified for reduced monitoring for many consecutive years should have a means 
to continue on reduced monitoring as deemed appropriate by the Primacy Agency. 

6 
 
 
 
INVENTORY REQUIREMENTS: 
EPA should remove fire services and other non-potable service lines from inventory and 
replacement requirements if there are appropriate administrative safeguards to prevent potable 
uses. Similarly, there has been confusion about system obligations for piping downstream of the 
recognized service line.  A service line is clearly defined as connecting the system’s main with 
the building.  Additional piping connecting buildings, or connecting buildings with 
appurtenances on private property are not service lines. It should not be the responsibility of the 
water system to try to decipher materials beyond the service line, in facilities such as trailer parks 
or office or condo complexes. 
 
EPA should remove service lines serving abandoned properties from inventory and 
replacement requirements if there are appropriate administrative safeguards to assure 
construction of appropriate service line materials prior to the property receiving service. If the 
system has the appropriate administrative safeguards in place, this serves no useful propose and 
diverts resources from achieving LSL replacement at occupied locations. 
 
EPA should retain the LCRR requirement that systems must only replace lead connectors as 
they are encountered. EPA should not include the replacement of connectors in the mandatory 
LSL replacement requirements because in many cases connector material records are not 
available, and field investigating all connector material in the absence of records would not be 
feasible or practical for most systems. Lead connectors should only be included in service line 
inventories for the purpose of identifying potential sampling locations, and only where existing 
records indicate their presence. 
Galvanized service lines: While NEWWA supports the inclusion of galvanized service lines 
downstream of a LSL in the inventory and replacement mandates of the proposed rule, we do 
not support the inclusion of those galvanized services that ever were downstream of a LSL or 
are currently downstream of unknown service lines in the inventory and replacement mandates. 
Including them in the mandate increases the total cost of replacement programs, with limited 
benefit. In addition, as EPA is requiring that all unknowns be resolved within 10 years, any 
galvanized service lines downstream of unknowns will be either identified as needing 
replacement because the upstream line was positively identified as lead, or the upstream service 
line will be positively identified as not lead. In the case of the latter, EPA should remove its 
requirement for systems to demonstrate that the upstream portion was never a LSL, as this is not 
possible given the previously unknown nature of the material, and instead reclassify the service 
line as non-lead and remove it from the replacement pool. 
Use of state laws or regulation prohibiting lead: EPA should be explicit that service lines 
without recorded material can be classed as non-lead if state law or regulation extant at the time 
of construction prohibited the use of lead. For example, the 1926 Maine State Law Lead Pipe 
ban should be allowed to qualify homes built in or after 1927 to be classified as Non-Lead. 
 
Simplifying Inventory Updates: Systems with online inventories should be able to simply 
notify their state primacy agency annually with summary statistics on any changes and provide 
instructions on how to access their online inventory. There is no need for these systems to 
annually re-submit the complete inventory to the state. 

7 
 
 
Validation Requirements: EPA should reconsider the content and timing of the proposed 
inventory validation requirement. The validation requirement will represent a distraction and 
unnecessary resource drag for many systems. The requirements are overly prescriptive, and the 
deadline overlaps with the most important time when systems will be working to make real 
progress at LSL replacement. Validation should only be necessary if the state primacy agency 
finds that the methods used to develop the inventory are unreliable. States should be given the 
latitude to review and approve validation work done prior to the LCRI implementation date. 
NEWWA also recommends that the validation language explicitly state that only one point on 
the private side and one point on the public side need validation. EPA should also state that 
service lines that have been identified by a record on one side of the service and physical 
inspection on the other side do not need to be included in the validation pool. 
 
 
ELIMINATION OF THE TRIGGER LEVEL AND 
LOWERING THE ACTION LEVEL 
NEWWA supports the efforts that EPA has made to slightly simplify the rule by eliminating 
the Trigger Level. However, EPA has failed to adequately analyze and document the 
synergistic impacts of lowering the Action Level, changes to the sampling site selection focusing 
on LSLs, and new sampling and reporting protocols using the highest of 1st and 5th liter samples. 
These proposed changes combined with the 24-hour public notice requirement will do 
unnecessary damage to public confidence as more systems exceed the Action Level, not because 
water quality is worse, but because the goal posts and game rules have been changed. 
 
 
OUTREACH AND EDUCATION 
REQUIREMENTS: 
Flexibility to improve coordinated outreach: EPA should carefully review all outreach 
activities for consistency, and design them as an integrated public education program. The 
outreach requirements must allow sufficient flexibility so that they can be thoughtfully 
integrated into a cohesive whole, helping consumers make good choices rather than 
unnecessarily scaring or confusing them. As currently proposed, customers in systems over the 
Action Level would receive the following outreach during a 12-month period: 
1. Two consumer confidence reports, with additional information on LSLs; 
2. an annual notice that they have a LSL or unknown (perhaps 4 additional times if their 
street is in a current LSL replacement program); 
3. exposure to the 24 hour Public Notice, and 
4. a lead education brochure with information on LSLs and replacement efforts (potentially 
twice that year). 
As part of that cohesive education program, for systems with LSLs, EPA should ensure that 
the 24-hour Public Notice template emphasizes the following: 

8 
 
1. That the samples were taken at homes with LSLs, 
2. That customers would have received information about the presence of a LSL or 
unknown, and 
3. A focus on actions the system and residents can take to replace LSLs and identify 
unknowns. 
The goal should be to encourage consumer action to permanently reduce their potential exposure 
through drinking water by replacing their LSL if they have one. 
The current 60-day delivery requirement should be retained for Public Education after an 
Action Level exceedance. Especially with all the lead-related outreach efforts described above, 
including the new 24-hour Public Notice, there is no need to unnecessarily rush delivery of the 
public education brochures. 
CORROSION CONTROL TREATMENT: 
Corrosion control treatment: Any required changes to treatment and water quality parameters 
needs to be system specific. A one size fits all approach to establishing Optimum Corrosion 
Control Treatment presents real risk to what is often a carefully crafted balancing of objectives 
for simultaneous compliance. Rule text and guidance must make this clear. 
 
 
SIMPLIFYING REQUIREMENTS FOR SYSTEMS 
WITH FEW OR NO LSLs: 
 
EPA should consider simplifying the compliance and reporting path for systems with no LSLs or 
unknowns. If a system has no identified LSLs or GRR, and no specific indication that they were 
used historically, there should be no need to conduct extensive potholing or other validation 
efforts, nor should service lines currently inventoried as unknown require risk mitigation efforts 
after disturbances. In cases where there are no known LSLs and no documented history that any 
had ever been installed, the likelihood of unknowns being lead is slight, and the primacy agency 
should have the flexibility to reduce the level of required effort. 
Systems with no LSLs and unknowns or connector updates should be able to submit a statement 
to their Primacy Agency to certify that no inventory updates are currently required. 
 
 
SCHOOL SAMPLING: 
NEWWA agrees that EPA has offered some additional flexibility for systems that have worked 
with schools and/or childcare facilities on lead testing, but believes the changes do not go far 
enough. Primacy agencies should have the flexibility to exempt (or reduce the scope of testing 
for) systems with recent past or ongoing school and childcare facility lead testing programs, even 
if they are not exactly congruent with the specific requirements in the proposed rule. 
 
 
 

9 
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to comment on this complex and important effort to further 
reduce potential lead exposures to consumers from drinking water and premise plumbing. 
 
I appreciate your consideration to this request and would be happy to discuss it should you have 
any questions. If so, please feel free to contact me at 792-2800. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Philip W. Croasdale 
 
Philip W. Croasdale, Director

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0836 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
The Honorable Michael Regan  
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
 
Via website delivery to https://www.regulations.gov/  
  
RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (Docket 
#: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801)  
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
The Massachusetts Water Resources Authority (MWRA) appreciates the opportunity to comment 
on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) proposed improvements to the Lead and 
Copper Rule (LCRI). The MWRA has been actively involved in various EPA consultation 
opportunities during each iteration of revisions to the LCR since 2004, and is pleased to be able to 
provide additional comments on the current set of proposed changes.  
 
The MWRA provides wholesale water service to 53 communities in eastern and central 
Massachusetts, serving approximately 2.5 million residents. MWRA believes that managing 
potential risks associated with lead in drinking water is a shared responsibility: MWRA, our 
customer communities, their individual retail customers, our state and federal regulators, and local, 
state and federal health officials, all share a part of the responsibility for appropriate action. With 
the implementation of modern corrosion control in 1996, MWRA has seen lead levels in those 
homes most at risk drop by almost 90 percent. MWRA communities have been removing lead 
service lines since the 1960s. In 2016 MWRA established a $100 million zero-interest loan 
program to accelerate full lead service replacement by our customer communities, and is currently 
evaluating program changes to further accelerate progress. MWRA shares EPA’s goal of 
eliminating all lead services as rapidly as practical. 
 
Our comments respond to issues affecting MWRA directly as the regional wholesaler providing 
drinking water treatment for our customer communities and on behalf of those customer 
communities on issues affecting their obligations such as sampling, consumer outreach and lead 
service line replacement. MWRA takes its collaborative role with our customer communities in 
reducing lead exposure seriously, and offers the following comments on the proposed revisions 
for your consideration. 
 

2 
 
IMPORTANT POINT FOR IMMEDIATE CONSIDERATION  
EPA must immediately provide regulatory clarity and certainty about the Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions (LCRR) requirements and deadlines.  MWRA supports EPA’s approach of 
eliminating confusion and unnecessary expenditures of resources by deferring compliance with 
many aspects of the LCRR until the compliance date of LCRI, with the important exception of the 
inventory, associated outreach, and the 24-hour Public Notice.  However, until the LCRI is 
finalized, water systems have no assurance of what will be in it, and there is concern that even if 
we assume that the final rule will contain the planned deferral of LCRR deadlines, any delay in 
LCRI issuance leaves systems vulnerable. MWRA routinely provides training and guidance to the 
53 communities we provide drinking water service to.  We are at a loss to provide specific advice 
on whether they should continue to assume compliance with LCRR by October 2024, potentially 
wasting effort that could be better spent elsewhere, or assume that LCRI will definitely provide 
the deferral. A delay in promulgation or a change of course at EPA would put them and us at risk 
of failing to be in compliance. We understand that many of the water associations have requested 
this immediate regulatory action to provide clarity and certainty – we support their request. 
 
COMMENTS ON THE LCRI PROPOSAL:  
The following sections provide specific comments and recommendations on the proposed rule 
provisions, and related EPA requests for comments. MWRA staff participated in the development 
of the American Waterworks Association and Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies’ more 
detailed comments, and urge you to carefully consider those as well. 
 
LCR as a Treatment Technique:  
MWRA supports the continued use of the Safe Drinking Water Act’s (SDWA’s) Treatment 
Technique framework for reducing the risk of lead in drinking water.  Because the source of the 
lead is from lead service lines and lead-containing premise plumbing, the use of a Maximum 
Contaminant Level (MCL) is not feasible or appropriate.  
 
Lead Service Line Replacements:  
MWRA supports the timely full removal of all lead service lines (LSL1), and has already 
committed $100 million of our ratepayers money in interest-free loans to our member communities 
for their full removal.  MWRA remains concerned that the federal government’s financial 
commitment falls far short of the funds needed to complete the job nationwide. Failure of the 
Federal government to step up and provide adequate resources will either result in communities 
being unable to meet the deadlines in the LCRI, or will affect their ability to meet all other 
                                                           
1 Unless specifically delineated, for simplicity we are referring to both lead service lines and galvanized requiring 
replacement as LSL.  

3 
 
regulatory requirements and urgent asset management objectives.  PFAS, changes in the 
disinfection byproducts rules, and concerns about legionella will all require attention and funds at 
many of our member communities. The thousands of miles of unlined cast iron mains in 
community distribution systems will continue to age and continue to require either replacement or 
relining.  In our region, we know that much of the oldest infrastructure, in need of the most 
resources, is in our poorest communities and those historically neglected. The full cost burden of 
resolving the decades or centuries old issue of lead service lines cannot be on the backs of our 
most vulnerable ratepayers. 
EPA and the Administration must make additional targeted funding available if our 
communities and communities across the nation are to succeed at eliminating lead service lines 
within a decade.  
MWRA supports EPA’s use of incentives to accelerate LSL replacement, particularly the 
provision to defer construction or re-optimization of corrosion control treatment if a system can 
replace all its LSL within five years of exceeding the proposed new lead Action Level. Lead 
service lines represent the most significant source of lead when they are present. Both the LCRR 
and the LCRI recognize this in their requirements that lead service lines be included in any 
evaluation of corrosion control.  However, any change in treatment risks upsetting the delicate 
balance of simultaneous compliance with all other rules and water quality objectives, and in 
particular the addition of phosphate carries long term implications for both water and wastewater 
system operations, even after all LSL are replaced. MWRA believes that EPA has struck an 
appropriate balance with this provision of encouraging that the best long term solution (LSL 
replacement) be conducted faster.  
MWRA recommends that EPA restructure the metrics for replacing LSL and resolving lead 
status unknown services (hereafter referred to as unknowns). The current combined three-year 
rolling average metrics for monitoring compliance with LSL replacement and resolution of 
unknowns are unworkable, and will almost inevitably result in inadvertent and unavoidable non-
compliance. Systems with many more unknowns than confirmed LSL, which appears to be the 
case for many of our communities in the preliminary inventories we have seen, will quickly 
exhaust the pool of LSL to replace, even while they are moving forward with resolving unknowns 
on a pace designed to eliminate all of them by 10 years. And even if that were not an issue (for 
example in a system with mostly confirmed LSLs), the three-year rolling average may handicap 
efforts at replacing LSL quickly (clearly a public health goal) while still meeting the rolling three-
year requirement. Replacing or resolving more than 10 percent for several early years could 
mathematically prevent compliance in later years with the three-year rolling average. MWRA 
recommends that EPA revise the requirement by requiring a cumulative 10 percent average 
beginning in year three for replacement of LSL and a separate cumulative 10 percent average for 
resolving unknowns.  
MWRA also recommends that the final rule clarify how homes with LSL where the owner has 
refused access to their private property and declined participation in the system’s LSL replacement 
program are accounted for in annual progress reporting and determination of program completion. 
The experience of MWRA’s customer communities has clearly evidenced that some owners will 

4 
 
simply refuse to participate, even at no cost, refusing access to their property, leaving, for now, 
some properties with LSL in place. EPA’s proposal provides an appropriate provision that refusal 
after four attempts using two different methods indicates that the property is not within the control 
of the water system. What is left unclear is whether a system can count that towards its annual 10 
percent progress, and more importantly, whether the system would be in compliance at the end of 
10 years (or five in the case where a system is availing itself of the incentivized deferral of 
corrosion control treatment provision). MWRA recommends that the final rule make it clear that 
the replacement obligations are only applicable to those LSL within its control, that is, where the 
owner has allowed access.   
 
Requirements for Systems with Multiple Action Level Exceedances:  
As discussed above, MWRA supports EPA’s use of incentives to accelerate LSL replacement, 
particularly the provision to defer construction or re-optimization of corrosion control treatment 
if a system can replace all its LSL within five years of exceeding the new lead Action Level. 
MWRA recommends that EPA revisit the requirements to offer filters to all customers if the 
Action Level is exceeded three times within five years.  With the changes in sampling and 
reporting protocols and the lowered Action Level, many systems will likely exceed within the first 
18 months of rule implementation. There is no justification for offering filters to every household 
- in many cases the higher risk homes will represent only a small fraction of water users – often 
less than five percent or even less than 1 percent.  Within the MWRA region, many of our systems 
that have any number of lead service lines, have less than one percent.  The current proposal will 
create substantial confusion with all the other emphases in the LCRR and LCRI on the importance 
of replacing LSL.  Offering filters to homes without a LSL will confuse the public, imply that their 
water is not safe and dilute the focus on replacing LSL where they exist. If filters are needed at all, 
the focus should be on those homes with LSL. However, offering filters to homes with LSL could 
cause the residents to believe that the risk has been removed, impacting their understanding that 
the LSL is a detriment and taking away the impetus to participate in replacement of the LSL.  
In addition to the issue related to inappropriate messaging, there is likely to be substantial issues 
with availability of appropriately certified filters if this is a nationwide mandate. We have already 
heard from systems that are making filters available as part of LSL investigations and 
replacements, that they are having difficulty purchasing even lots of a few hundred. Needing to 
secure thousands or tens of thousands of filters at the same time that many other systems will be 
facing the same task, seems likely to result in supply chain failure. MWRA recommends that 
EPA eliminate this provision in its entirety, or at a minimum focus the offer on only those homes 
with LSL. 
If EPA chooses to retain any part of this requirement, it must clarify what the term “make 
filters available” means in practice, as the preamble states that the system must only make them 
available at “no direct cost” for low-income customers, clearly implying that for all others they 

5 
 
could be offered to the consumer at cost2. At the scale of an entire system, this requirement creates 
substantial implementation issues. For example, will the system need to conduct income 
verification, is it adequate to provide access to a commercial web site where consumer can order 
a certified filter, at their cost, for delivery to their home?   
 
Sampling and Results Reporting Requirements:  
MWRA recommends that EPA further clarify under what conditions a system can reject an 
inappropriately collected sample prior to analysis. The rule preamble provides a discussion of the 
ways a system can identify and avoid analyzing inappropriately collected samples, but there is no 
parallel rule language for systems to rely on. MWRA has had communities collect samples in 
structures that were under renovation and vacant, or after extended absences. These circumstances 
produce lead data which is not representative of typical use, and could result in inappropriate 
mandated actions. EPA should either provide additional language in the rule itself, or at a 
minimum develop explicit written guidance that buildings that are not currently occupied or 
samples with stagnation times in excess of 24 hours should be discarded prior to analysis, and new 
samples collected.  
EPA should continue to explicitly allow flexibility for consecutive systems in the design of 
sampling programs, especially those regional systems like MWRA with long standing effective 
and efficient consecutive system sampling agreements.  Such systems should be able to initially 
switch to twice-annual “standard” monitoring without necessarily having to collect the full 
“standard” number of samples.  MWRA’s current regional consecutive system sampling pool for 
a system with one source and one treatment plant includes collecting just under 600 samples per 
sampling round – six times the standard number for the largest systems.  If we were to collect the 
standard number in each of our consecutive systems, we would be collecting about 1800 samples 
per sampling round, 18 times what EPA’s own statisticians had determined was necessary for 
reliable data.  
MWRA recommends that EPA revise the sample data reporting requirements. Requiring that 
sample results be provided to the sampler within three calendar days presents systems with the 
substantial risk of inadvertent and potentially unavoidable non-compliance.  In our region, many 
systems work a short day on Fridays, and there are many Monday holidays. Results received on a 
Friday would need to provided to the sampler by Monday – but there may well have been no one 
to receive and respond to the data during that entire three calendar day period. Water system staff 
have many responsibilities to actively and safely manage their systems. In smaller systems with 
fewer staff, there is not a dedicated staff person waiting for results, ready to jump into action. 
Typically by the time a system receives lead results, at least several weeks or longer have elapsed 
from the time of sample collection.  Allowing a few additional days to deliver elevated lead results 
to ensure a reasonable likelihood of compliance is not unreasonable.  MWRA recommends two 
changes: change the rule to allow three business days (or better yet five), and limit rapid data 
                                                           
2 This requirement is clearly distinguished for the language related to replacement of LSL or disturbances of LSL 
which requires that the system “provide filters and replacement cartridges”.  

6 
 
transmittal to samples over the Action Level, retaining the current 30 days for all other samples.  
Requiring as EPA now proposes in the LCRI that all samples receive rush delivery, defeats the 
purpose of quickly delivering elevated results to the much smaller number of samplers with results 
over the Action Level.  This will reduce the likelihood that water system staff will be able to 
prioritize directly connecting with and educating those samplers with higher results (and beginning 
the process of working with the resident to begin the required Distribution System and Site 
Assessment). 
Distribution System and Site Assessment: 
MWRA recommends that EPA limit the requirement for Water Quality Parameter (WQP) 
monitoring to a single sample collected in the vicinity of any LCR tap sample with results over the 
Action Level. The current requirement to add these additional sites to a system’s permanent regular 
WQP monitoring program, in the absence of a finding that the initial sample indicated a localized 
deviation from the system corrosion control limits, adds no useful additional data, provides no 
cause for action, and adds unnecessary long term sampling burden. MWRA has piloted this 
sampling requirement over the past several years, conducting 79 assessments of water quality near 
taps sampling sites that were over the Action Level: none demonstrated that local water quality 
was outside OWQP limits.  
 
Inventory Requirements:   
MWRA recommends that EPA remove fire services and other non-potable service lines from 
inventory and replacement requirements if there are appropriate administrative safeguards to 
prevent potable uses. Having this as a regulatory requirement with the associated annual notices 
and its presence in the publicly available inventory list adds unnecessary confusion, and adds 
unnecessary additional system effort in developing and maintaining the inventory, without any 
public health benefit.  
 
Similarly, there has been confusion about system obligations for piping downstream of the 
recognized service line.  A service line is clearly defined as connecting the system’s main with the 
building.  Additional piping connecting buildings, or connecting buildings with appurtenances on 
private property are not service lines, and EPA must clarify this in both guidance materials and 
in EPA staff’s interactions with state primacy agency staff.  
 
MWRA recommends that EPA remove service lines serving abandoned properties from 
inventory and replacement requirements if there are appropriate administrative safeguards to 
assure installation of an appropriate new non-lead service line prior to the property receiving 
service. If the system has the appropriate administrative safeguards in place, this provision serves 
no useful propose and diverts resources from achieving LSL replacement at occupied locations.  
 
EPA should retain the LCRR requirement that systems must only replace lead connectors as they 
are encountered.  EPA should not include the replacement of connectors in the mandatory LSL 
replacement requirements because in many cases connector material records are not available, and 
field investigating all connector material in the absence of records would not be feasible or 

7 
 
practical. Lead connectors should only be included in service line inventories for the purpose of 
identifying potential sampling locations, and only where existing records indicate their presence.  
MWRA supports the inclusion of galvanized service lines downstream of a lead service line in 
the inventory and replacement mandates of the proposed rule.  
MWRA does not support the inclusion of those galvanized services downstream of “ever was” 
lead or unknown service lines in the inventory and replacement mandates. While there is a 
reasonable level of evidence that galvanized pipe downstream of a lead pipe can accumulate and 
potentially release lead, the evidence for such release long after the lead line has been replaced is 
lacking, and some studies indicate essentially no risk. Including such service lines in the mandate 
increases the total cost of replacement programs, and prolongs their duration, with limited risk 
reduction. In addition, as EPA is requiring that all unknowns be resolved within ten years, any 
galvanized service lines downstream of unknowns will be either identified as needing replacement 
because the upstream line was positively identified as lead, or positively identified as not requiring 
replacement as the upstream service line was positively identified as not lead.  
EPA should reconsider the content and timing of the new inventory validation requirement. The 
validation requirement, while seemingly an important sub task in creating a reliable inventory, 
actually will represent a distraction and unnecessary resource drag for many systems. The 
requirements are overly prescriptive, and the deadline overlaps with the most important time when 
systems will be working to make real progress at LSL replacement. Validation should only be 
necessary if the state primacy agency finds that the methods used to develop the inventory are 
demonstrably unreliable. MWRA recommends requiring this be done after the 10 year window, 
simplifying the requirements, and explicitly allowing states to review and approve validation work 
done prior to the LCRI implementation date.  
MWRA also recommends that the validation language explicitly state that only one point on the 
private side and one point on the public side need validation, and thus that validation efforts may 
only require additional research on whichever side did not have adequate quality of original data.   
 
Elimination of the Trigger Level and Lowering the Action Level  
MWRA supports the efforts that EPA has made to slightly simplify the rule by eliminating the 
Trigger Level.  However, EPA has failed to adequately analyze and document the synergistic 
impacts of lowering the Action Level, changes to the sampling site selection focusing on LSL, and 
sampling and reporting protocols using the higher of 1st and 5th liter samples. These changes 
combined with the 24-hour public notice requirement will do unnecessary damage to public 
confidence as more systems exceed the Action Level, not because water quality is worse, but 
because the goal posts and game rules have been changed.  
With the switch to LSL replacement being required of all systems, rather than only those over the 
Action Level, the importance of the Action Level in the LCR rule construct has substantially 
changed. Rather than now being the primary method for lead risk reduction in the rule, it is 
diminished in importance, and will be further diminished over time as lead service lines are 

8 
 
replaced. For most systems, going forward, the impact of the Action Level will be primarily be the 
need to find ways to manage public understanding of risks of lead. The Public Notice requirement 
is a very non-targeted public education program, broadcasting rather than narrow casting to highest 
risk homes. EPA should carefully craft the guidance for the Public Notice to focus it narrowly.  
 
Appropriately Integrated and Focused Outreach and Education Requirements:  
EPA should carefully review all outreach activities for consistency and appropriate focus, as part 
of what ought to be an integrated public education program. As currently drafted, customers will 
be in danger of zoning out from information overload, thus negating the value of all the outreach 
efforts. Consider that for systems over the Action Level, during one year, customers will be 
receiving:  
 their CCR twice, with additional information on LSL;  
 an annual notice that they have a LSL or unknown (perhaps 4 additional times if their 
neighborhood is part of that year’s LSL replacement program);  
 exposure to multiple versions of the 24 hour Public Notices (hopefully focused on LSL risk 
and replacement efforts); and  
 a lead education brochure with information on LSL and replacement efforts (potentially 
twice that year).   
In most cases, most of those receiving this deluge of information will not be the actual target 
audience, and the message will not be tailored to their circumstances. The outreach requirements 
must allow sufficient flexibility so that they can be thoughtfully integrated into a cohesive cogent 
whole.  
As part of that cohesive focused education program, for systems with LSL, EPA should ensure 
that the 24-hour Public Notice template emphasizes the following key points: that the samples 
were taken at homes with LSL, that customers would have already received information about the 
presence of a LSL or unknown, and a focus on actions the system and resident can take to identify 
and replace that LSL. The goal should be to create impetus towards our long term goal of replacing 
all LSL. The same should be considered for each of the other required elements – they should work 
together to provide context for where the highest risks are, and encourage action to permanently 
reduce their potential exposure through drinking water by replacing their LSL if they have one.  
MWRA recommends that the current 60 day requirement be retained for the delivery of Public 
Education after an Action Level exceedance. Development and execution of a well-organized, 
coordinated, and effective public education effort, including gaining primacy agency approval, and 
procuring printing and delivery services takes time.  Especially with all the lead-related 
touchpoints described above, including the new 24-hour Public Notice, there is no need to 
unnecessarily rush delivery of the public education brochures.  
 

9 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide comments on this important next step in reducing lead 
related risks in drinking water. If you need any further information about any of our 
recommendations or comments, please feel free to reach out directly to me at 
dave.coppes@mwra.com or (617) 788-4359 or Stephen Estes-Smargiassi at (617) 839-9638 or 
smargias@mwra.com.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
David W. Coppes, P.E.  
Chief Operating Officer

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1339 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5th, 2024  
  
Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801,   
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements  
  
Michael S. Regan, Administrator   
US Environmental Protection Agency   
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
  
Dear Administrator Regan,  
  
The NAACP State Conference of Mississippi submits the following comments regarding the US 
Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”). The Mississippi State Conference 
NAACP provides leadership for local branches, youth councils, and college chapters for 
environmental and climate justice needs in [insert state]. The NAACP and its Center for 
Environmental and Climate Justice have a longstanding interest in ensuring that issues of 
community engagement and environmental justice center Black communities and frontline 
communities most impacted, including communities throughout the State of Mississippi.    
 
The Mississippi State Conference NAACP applauds EPA for proposing stronger regulations to 
protect communities from lead in drinking water. Lead in drinking water has been a historically 
prevalent issue in Black communities, posing extreme risks to the health of young people, 
mothers, and their families. In Mississippi estimates suggest that there are as many as between 
16,000 to 48,000 lead service lines, threatening families across our state with exposure to a 
potent and irreversible neurotoxin which even at low levels of exposure is linked to damage to 
the brain and nervous system, learning disabilities, shorter stature, impaired hearing, and harm 
to blood cells. In Mississippi, we would derive between $948 million and $2.4 billion in public 
health cost savings from full lead service line replacement.  
  
The potential high level of lead and copper in Mississippi’s waters parallels with the high level of 
PFAS in several Mississippi counties, according to a Consumer Reports article and study 
released in August 2023.  
 
In Jackson, a federal judge has allowed a lawsuit to move forward with about 1,000 children 
diagnosed with lead poisoning suing the city and Mississippi State Department of Health. As the 
water system there has been the subject of national headlines, some residents, and at least one 
college and a hospital, have decided to turn to private wells.  
 
Jackson residents remain warned of lead levels over the EPA action level, but the city’s third-
party water administrator, Ted Henifin, has said his team had not found any lead pipes since it 
took over the system last fall, at least as of last month.  
 
An investigation by Consumer Reports and Mississippi Spotlight, a collaboration of the Clarion 
Ledger and other news organizations, found detectable levels of lead in all 149 municipal and 
well water samples from all corners of Mississippi, covering all counties in the state. 
 

Essentially, more water testing must be conducted in all Mississippi municipalities and counties, 
not curtailed.  And the water systems must pay for these tests, not the residents and/or 
taxpayers.  
 
The EPA should not only incentivize the installation of filters in schools, they should also foot the 
bill – for the children. 
A few additional links for context here to review: 
• 
https://www.nrdc.org/press-releases/nrdc-estimates-12-million-lead-pipes-may-
connect-water-mains-homes-most-states-fail  
• 
https://humanimpact.org/hipprojects/achieving-equity-in-lead-poisoning-
prevention-policy-making/  
• 
https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/2023-07/deconstructing-cost-lead-service-line-
replacement-202210.pdf  
• 
https://www.lslr-collaborative.org/  
  
For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong elements of the 
proposed LCRI such as the requirement for the removal of all lead service lines in ten years, the 
requirements for water systems to sample both the first and fifth liter of water passing through 
lead pipes and a lower action level; but also ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes 
which undermine their goals and ensure that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened.  
  
Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule does not 
leave black communities in Mississippi behind:  
  
• 
Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it is a 
fundamental injustice that the communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed 
40 or more years to fix this issue.  
  
  
• 
Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines: 
Removal can cost thousands of dollars, and putting the financial burden on impacted 
communities will result in mostly wealthy and white neighborhoods having lead service lines 
replaced. Removal and replacement do not make up major proportions of utility budgets, and 
utilities should be expected to maximize the use of available federal water infrastructure 
funds and other non-ratepayer sources of funds to prioritize solving this crisis.  
  
  
• 
Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who spend many 
hours there daily are not at risk of exposure: Black children face an increased risk of lead 
exposure when compared with white children. The proposal’s suggested testing program 
does not differ from past ineffective programs, and EPA should move towards incentivizing 
the installation of filters and protecting children.  
  
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components would allow for 
environmental injustice to persist. Black communities and frontline communities have long 
suffered from disinvestment and lack of resources. Past NAACP analysis has demonstrated that 
race, ethnicity, or language spoken had the strongest relationship to slow and inadequate 
enforcement of the SDWA of any sociodemographic characteristic analyzed. The final LCRI is a 
rare opportunity to make significant changes in the lives of millions of people in [state], and to 
provide a measure of environmental justice which these families are owed, and we encourage 

this administration to build on the progress made in the proposed rule by strengthening the final 
rule further.  
  
Sincerely, 
 
Gordon Jackson, Chair 
Environmental and Climate Justice Committee 
Mississippi State NAACP

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1098 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
ian@blueconduit.com
February 5, 2024
Michael Regan, EPA Administrator
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
EPA Docket Center
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket
Mail Code 28221T
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
Re: Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036
Dear Administrator Regan,
BlueConduit respectfully submits the following comments to the Environmental Protection
Agency’s (EPA) proposed revisions to its Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) under the
Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA). The agency published proposed revisions in the December 6,
2023, Federal Register at 88 FR 84878, and is accepting comments at Docket No.
EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036.
Since 2016, the founding team of our organization, BlueConduit, has supported more than 275
cities in the United States to find and replace lead service lines. Accordingly, we have a deep
understanding of the ways in which cities manage challenges with water infrastructure and the
work involved in complying with the proposed regulations. Our research has been published in
peer-reviewed academic publications and has won awards.1 Our work in Flint and other
communities has also received considerable media attention and has informed policy changes,
including informing the LCRR and state-level LCR guidance.
For example, we have:
●
Published a white paper with ASDWA detailing inventory development best practices
cited in EPA’s LCRR Guidance in 20202
2 https://www.asdwa.org/2020/09/25/asdwa-blueconduit-release-white-paper-on-lsl-data-methods/
1 “KDD 2018 Announces Best Paper & Other Awards”
https://medium.com/syncedreview/kdd-2018-announces-best-paper-other-awards-4835ab8475a4

●
Co-written an industry report with Jacobs Engineering about Galvanized Requiring
Replacement3
●
Published a white paper on using predictive modeling for no or low-lead in water
systems4
●
Provided letters of support for NY S5512 and MN SB 0513 legislation
●
Published a white paper on using ARPA money to replace lead service lines5
We are committed to achieving a lead-free drinking water system through evidence-based
decision-making and applaud EPA for establishing a timeline for the replacement of all lead
service lines in the United States. To that end, we hereby submit the following comments
regarding EPA’s proposed modifications with the LCRI. We recognize that we are employees of
a for-profit company that provides water infrastructure analytics services to utilities. However,
these recommendations are made in the public interest, based on established best practices in
statistics and data-driven decision-making in the face of uncertainty. Further, the
consequences of our recommended changes to the rule would increase the reliability and trust
service line inventory and replacement, increase efficiency of water utility compliance efforts,
and increase public transparency.
Our comments and recommended changes to the proposed rule that follow can be
summarized as:
(1) we propose streamlining some of the process for validation of non-lead service
lines;
(2) we recommend expanding the pool of addresses for validation to include non-lead
service lines that have been determined based on historic records;
(3) we propose allowing water systems more flexibility in handling their validation of
non-lead addresses;
(4) we encourage EPA to make adjustments to its rule to make it easier for water
systems to have access and control of lead service lines for the purpose of
replacement;
(5) we request that EPA make more resources available for water systems to plan for
mandatory lead service line replacement; and
(6) We propose modifying how EPA categorizes galvanized service lines in communities
where lead-lined galvanized pipes are located.
5 American Rescue Plan Funding: A Playbook for Efficiently Getting the Lead Out. Day One Project.
https://blueconduit.com/post/day-one-whitepaper/
4“When a Representative Sample of Service Lines Reveals Zero Lead, What Can You Say?” Alice Berners-Lee
https://blueconduit.com/post/when-a-representative-sample-of-service-lines-reveals-zero-lead-what-can-you-say/
3 “Lead in Drinking Water.” Jacobs Engineering
https://www.jacobs.com/reports/infrastructure/lead-drinking-water

Improving validation program
A reliable lead service line inventory is the backbone of the LCRI. Visually verifying every
service line’s materials is an expensive endeavor for water systems and not the best use of
their limited resources. EPA proposes requiring water systems to validate a subset of the non-
lead service lines in their inventory to validate the reliability of the methods and assumptions
used to make those determinations. This also makes it clear for water utilities that they are not
expected to visually verify every single service line’s materials, but to adopt a science-based
methodology to determine the number and distribution of service lines to be visually verified.
We believe that this is a thoughtful and scientific approach to validate across the system
without spending time and money at every unknown service line. Our team published a white
paper that specifically addresses what water systems should do when their efforts to inspect a
representative, random set of homes does not reveal a single lead service line.6
Given the overall goal of the validation process, there are a few targeted ways that it can be
improved upon.
Better defining and communicating 95% confidence level
EPA is proposing a 95 percent confidence level approach used to develop the size of the
validation pool. We believe that this is an appropriate approach for the specific statistical
question being asked of water systems, but we are concerned that EPA guidance around
confidence levels is not clear enough. As a result, we recommend that EPA make two changes
to the LCRI.
First, the final LCRI should include the following definition for confidence level.
​
“Confidence level - how likely is it that an estimated interval will typically contain the
true value.”
Applied to the context of validating non-lead service lines in an inventory, if a water system
completes inspections at a set of addresses representative of a population of addresses
requiring validation and does not find an LSL or GRR, then it can say the following, “We can
conclude with a 95% confidence level that the true count of LSL or GRR among that population
is less than Y service lines.” The number “Y” will depend on the number of addresses
representative of the population that were actually inspected.
6 “When a Representative Sample of Service Lines Reveals Zero Lead, What Can You Say?” Alice Berners-Lee
https://blueconduit.com/post/when-a-representative-sample-of-service-lines-reveals-zero-lead-what-can-you-say/

Second, because a confidence interval does not reflect true certainty (the only way to achieve
true certainty would be to physically inspect every service line), we recommend that EPA also
require the water systems to include language around the results of the validation program in
the Consumer Confidence Reports. That language will also help water utilities correctly
communicate around the reliability of their service line inventory. It is important that EPA
provide language for water systems to use because the precise meaning of terms around
uncertainty are critical to effectively communicating the relative risk. Below is some sample
language that could be used:
“As part of the Lead and Copper Rule compliance, the water system developed a lead
service line inventory. In order to verify the reliability of service lines categorized as
non-lead, the water system is required to physically verify service line materials at a
subset. Out of all service lines considered non-lead in our system, we physically
inspected a representative sample of 200 of them and found 0 lead service lines in the
representative sample set. Based on those inspections, and a standard statistical
sample size formula, these numbers suggest there is a 95% chance that less than 1.5%
of the population of those pipes is lead. Based on those results, we will continue to
classify all of the service lines in the validation pool as ‘non-lead.’”
When a system verifies more (or less) of those non-lead service lines, the statement can
change. For instance, if they verify 300 representative service lines and find 0 are lead, then
they can conclude that less than 1.0% of the population of those pipes is lead.
Many water systems and service providers have misinterpreted and misused the “95%
confidence level” in other applications to refer to a measure of reliability around a specific
prediction at a specific service line’s material. For example, some understand 95% confidence
as a 95% certainty around a specific service line’s material relative to its predicted material,
which is not the way it is being used in this application. By adding the definition and the
language about how to communicate the results of the validation program, EPA will be able to
reduce confusion around the meaning to specific statistical phrases.
Expanding validation pool to increase inventory reliability
In the proposed rule, the ‘‘validation pool’’ of addresses to include in the subset would consist
of service lines identified as non-lead using methods other than records review or visual
inspection of at least two points on the line. We encourage EPA to include service lines
categorized based on historic records and only exclude service lines verified through visual
inspection or installation after a local lead ban from the validation pool.

From our experience working with hundreds of communities, the reliability of historic records
can be variable. In some communities, they have proven to be extremely reliable, but have
been highly unreliable in other communities. In Flint, Michigan, among the first 5,145 service
lines inspected as part of the replacement project, 1,498 of those had a historic label
indicating copper.7 Of those historic copper labels, 24% of those service lines were made of
lead. If the historic records had been trusted, those lead service lines would have remained in
the ground indefinitely. Accepting the materials on the historic records as fact without
validating their reliability can cause LSLs to be mislabeled as “non-lead.”
This is further substantiated in the work done by the Lead Free DC task force that found that
20% of historic copper labels were in fact made of lead. One of the task force's
recommendations was for DC Water to “consider statistical methods to identify areas with
copper service lines that turn out to be lead, and brass service lines that turn out to be lead or
brass.”8 Increasing the validation pool to include service lines whose materials were
determined by historic record would allow EPA to ensure that these falsely labeled copper
service lines do not fall through the cracks.
We understand that there will be communities where the historic records will prove to be
100% reliable. In that case, the verification program provides additional certainty and trust in
the records. But the risk of leaving lead service lines in the ground that were mistakenly
categorized as “non-lead” because of a historic record whose reliability was never evaluated is
too great a risk for water systems.
We believe that EPA should adopt a validation pool similar to the State of Michigan EGLE in
their Distribution System Material Inventory Process, which only excluded service lines from
the validation pool if there was a recent visual verification or the installation date for the
service line was after 1986 or a local lead ban.9
We ask that EPA consider our recommendations to improve the LCRI with the below text
revisions:
9 “Minimum Service Line Material Verification Requirements.” State of Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes,
and Energy. March 2021.
https://www.michigan.gov/egle/-/media/Project/Websites/egle/Documents/Programs/DWEHD/Community-Water-Sup
ply/Lead-Copper/Minimum-Service-Line-Material-Verification-Requirements.pdf
8 “Independent Verification and Validation of DC Water’s Lead Free DC Lead Service Line Removal Plan: FINAL REPORT.” Safe
Water Engineering. Sept 2022.
https://lims.dccouncil.gov/downloads/LIMS/51294/Introduction/RC24-0221-Introduction.pdf?Id=146215
7 “Principles of Data Science for Lead Service Line Inventories and Replacement Programs” Association of State Drinking
Water Administrators and BlueConduit. Sept 2020.
https://www.asdwa.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/ASDWA-BlueConduit-White-Paper-on-Data-and-LSL.pdf

§ 141.84 (5) (i) The water system must identify a validation pool, consisting of all service
lines categorized as “non-lead” excluding non-lead service lines identified by records
described in paragraphs (b)(2)(i) through (iii) of this section visual inspection of the pipe
exterior at a minimum of two points ( e.g., excavation, visual inspection in the meter pit or
stop box, or visual inspection inside the home), previously replaced lead or galvanized
requiring replacement service lines from the validation pool, or installed after the earlier
of a local/national lead service line installation ban. If a water system has no existing
record or documentation of a two-point visual inspection that indicates how an individual
non-lead service line was categorized, that service line must be included in the validation
pool.
(ii) The water system must confirm the service line material of a random sample ( e.g., a
sample selected by use of a random number generator or lottery method) of non-lead
service lines from the validation pool. Confirmation of service line material must be done
by visual inspection of the pipe exterior at a minimum of two points. Where ownership is
shared, the water system must visually inspect both portions of the service line. Water
systems must validate at least as many service lines as are required in the table in this
paragraph.
(b)(2)(i)-(iii):
(i) All construction and plumbing codes, permits, and records or other documentation that
indicate the service line and connector materials used to connect structures to the
distribution system.
(ii) All water system records on service lines and connectors, including distribution system
maps and drawings, recent or historical records on each service connection and connector,
meter installation records, historical capital improvement or master plans, and standard
operating procedures.
(iii) All records of inspections in the distribution system that indicate the material
composition of the service connections and connectors that connect a structure to the
distribution system.
Avoiding redundancy in inventory-building
We applaud EPA for adopting best practices in reducing uncertainty through the requirement
for water systems to verify service line materials at a representative, random subset of its
service area. This methodology has already been embraced and accepted by many state
regulators as an acceptable method for developing a service line inventory, as it leverages all

available data points to generate a best estimate for service line material.10 Many water
systems have already received approval from their state regulators to utilize methodologies
similar to the validation method outlined in the LCRI to build their service line inventory. If a
water system abides by the key principle of 95% confidence interval at a representative,
random set of inspections, it is redundant to ask a water utility that has already received
regulatory approval for such a methodology to follow a similar task, again. We encourage EPA
to include language exempting water systems that have proved their process to their state
regulatory body. We suggest the following language be adopted to the LCRI to allow for this
change:
§ 141.84 (5) (ii) The water system must confirm the service line material of a
random sample (e.g., a sample selected by use of a random number generator or
lottery method) of non-lead service lines from the validation pool. Confirmation of
service line material must be done by visual inspection of the pipe exterior at a
minimum of two points. Where ownership is shared, the water system must visually
inspect both portions of the service line. Water systems must validate at least as
many service lines as are required in the table in this paragraph. Water systems
that have already received regulatory approval from their primacy agency to meet
inventory requirements through random, representative inspections are not
required to conduct another round of inspections. The table is….
Finding Lead Service Lines or Galvanized Requiring Replacement in Validation Work
The proposed LCRI is severely lacking in specificity about what a water system should do in the
case that it locates LSL or GRR during its validation program. The goal of the validation program
is to reinforce the reliability of the service line inventory. If the validation program identifies
gaps in the service line inventory, water utilities should be required to take actions to increase
the accuracy of their inventories. Yes the preamble specifically states that water systems are
not required to do so. Failure to include concrete steps to improve inventories could undermine
the trust and reliability of the document that is the backbone of LCRI compliance.
In the case that a water utility’s validation program identifies LSL or GRR among service lines
that were previously considered non-lead, we recommend that EPA require water systems to
submit a plan to their regulators about what they will do to increase the accuracy of their
inventory, including with an independent expert not involved in the development of the initial
service line inventory, who can verify that steps are being taken to improve the inventory based
on the nature/pattern of inaccuracies.
10 “State Guidance and Predictive Modeling” BlueConduit.
https://blueconduit.com/state-guidance-and-predictive-modeling/

We propose that EPA adopt two additional steps in the case that LSL or GRR are found in the
validation group. First, state regulators should ensure that the water utility works with a
qualified outside service provider to evaluate the existing service line inventory, analyze the
results of the validation work, and make recommendations for next steps on updating the
inventory.
§ 141.84 (5) Vi. If a water system’s validation program uncovers LSL or GRR, the
primacy agency would require the water utility to take steps to improve the
accuracy of their inventory, including working with an independent entity, not
involved in creating the initial inventory, to improve and resubmit the inventory to
EPA.
Second, we recommend that EPA require water systems to include information about the
validation program in the Consumer Confidence Report to increase transparency and trust. EPA
could suggest the following text be included in the CCR to provide context to customers about
the findings and progress of the validation program.
“XYZ Water System’s service line inventory includes A number of water connections. Among
those connections, we have categorized B number as non-lead based on physical inspection
and C number as non-lead based upon other methods. In order to validate the reliability of
those alternative methods, we conducted D number of inspections at a representative subset
of addresses categorized as non-lead based on something other than a physical inspection.
Among those inspections, we found E number lead addresses among those. Based on this
result, we estimate that less than XX% of the non lead addresses actually contain lead. The
water system is taking the following steps …. to update the service line inventory.”
““As part of the Lead and Copper Rule compliance, the water system developed a lead
service line inventory. In order to verify the reliability of service lines categorized as
non-lead, the water system is required to physically verify service line materials at a
subset. Out of all service lines considered non-lead in our system, we physically
inspected a representative sample of 200 of them and found 0 lead service lines in the
representative sample set. Based on those inspections, and a standard statistical
sample size formula, these numbers suggest there is a 95% chance that less than 1.5%
of the population of those pipes is lead. Based on those results, we are working with our
state regulators to improve the accuracy of the service line inventory and complete an
updated service line inventory.”
Alternative to validation process

We applaud EPA for the process outlined in the LCRI for water systems to validate the
reliability of addresses categorized as “non-lead” in their service line inventory. However, we
believe that there are some water systems where the validation process does not have the
same benefits. We are concerned that adding a requirement for representative, randomized
inspections for water systems with a high percentage of lead service lines, at the same time
that they are replacing lead service lines all over their community will reduce the efficiency of
their process without providing much additional information gain. Furthermore, for these water
systems that are planning on replacing all of their service lines in the 10-year window required
by EPA, adding a seven-year deadline for the inspections doesn’t allow for operational
efficiencies. Therefore, we recommend that EPA allow for an alternative so that water systems
have the option to visually verify all of their service lines in 10 years OR complete the
validations on the seven-year timeline outlined in the rule.
§ 141.84 (5) (iv) (D) Water systems can opt out of the validation process by
committing to physically 100% of their service lines on the same timeline as their
lead service line replacement timeline.
Access and control to complete full service line replacement
We applaud EPA for implementing a 10-year replacement timeline for all lead service lines. We
are concerned that the issue of access and control presents a barrier to achieving the rule’s
intended effect. We appreciate the detailed analysis in the “Impact of State and Local Laws on
Service Line Replacement,” but want to impress upon EPA how essential it will be for rule
implementation to take all measures possible to facilitate access to the private side of the
service line. We are concerned that water systems and states will not work to replace the
10-year replacement requirement unless EPA makes it clearer and easier for water systems to
complete full service line replacement.
The proposed rule 1) deletes the existing references to private property in the definitions of
both “Lead Service Line” and “Full Lead Service Line Replacement” and 2) provides that full
replacement of LSLs is only required when the water system has “access” to the LSL without
setting criteria for what qualifies. Taken together, these changes create a serious ambiguity as
to whether utilities will be required to replace most of the nation’s lead lines.
We think the EPA must fix the rule. Specifically, the proposed definition of service line should
include the sentence in red below that is in the current definition of LSL.
Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means a portion of pipe
which connects the water main to the building inlet. Where a building is not

present, the service line connects the water main to the outlet. Service lines may be
owned by the water system, owned by the property owner, or both.
In addition, EPA should provide more useful criteria regarding access and avoid
parenthetical examples such as “(e.g., legal access, physical access)” or stating
what it does not establish. We recommend the changes to proposed 40 C.F.R. §
141.84(d) regarding mandatory full service line replacement as follows.
(1) All water systems must replace all lead and galvanized requiring
replacement service lines under the control of the water system unless the
replacement would leave in place a partial lead service line.
(2) Where a water system has access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to
conduct full service line replacement, the service line is under its control,
and the water system must replace the service line regardless of ownership
of the line or the property it is on. Where a water system does not have
access to conduct full service line replacement, the water system is not
required by this rule to replace the line, but the water system must
document the reasons that the water system does not have access and
include any specific laws, regulations, and/or water tariff agreements that
affect the water system’s ability to gain access to conduct full replacement
of a lead service line and or a galvanized requiring replacement service line
replacement identified pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)(viii) of this section. The
water system must provide this documentation to the State pursuant to §
141.90(e)(10).
(i) This rule does not establish the criteria for determining whether a
system has access to conduct full service line replacement. The
criteria for determining whether a system has access to conduct full
service line replacement include: whether the system can safely
enter the property; whether the system can safely conduct the
replacement; and whether the system has obtained the property
owner’s consent, if consent is required for access. Presence of a lead
service line on private property does not, by itself, determine whether
a system has access to conduct full service line replacement for
purposes of this rule. Any State or local laws or water tariff
agreement requirements to gain access to conduct full service line
replacement must be identified in the service line replacement plan
as described in paragraph (c) of this section and in the notification
provided to persons served by lead, galvanized requiring
replacement, and unknown service lines as described in § 141.85(e).

(3) Where a water system has legal access pursuant to § 141.84(d)(2)(i) to
conduct full service line replacement only if property owner consent is
obtained, the water system must make a ‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain
property owner consent or written waiver documenting refusal of access for
the purpose of full lead service line replacement. If such a water system
does not obtain consent after making a ‘‘reasonable effort’’ to obtain it from
any property owner, then the water system is not required by this rule to
replace any portion of the service line at that address.
Replacement Rate Usability Tools
We are encouraged by the mandatory lead service line replacement requirement of the LCRI.
In order for water systems to understand what is required of them, EPA needs to make tools
available to water systems for them to be able to calculate and communicate their annual lead
service line replacement plans and goals. To that end, we suggest that EPA release a
spreadsheet, either connected to or separate from EPA’s service line inventory template, that
water systems can use to input information about their community and various scenarios from
year to year to understand how their mandatory lead service line requirement changes from
year to year. One of the scenarios that the calculator must be able to communicate is how a
water system’s annual replacement rate changes (or doesn’t change) based on the material
verifications of “non-lead” at service lines that were previously “unknown.”
The calculator must be user-friendly so that water systems can use it to understand their
required replacements over time and include the outputs in their lead service line replacement
plans.
In addition to the user-friendly calculator, we encourage EPA to update its lead service line
inventory template to include fields for lead connectors.
Lead-Lined Galvanized Pipes
Our team has worked in Trenton, NJ since 2020. Trenton Water Works has experienced
multiple action level exceedances in the last decade due to their galvanized service lines being
lined with lead. We appreciate that EPA noted lead-lined galvanized in the LCRI preamble, but
we believe that EPA needs to go further to ensure that lead-lined galvanized pipes or
galvanized pipes that might be lead-lined are appropriately accounted for in LCRI.

EPA should be explicit that water systems where lead-lined galvanized pipes are or have been
located, all galvanized pipes in those water systems should be categorized as lead for the
purpose of inventory and replacement.
Conclusion
In this comment, we ask that EPA consider our recommendations to improve the LCRI by:
1. EPA must take steps to make it easier for water utilities to gain access and control to
complete full service line replacement.
2. Historical records of water service line materials have varying reliability. Service lines
whose material are determined by historic records should be added to the pool of
validation addresses.
3. Water systems that locate LSL or GRR as part of their validation process should be
required to work with their primacy agency to improve the accuracy of their inventory.
4. Water systems that have a state agency-approved plan for using representative,
random inspections as part of their inventory should not be required to conduct another
set of representative, random inspections.
5. Water systems will need more tools from EPA to be able to understand and implement
the mandatory lead service line replacement.
6. Galvanized pipes in systems with lead-lined galvanized pipes should be treated as
“lead.”
Thank you for considering this request. If you have any questions, please contact Ian Robinson
at ian@blueconduit.com or 248-761-2005.
Sincerely,
BlueConduit team

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1840 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1444 9th Street         
       
 ph. 310-451-1500       
info@healthebay.org          
Santa Monica, CA 90401         fax 310-496-1902       
www.healthebay.org       
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Docket 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460 
 
Submitted electronically 
 
Re: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper- Improvements 
(LCRI) (Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
 
Dear Ms. Fox and Mr. Regan:  
Heal the Bay is an environmental non-profit organization based on the lands of the Tongva 
people with nearly 40 years of experience dedicated to making the coastal waters and watersheds 
of greater Los Angeles healthy, safe, and clean. Our team of scientists, activists, educators, and 
community advocates works tirelessly to protect the public’s health from contaminated water. 
We recognize the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements (LCRI) as a step towards safer drinking water for all. Lead-contaminated 
drinking water has continuously disproportionately harmed environmental justice communities 
for more than a century and it is the responsibility of the EPA to protect these communities from 
lead exposure. Although there has been an effort to improve the rule, there are weaknesses in the 
proposed LCRI that should be addressed to ensure that everyone has access to safe drinking 
water. We respectfully recommend these changes in the new proposed LCRI: 
1. Improve testing and filtration in schools and childcare facilities. 
2.  Mandate water systems to cover costs to replace old lead pipes. 
3. Lower the Lead Action Level to below 5 parts per billion.  

 
  
 
 1444 9th Street         
       
 ph. 310-451-1500       
info@healthebay.org          
Santa Monica, CA 90401         fax 310-496-1902       
www.healthebay.org       
 
 
 
These recommendations are discussed in further detail below. 
1. Improve testing and filtration in schools and childcare facilities. 
We appreciate the provisions in the proposal to improve tap water quality testing.  However, the 
provisions need to go further and require additional testing from utilities to comprehensively test 
for lead from fountains and drinking water sources in schools and childcare facilities. Infants and 
young children are especially vulnerable to lead exposure. Lead exposure can cause infants and 
children to experience new or worsened learning and behavior problems, severe harm to mental 
and physical development, and brain damage. The rule must protect public health to the 
maximum extent possible and require utilities to test for lead in all areas where the public could 
be harmed and at a frequency that is health protective. 
 
2. Mandate water systems to cover costs to replace old lead pipes. 
The proposed LCRI would require remaining lead pipes to be removed and replaced within 10 
years. Water systems are not required to pay the cost for replacing the lead pipes. This burdens 
the individual homeowner to expense this cost, which will make it difficult for low-income 
communities to protect themselves from toxins and be in compliance. Water utilities and 
government agencies must cover the cost of replacing lead pipes without passing the cost on to 
the communities.  
 
3. Lower the Lead Action Level to below 5 parts per billion. 
Research has proven there is no safe level of lead in drinking water. While the EPA is proposing 
to lower the lead action levels from 15 parts per billion (ppb) to 10 ppb, this level is not 
protective enough. Health experts and the governments in Canada and Europe recommend a 5 
ppb lead action level, whereas the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends limiting lead in 
school water fountains to no more than 1 ppb. The lead action level dictates when a water system 
has to inform the public and take action to reduce lead exposure, but is not a health standard. We 
urge the EPA to lower the lead action alert to below 5ppb and follow the same recommendations 
as Canada, Europe, and the Academy of Pediatrics. 
Lead pipes have been prohibited for over 40 years; however, more than 9 million lead pipes 
continue to transport unsafe drinking water to predominately environmental justice communities. 

 
  
 
 1444 9th Street         
       
 ph. 310-451-1500       
info@healthebay.org          
Santa Monica, CA 90401         fax 310-496-1902       
www.healthebay.org       
 
 
 
Access to safe drinking water is a fundamental right that should be available to all, especially 
children. To better protect these communities, the proposed improvements in the Lead and 
Copper Rule need to be more stringent. It is crucial to ensure that the expenses associated with 
the replacement of water infrastructure and water quality monitoring are not transferred to 
vulnerable communities. We appreciate the EPA’s efforts for putting forth improvements to the 
LCRI and look forward to further improvements to ensure that safe drinking water is accessible 
to all communities. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Crystal Barajas 
Senior Community Science and Outreach Coordinator

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0772 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Comments from the Associaon of State Drinking Water 
Administrators for the 1/31/24 NDWAC Meeng on LCRI
Good aernoon, thank you for the opportunity to provide input on this 
rulemaking. My name is Ashley Voskuhl, and I am a Senior Policy 
Analyst at the Associa"on of State Drinking Water Administrators, 
otherwise known as ASDWA. ASDWA is the na"onal associa"on for the 
heads of the 57 state and territorial drinking water agencies, who co-
regulate the safe drinking water act with EPA. The agencies’ collec"ve 
workforce of about 3,600 regulators works "relessly every day to 
ensure that the 150,000 water systems na"onwide provide safe 
drinking water and protect public health. 
ASDWA’s members most pressing concern with the proposed LCRI is 
the increased state workload, compounded by the upcoming PFAS 
regula"on and ongoing IIJA implementa"on. These important new tasks 
will be in addi"on to our current everyday ac"vi"es, such as hands-on 
technical assistance, ensuring compliance with over 90 standards, 
system inspec"ons, engineering reviews, operator cer"ﬁca"on, etc. The 
proposed rule requires 38 new reviews by states, 8 new templates to be 
developed, and 5 new state-to-system consulta"ons across various LCRI 
components. Our es"mate of the increased burden is over 5 million 
addi"onal hours each year for state implementa"on of LCRI.
States are encouraged that EPA incorporated so many of ASDWA’s 
recommenda"ons into the proposed LCRI, but EPA must priori"ze
feasible implementa"on. The ﬁnal rule should balance health, feasibility 
and cost and should:
Retain the 10 ppb ac"on level.
Stagger the compliance deadline based on system size, similar to
the approach taken for Stage 2 DBPR.
Provide ﬂexibility in CCT implementa"on, allowing states 
discre"on in determining if pipe-loop studies are needed and 

allowing systems to make incremental changes once CCT is 
installed, as opposed to wai"ng years for pipe-loop studies for 
systems with LSLs.
Maintain the exis"ng 30 day consumer no"ce requirement. 
Ensures exis"ng school and childcare tes"ng programs that meet 
the proposed sampling criteria and implemented aer 2014 will 
be honored, rather than limi"ng programs implemented aer 
2021.
Priori"ze development and implementa"on of a data system that 
will be able to handle all the new regulatory tracking requirements 
in this rule and others. 
Finally, ASDWA’s Members urge EPA to recognize and to assist in 
communica"ng with the public as implementa"on moves forward and 
the public begins to receive increased communica"on about lead, 
including:
No"ﬁca"ons to all property owners with unknown service line 
materials;
LSLR disturbances on private property – “who is going to replace 
my landscaping?”
Property owners that refuse to par"cipate in LSLR
Community disrup"on with LSLR, i.e., roadways being torn up
Filter distribu"on
The addi"onal ALEs with revised compliance sampling plans and 
sampling both the ﬁrst and ﬁh liters
This is only a summary of our issues – ASDWA also recommends the 
NDWAC thoroughly review ASDWA’s detailed comments that will be 
submiHed to the LCRI Docket.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1347 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Virginia State Conference of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
PO Box 27212 • Richmond, VA 23261 • (804) 321-5678 • naacpva.org 
February 5, 2024 
 
Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801,  
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
US Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
The NAACP Virginia State Conference submits the following comments regarding the US Environmental 
Protection Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements” (“LCRI”). The NAACP Virginia State Conference provides leadership for local branches, youth 
councils, and college chapters for environmental and climate justice needs in Virginia. The NAACP and its 
Center for Environmental and Climate Justice have a longstanding interest in ensuring that issues of 
community engagement and environmental justice center Black communities and frontline communities most 
impacted, including communities in Virginia. 
 
The NAACP Virginia State Conference applauds EPA for proposing stronger regulations to protect 
communities from lead in drinking water. Lead in drinking water has been a historically prevalent issue in Black 
communities, posing extreme risks to the health of young people, mothers, and their families.  According to a 
study by the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), in Virginia, there is an estimated 187,883 lead 
service lines threatening families across our state with exposure to a potent and irreversible neurotoxin which, 
even at low levels of exposure, is linked to damage to the brain and nervous system, learning disabilities, 
shorter stature, impaired hearing, and harm to blood cells. In Virginia, we would derive $16,063,996,500 in 
public health cost savings from full lead service line replacement. 
 
Lead contamination in our state's drinking water is not just a historical issue; it's an ongoing concern that 
profoundly impacts our communities' public health, economy, and overall well-being. Throughout Virginia's 
history, we have seen the devastating consequences of lead exposure, particularly on marginalized 
communities. It is imperative that we address this issue as a priority, not only for the sake of public health but 
also for the principles of economic and environmental justice. Black families in our state should not bear the 
destructive burden of lead exposure and exposure to countless other pollutants. We must commit to equitable 
access to clean and safe drinking water, ensuring that every Virginian can enjoy a healthy and prosperous 
future, free from the harmful effects of lead and other pollutants. This commitment is not just about protecting 
our environment; it's about safeguarding the health and dignity of all our residents and fostering a more just 
and sustainable future for our state. 
 
Recently, the EPA awarded Virginia $46 million for towns and cities to replace lead water lines under the 2021 
bipartisan Infrastructure bill. According to Senator Mark Warner, the Virginia Department of Health Office of 
Drinking Water will award the funds to communities.  Some Virginia municipalities have advised residents to 
filter their water until the lines can be replaced. It is imperative that the Lead and Cooper Rule modifications 
are adopted as soon as possible.  In some instances, it will take years to replace the pipes.  In July 2022, the 
issue of lead service pipe replacement needs in Virginia was amplified by the Virginia Department of Health.  
Dr. Tony Singh, deputy director of the Office of Drinking Water reported that $1.1 million in funding from the 
Environmental Protection Agency will be used to collect and analyze 40,000 drinking water samples. What is 

 
 
PAGE 2 of 2 
 
Virginia State Conference of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
P.O. Box 27212 • Richmond, VA 23261 • 804.321.5678 • naacpva.org 
known as a result of years of studies conducted nationwide is that Black children and 2-3 times as likely as 
white children to have high blood lead levels. Using lead pipes one day longer is too long.   
 
For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong elements of the proposed 
LCRI, such as the requirement for the removal of all lead service lines in ten years, the requirements for water 
systems to sample both the first and fifth liter of water passing through lead pipes and a lower action level; but 
also ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes which undermine their goals and ensure that weaker 
parts of the rule are strengthened. 
 
Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule does not leave Black 
communities in Virginia behind: 
 
§ 
Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it is a fundamental injustice 
that the communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed 40 or more years to fix this 
issue. 
 
§ 
Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines: Removal can cost 
thousands of dollars, and putting the financial burden on impacted communities will result in mostly 
wealthy and white neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced. Removal and replacement do not 
make up major proportions of utility budgets, and utilities should be expected to maximize the use of 
available federal water infrastructure funds and other non-ratepayer sources of funds to prioritize 
solving this crisis. 
 
§ 
Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who spend many hours there daily 
are not at risk of exposure: Black children face an increased risk of lead exposure when compared 
with white children. The proposal’s suggested testing program does not differ from past ineffective 
programs, and EPA should move towards incentivizing the installation of filters and protecting children. 
 
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components would allow environmental 
injustice to persist. Black communities and frontline communities have long suffered from disinvestment and 
lack of resources. Past NAACP analysis has demonstrated that race, ethnicity, or language spoken had the 
strongest relationship to slow and inadequate enforcement of the SDWA of any sociodemographic 
characteristic analyzed. The final LCRI is a rare opportunity to make significant changes in the lives of millions 
of people in Virginia and to provide a measure of environmental justice that these families are owed, and we 
encourage this administration to build on the progress made in the proposed rule by strengthening the final rule 
further. 
 
Sincerely, 
Rev. Cozy Bailey 
 
 
 
 
 
Karen T. Campblin 
Rev. Cozy Bailey 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Karen T. Campblin 
President 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental and Climate Justice

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1847 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
USEPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 2822IT  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Submitted electronically to: https://www.regulations.gov/    
RE: Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI): Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
Water District No. 1 of Johnson County, Kansas (WaterOne) is a drinking water provider in northeast 
Kansas and is the largest water provider in the state. We appreciate the opportunity to submit 
comments to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI) under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA). EPA published the 
proposed rules in the Federal Register on December 6, 2023, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801. 
In the LCRI, EPA requested comments on specific regulatory elements. In the bulleted list below, 
WaterOne provides input on key items as requested by EPA. WaterOne’s comments are provided in bold 
text. 
1. The revised definition of “connector,” including that connectors are defined as “not exceeding 
two feet.” 
a. WaterOne supports and appreciates the inclusion of the “connector” definition. This 
definition will help provide additional clarity and a definitive distinction between 
connectors and service lines that currently does not exist in the LCRR. 
2. Whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent should be more than four times 
(e.g., five, six, or seven times). 
a. In our staff’s experience, reaching out to a customer more than four times would not 
yield increased results and will only add burden to the utility for time associated with 
multiple forms of contact and tracking such attempts. EPA should provide clarity on 
the amount of time necessary between attempts and amount of time after last 
attempt where customer can be labeled as “not responsive”. 
3. Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of the proposed sites should be 
included in Tier 3, if additional sites should be included, or if some should be included in a 
different, lower priority tier, such as Tier 4. Specifically, comment on whether sites served by 
galvanized service lines or containing galvanized premise plumbing that are identified as ever 
being downstream of an LSL or lead connector should be included in the same tier as other sites 
with a current lead connector (e.g., copper service line downstream of a lead connector).    

 
 
a. For water utilities with unknown service lines and no identified lead service lines, it is 
critical that EPA clarify Galvanized Requiring Replacement as only when it has been 
positively identified as being connected to or previously connected to Lead.  Utilities 
should NOT be asked to prove a negative using the entire life history of every 
connection to the line. This practice provides no benefit to customers and significantly 
increases costs and complex logistics in numerous aspects of the LCRR/LCRI.  
4. Comment on the applicability of alternate sampling protocols to assess CCT performance, 
increase customer participation, and other relevant factors.   
a. Customer participation remains a concern in general as response rates to email and 
phone calls continue to decline and it becomes very hard to keep customers engaged 
and informed. 
5. Comment and any relevant data on the number and tiering of samples used to calculate the 90th 
percentile lead and/or copper levels for systems with LSLs for purposes of assessing CCT efficacy. 
Specifically, whether samples from non-LSL sites that have higher lead concentrations than 
samples from LSL sites should be included and whether these higher values should replace lower 
values from LSL sites in the 90th percentile calculation.   
a. More clarity is needed as to how to approach a galvanized line with unknown 
connections and what it means in terms of tier and sampling requirements. 
6. In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a threshold of systems serving greater than 50,000 persons to host 
the inventory and plan online, which is the required threshold under the LCRR. EPA is seeking 
comment on the size threshold at which systems must host their publicly accessible inventory, 
inventory summary data, replacement summary data, and service line replacement plan online, 
and whether it should be lowered relative to the LCRR requirements. 
a. Under the proposed LCRI, water utilities with unknown service lines in their inventory, 
but without any documented lead service lines, will be required to develop a Lead 
Service Line Replacement Plan and post it online. This requirement of posting a Lead 
Service Line Replacement Plan will cause customers to be concerned about a problem 
that does not or may not exist and subsequently, once all of the service lines are 
characterized, this requirement would go away. This could result in false information 
being provided to the public and potentially raise unnecessary concern.    
7. In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of non-lead 
service lines in their inventory that were categorized using methods other than records review or 
visual inspection of at least two points along the line. EPA is requesting comment on the number 
of validations required, the proposed 95 percent confidence level approach used to develop the 
number of validations required, the criteria for which methods used to categorize non-lead 
service lines should be included in the validation pool (including whether non-lead lines 
categorized based on records should be subject to validation), and the seven-year timeline for 
systems on a 10-year replacement deadline to complete the validation requirements. 
a. WaterOne believes this is a reasonable request and will help ease concern over using 
methodology such as predictive modeling to support service line inventory 
development. However, predictive modeling requires that visual inspection validation 
occur on the test set that is withheld from the data set used to build the model. It 
would be important to know if these visual validations used in the development of a 

 
 
predictive model will be allowed to count toward the newly required validation 
pool.  Clarification is needed as to whether the validation pool will be in addition to 
verification performed in the process of developing a predictive model.  
8. Comment on establishing a deadline for systems to identify all unknown service lines prior to 
their service line replacement deadlines. 
a. There should be a separate service line identification deadline for utilities with NO 
documented or discovered lead service lines. Tying a deadline for identification of all 
unknowns to the service line replacement deadline does not make sense as 
demonstrated in the following example: a utility with 150,000 service lines with 15% 
of those documented as unknown would be required to replace 2,250 service lines per 
year. If the utility has zero lead service lines, establishing this replacement rate would 
put the utility out of compliance with the LCRI. For utilities with zero lead service lines, 
the deadline for identification of all unknowns should have a separate service line 
identification deadline.  
9. Comment on a requirement for systems to update their service line replacement plans if there 
are any changes, such as changes to laws and policies applicable to full service line replacement. 
a. We support this requirement.   
10. EPA is also seeking comment on the use of the action level to determine when additional public 
education is required, and the use of the same action level for public education as for the CCT 
provisions. 
a. WaterOne is concerned about the effectiveness of system-wide communication 
requirements for potentially isolated exceedances caused by private plumbing. This 
scenario would seem to increase in likelihood, given the reduced action limit of 10 
ppb. 
11. The proposed determination that the public education treatment technique is feasible and 
prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible. 
a. The requirements for specific phrasing such as “IMPORTANT INFORMATION ABOUT 
LEAD IN YOUR DRINKING WATER” is misleading for system-wide public education 
efforts and creates a high potential for public distrust. Targeted communication to 
residences known to be at risk would be more appropriate.   
12. Whether the Agency should require States, as a condition of primacy, to provide translation 
support to water systems that are unable to do so for public education materials to consumers 
with limited English proficiency. 
a. State resources supporting translation of public education materials would be a 
benefit to many water systems throughout the state.   
13. EPA is also requesting comment on additional ways to streamline public education and 
associated certification requirements (e.g., combine deadlines for systems to conduct public 
education or submit information to the State). 
a. Combined/consolidated deadlines would provide significant benefit in helping water 
systems plan and prepare to meet certification requirements.  

 
 
14. Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water systems are capable of 
providing consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three calendar days of 
obtaining those results, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or copper action level, 
or if a longer time frame is needed ( e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 calendar 
days). 
a. WaterOne owns and operates a NELAC certified laboratory and even in this position, 
believes it will be extremely challenging to meet the 3-calendar day turn around for 
sample results notifications due to the additional sampling and analysis load and 
associated logistics presented by LCRR/LCRI. We believe that 7 calendar days is a more 
achievable expectation to deliver sample results. 
15. Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or to sample more frequently in 
schools and child care facilities. 
a. If lead is absent in plumbing materials at a school, the school will not benefit from 
increased sampling frequency. However, increasing the number of samples taken at a 
school may, in some cases, have the potential to identify a faucet/fixture that requires 
remediation. The EPA clearly states that the intent of the School and Childcare 
sampling is to identify situations where the water is too corrosive. We believe that 5 
samples per school and 2 per childcare facilities would provide the intended 
results/objective of EPA.    
16. The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community water systems from the 
requirement for lead sampling in schools and child care facilities during the five-year period after 
the LCRI compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021 but prior to 
the LCRI compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver requirements of 
§ 141.92(h). 
a. WaterOne serves nearly 800 school and childcare facilities that require sampling per 
the LCRR/LCRI; therefore, since 2021, we have been proactively meeting with each 
school district leadership, facility directors, and PIOs. We have also met numerous 
times with the county daycare licensing department as well as privately operated 
schools in our service area to prepare them for the LCRR sampling that was set to 
begin in October 2024. Postponing this critical sampling program to potentially begin 
in October 2027 could cause distrust and frustration from our school and childcare 
partners. We respectfully request that waivers include sampling conducted between 
October 2024 and October 2027 so long as the sampling is conducted in accordance 
with the revised sampling requirements.   
17. Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and child care facility sampling results publicly 
available, and if so, how frequently and in what manner. 
a. Local and state health departments will have the most complete data set of school and 
childcare sample results. To keep the information consistent, and to provide a 
single/uniform entity to provide data, we believe the state should be responsible for 
choosing how to share that information and not each individual CWS. 
18. EPA is requesting comment on the expansion of the inventory reporting to include lead 
connectors and non-lead service lines. 

 
 
a. WaterOne has invested signiﬁcant Dme and resources to developing our inventory 
plaEorm as well as reviewing historical records. Changes to the inventory this late in 
the process will cause signiﬁcant re-work for public uDliDes that already have minimal 
resources. Connector materials that are shown on records can be documented in the 
inventory, but moving forward should not be a requirement but added beneﬁt.  
19. Whether there are other LCRR provisions besides the initial inventory and notifications of service 
line material for which the October 16, 2024 compliance date should be retained. 
a. We support retaining the School and Childcare sampling in accordance with the LCRR 
established timeline. 
20. EPA is proposing to define a two-foot maximum length of connectors. EPA proposes that 
“connectors” that exceed two feet in length be treated as a service line. EPA is requesting 
comment on the defined length of a connector. 
a. As previously noted, we support the addition of this clarification.  
Additionally, 
• 
WaterOne is concerned that if the ﬁnal LCRI is not published by October 16, 2024 then we 
would need to move forward with all LCRR requirements as published in 2021. Publishing the 
draG LCRI presents signiﬁcant changes to nearly every aspect of the LCRR; therefore, we are 
very concerned with preparing for the LCRR or the LCRI, not knowing if EPA is going to publish 
the ﬁnal LCRI by the LCRR regulatory date.   
• 
Should a water system follow LCR or LCRR requirements when compleDng tap compliance 
sampling between 2025-2027? Also, when communicaDng the health eﬀects of lead to the 
public is it appropriate to use the language in LCRR between 2025-2027? 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Sarah C. Tuite, P.E.  
Manager of Process Engineering 
stuite@waterone.org 
 
cc: File

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1340 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0757 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
615 N Wolfe St, Baltimore, MD 21205  
 (410) 955-3543  
bhuynh@jhu.edu  
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
 
 
 
 
 
            January 25, 2024 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-080 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
I am an Assistant Professor of Environmental Health and Engineering at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg 
School of Public Health, writing to provide feedback on the United States Environmental Protection 
Agency’s (EPA) proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). I have conducted research on 
estimating the population-level health impact of lead-contaminated drinking water, and appreciate the 
opportunity to provide public comment based on my experiences. My comments are as follows: 
 
Comment 1: Support for lead service line replacement plan over 10 years. 
 
I agree with the proposal to replace all lead service lines (LSLs) within 10 years. There is considerable 
scientific evidence showing that low-dose chronic exposure to lead-contaminated drinking water is associated 
with increased blood lead levels, which is associated with a variety of adverse health outcomes.1–8 
 
Comment 2: Alternative temporary filter programs are inadequate. 
 
The interim plan to provide filters only for areas with multiple action level (AL) exceedances is insufficient, 
especially for cities with extended LSL replacement timelines, such as Chicago. If LSLs are being replaced 
under the justification that no amount of lead in drinking water is safe, then the decision to only provide 
filters for areas with multiple AL exceedances is inconsistent with that notion. Most households with lead-
contaminated drinking water will not be served by public water systems with multiple AL exceedances, yet 
would still benefit from filters.  
 
I recommend either lowering the AL, which is not a health-based standard, or otherwise changing the 
alternative temporary filter requirement to apply to a broader subset of the population. 
 
Comment 3: Economic analyses should include preterm births. 
 
The economic analysis as proposed considers the benefits of reducing instances of low birthweight, but does 
not consider the benefits of reducing pre-term births, a similar but distinct metric. The Zhu et al. (2010) 
study used in the economic analysis reports differs from other studies in terms of estimated effect of blood 
lead level on preterm births.9 For example, Fisher et al. (2023), in a prospective cohort study, report 1.48 and 
1.71 risk ratios per 1 μg/dL increase of blood lead concentration for preterm birth and spontaneous preterm 

birth, respectively.10 Other pregnancy cohort studies also found increased risk of preterm birth from increased 
blood lead concentrations.11–15 
 
The estimated costs of preterm births are high, largely driven by increased medical expenditures for the 
newborn baby, and lost productivity in the labor market. Waitzman et al. (2016) estimate the additional cost 
of preterm births over term births to be $64,815 in 2016 dollars (approximately $83,915 in December 2023 
dollars), and the additional cost of extremely preterm births over term births to be $344,355 in 2016 dollars 
(approximately $445,852 in December 2023 dollars).16 
 
Comment 4: Economic analysis underestimates benefits due to unquantified factors. 
 
There are many benefits to LSL removal that are not included in the EPA’s economic analysis, in part because 
they are difficult to quantify without fully identified exposure-response functions. For example, lead-
contaminated water disproportionately affects racially minoritized populations.17–20 This may lead to mistrust 
in the water system, which may manifest as avoidance of tap water: Black and Hispanic households are far 
more likely to use bottled water as their primary drinking water source compared to White households.21  
 
However, bottled water is roughly 3000% more expensive than tap water, and is not necessarily safer than tap 
water, with concerns of plastic exposure and a federally established maximum lead concentration of 5 ppb for 
bottled water.22 Similarly, there are unquantified stress and mental health costs to living with poor water 
quality, for which there are no fully identified exposure-response functions.23–25 
 
Lastly, clean drinking water is a human right and one of the most basic needs for human survival and 
flourishing. Systematic denial of that right, especially in a manner that disproportionately harms racially 
minoritized and other marginalized communities, is unjust and harmful in ways that cannot be captured in 
cost-benefit analyses.  
 
Conclusion 
 
In summary, I support the EPA’s recognition of the public health threat posed by widespread lead-
contaminated drinking water. Low-level exposure at the population level may be imperceptible at the 
individual level, but can have grave public health consequences for generations to come. It is my hope that the 
EPA will continue to recognize the urgency of lead-contaminated drinking water and take expedited action to 
protect the communities most at risk. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please feel free to contact me at bhuynh@jhu.edu should you have any questions. Thank you for your 
consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Benjamin Q. Huynh, PhD  
Department of Environmental Health & Engineering 
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health 
 
 

References 
1. Canfield, R. L. et al. Intellectual Impairment in Children with Blood Lead Concentrations below 10 µg per Deciliter. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 348, 1517 (2003). 
2. Reuben, A. et al. Association of Childhood Blood Lead Levels With Cognitive Function and Socioeconomic Status at 
Age 38 Years and With IQ Change and Socioeconomic Mobility Between Childhood and Adulthood. JAMA 317, 
1244–1251 (2017). 
3. Lanphear, B. P. et al. Low-Level Environmental Lead Exposure and Children’s Intellectual Function: An 
International Pooled Analysis. Environ. Health Perspect. 113, 894–899 (2005). 
4. Evens, A. et al. The impact of low-level lead toxicity on school performance among children in the Chicago Public 
Schools: a population-based retrospective cohort study. Environ. Health 14, 21 (2015). 
5. Levallois, P. et al. The impact of drinking water, indoor dust and paint on blood lead levels of children aged 1–5 
years in Montréal (Québec, Canada). J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 24, 185–191 (2014). 
6. Lanphear, B. P., Burgoon, D. A., Rust, S. W., Eberly, S. & Galke, W. Environmental exposures to lead and urban 
children’s blood lead levels. Environ. Res. 76, 120–130 (1998). 
7. Lanphear, B. P. et al. Environmental lead exposure during early childhood. J. Pediatr. 140, 40–47 (2002). 
8. Ngueta, G., Abdous, B., Tardif, R., St-Laurent, J. & Levallois, P. Use of a Cumulative Exposure Index to Estimate 
the Impact of Tap Water Lead Concentration on Blood Lead Levels in 1- to 5-Year-Old Children (Montréal, 
Canada). Environ. Health Perspect. 124, 388–395 (2016). 
9. Zhu, M., Fitzgerald, E. F., Gelberg, K. H., Lin, S. & Druschel, C. M. Maternal Low-Level Lead Exposure and Fetal 
Growth. Environ. Health Perspect. 118, 1471–1475 (2010). 
10.  Fisher, M. et al. Association between toxic metals, vitamin D and preterm birth in the Maternal–Infant research on 
environmental chemicals study. Paediatr. Perinat. Epidemiol. 37, 447–457 (2023). 
11.  Li, J. et al. Maternal serum lead level during pregnancy is positively correlated with risk of preterm birth in a Chinese 
population. Environ. Pollut. 227, 484–489 (2017). 
12.  Wang, H. et al. Association of maternal serum cadmium level during pregnancy with risk of preterm birth in a 
Chinese population. Environ. Pollut. 216, 851–857 (2016). 
13.  Vigeh, M. et al. Blood lead at currently acceptable levels may cause preterm labour. Occup. Environ. Med. 68, 231–
234 (2011). 

14.  McMichael, A. J., Vimpani, G. V., Robertson, E. F., Baghurst, P. A. & Clark, P. D. The Port Pirie cohort study: 
maternal blood lead and pregnancy outcome. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 40, 18–25 (1986). 
15.  Taylor, C., Golding, J. & Emond, A. Adverse effects of maternal lead levels on birth outcomes in the ALSPAC 
study: a prospective birth cohort study. BJOG Int. J. Obstet. Gynaecol. 122, 322–328 (2015). 
16.  Waitzman, N. J., Jalali, A. & Grosse, S. D. Preterm birth lifetime costs in the United States in 2016: An update. 
Semin. Perinatol. 45, 151390 (2021). 
17.  Sampson, R. J. & Winter, A. S. The Racial Ecology of Lead Poisoning: Toxic Inequality in Chicago Neighborhoods, 
1995-2013. Bois Rev. Soc. Sci. Res. Race 13, 261–283 (2016). 
18.  Teye, S. O. et al. Exploring persistent racial/ethnic disparities in lead exposure among American children aged 1–5 
years: results from NHANES 1999–2016. Int. Arch. Occup. Environ. Health 94, 723–730 (2021). 
19.  Ezell, J. M. & Chase, E. C. Forming a Critical Race Theory of Environmental Disaster: Understanding social 
meanings and health threat perception in the Flint Water Crisis. J. Environ. Manage. 320, 115886 (2022). 
20.  Hanna-Attisha, M., LaChance, J., Casey Sadler, R. & Champney Schnepp, A. Elevated Blood Lead Levels in 
Children Associated With the Flint Drinking Water Crisis: A Spatial Analysis of Risk and Public Health Response. 
Am. J. Public Health 106, 283–290 (2016). 
21.  Gorelick, M. H. et al. Perceptions About Water and Increased Use of Bottled Water in Minority Children. Arch. 
Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 165, 928–932 (2011). 
22.  Eerkes-Medrano, D., Leslie, H. A. & Quinn, B. Microplastics in drinking water: A review and assessment. Curr. 
Opin. Environ. Sci. Health 7, 69–75 (2019). 
23.  Wutich, A., Brewis, A. & Tsai, A. Water and mental health. WIREs Water 7, e1461 (2020). 
24.  Kruger, D. J. et al. Toxic trauma: Household water quality experiences predict posttraumatic stress disorder 
symptoms during the Flint, Michigan, water crisis. J. Community Psychol. 45, 957–962 (2017). 
25.  Toivettula, A., Varis, O., Vahala, R. & Juvakoski, A. Making waves: Mental health impacts of inadequate drinking 
water services — From sidenote to research focus. Water Res. 243, 120335 (2023).

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0972 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
ASDWA • 1300 Wilson Boulevard • Suite 875 • Arlington, VA 22209 
703-812-9505 • info@asdwa.org • www.asdwa.org 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
Dr. Jennifer McLain 
Office of Groundwater and Drinking Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave NW 
Washington, DC  20009 
 
RE: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI), Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0813 
 
Dear Dr. McLain, 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this important rulemaking. The state and territorial 
primacy agencies are co-regulators with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in the development 
and implementation of drinking water regulations. The primacy agencies’ collective workforce of about 
3,600 regulators works tirelessly every day to ensure that the nation’s 150,000 water systems provide 
safe drinking water every time consumers turn on the tap. Additionally, state regulators provide boots-
on-the-ground assistance to respond to emergencies and address many other compliance and 
implementation challenges.  
 
States have over 30 years of direct implementation experience with the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR), 
originally published in 1991, including the minor revisions in 2000 and 2004 and the short-term revisions 
in 2007. ASDWA’s Members are also currently working to implement the service line inventory 
components of the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) ahead of the LCRI. ASDWA’s members 
have a breadth and depth of knowledge on the details of LCR implementation that EPA should 
incorporate into the final LCRI. As EPA’s development of the LCRI continues, ASDWA’s members, as co-
regulators with EPA, need to continue to be included in efforts to ensure the final LCRI can be 
implemented in such a way that both protects public health and streamlines the overall rule complexity. 
The LCRI must be feasible to implement in order to be effective.  
 
ASDWA’s members appreciate that the Agency included some of ASDWA’s LCRI Federalism Consultation 
Recommendations in the proposed rule, including: 
• Elimination of the lead trigger level. 
• Establishment of a standardized approach for proactive lead service line replacement. 
• Renaming “find-and-fix” to “Distribution System and Site Assessment.” 
• Limiting the use of small system flexibilities to those serving populations less than 3,300. 
• Alignment of school and childcare sampling protocols with existing 3Ts Guidance. 
• Clarification of definitions of galvanized requiring replacement and connectors. 
After a review of the proposed regulatory language, ASDWA’s members have developed extensive, in-
depth comments based on over 20 hours of input via Teams Meetings from 165 state regulators across 

 
2 
 
41 states. ASDWA’s members’ most pressing concern with the proposed LCRI is the increased state 
workload, compounded by the upcoming PFAS regulation and ongoing Infrastructure Investment and 
Jobs Act (IIJA) implementation. These important new tasks under LCRI will be in addition to states’ 
current everyday activities, such as providing hands-on technical assistance to water systems, ensuring 
compliance with over 90 existing standards, system inspections, engineering reviews, operator 
certification, and much more. The proposed rule requires 38 new reviews by states, 8 new templates to 
be developed, and 5 new state-to-system consultations across various components of the LCRI. Our 
estimate of the increased burden to states is a few million additional hours each year for LCRI 
implementation. 
 
ASDWA’s updated Cost of States’ Transactions Study (CoSTS) estimates that the LCRI will place a 
significant cost and time burden on states annually, estimating that a total of 5,141,769 state staff hours 
will be needed each year, or 71% of estimated available state staff time based on the estimated 3,600 
state staff across all primacy agencies. This time burden translates to over $300 million a year for state 
implementation—more than three times the amount of PWSS funding allocated for state 
implementation for the entire Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA.) Additionally, CoSTS estimates that the 
rule will necessitate approximately 799,115 upfront state hours, equating to about $48 million for initial 
implementation and transition to the new rule.  
 
While ASDWA’s Members are encouraged that EPA incorporated state’s feedback from the Federalism 
Consultation into the proposed rule, states still have concerns about the overall feasibility of the updated 
rule. ASDWA’s detailed comments that follow this letter contain several important recommendations 
that EPA should prioritize in the final LCRI—priority issues are outlined below.  
 
Lead Service Line Replacements  
 
ASDWA’s members applaud the Agency for requiring proactive lead service line (LSL) replacements 
nationwide, as this action will help eliminate one of the major sources of lead in drinking water. However, 
ASDWA’s members are concerned with the Agency’s implicit messaging implying that full removal of 
LSLs will eliminate the risk of lead exposure from drinking water. Premise plumbing, including legacy lead 
pipes, lead solder, and brass fixtures will continue to be a potential source of lead in drinking water and 
the importance of effective corrosion control should continue to be emphasized. This messaging needs 
to be appropriately revised as part of finalizing the LCRI. 
 
The $15 billion in LSLR funding from the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) is a significant first 
step towards the goal of 100% LSL removal, however, this IIJA funding will not cover the estimated $45 
billion cost to replace all LSLs nationwide. Giving that impression in the Agency’s messaging is 
problematic. Additionally, this funding is anticipated to already be distributed by the time the rule is 
effective. States, systems, and EPA will need to continue to work together to advocate wherever possible 
for additional funding to meet this critical public health need.  
 
States have a variety of concerns about the feasibility of components of the proposed rule regarding LSL 
replacements. EPA’s attempt to establish that control equals access for water systems may impact the 
enforceability of the rule requirements to conduct LSL replacements. EPA should define “control” and 
determine if control equates to ownership, rather than access, to clarify these concerns. Additionally, 
prohibiting partial LSL replacement during planned infrastructure work or repairs is not realistic. Partial 

 
3 
 
replacements may be necessary where a homeowner will not cooperate with the system, and the rule 
employs several mitigation measures that will provide sufficient notice and reduce resident risk where a 
partial replacement is necessary to conduct needed infrastructure work. States determining if a 
particular water system could replace LSLs at a faster rate than determined by rule is not feasible and 
this evaluation should not be a condition of primacy in the final LCRI. This option should be left to state 
discretion where a state implements regulations more stringent than federal regulations. 
 
Lead Service Line Inventories 
 
Additional clarification is needed in the final LCRI to ensure feasibility of the inventory requirements, 
especially the requirements for connectors. States recommend that connectors be optional in the LSL 
inventory, to ensure continuity with existing inventory requirements and the first round of inventories 
that are due October 2024. EPA should revise the proposed definition of “connector,” indicating that 
connectors are not to exceed three feet, rather than two feet, otherwise many connectors would need 
to be re-classified as LSLs. Additionally, EPA should add clarification to the definition of “connector” and 
“lead service line” explicitly outlining that any such piping over three feet is an LSL for purposes of the 
rule. Further, EPA should clarify what constitutes the “service line” and where the service line ends and 
interior plumbing begins, specifically defining the “building inlet”. Recently, there have been 
inconsistencies with defining a “lead service line” for the purposes of Drinking Water State Revolving 
Fund program funding, and ASDWA recommends that all EPA programs use the proposed LCRI definition. 
 
EPA should establish a deadline for systems to identify all unknown service lines prior to service line 
replacement deadlines, or risk systems failing to meet the LSL replacement deadline altogether.  
 
States also brought up concerns about some service line data being publicly available, and potential 
misuse of this data. EPA should give states discretion to allow location identifiers to be used in lieu of 
street addresses in some instances, such as on military installations, to address privacy and security 
concerns.   
 
Compliance Monitoring 
 
Under the updated tiering requirements, most water systems will need to adjust their compliance 
sampling sites. As such, EPA should utilize a phased approach for the review of compliance sampling 
plans and implementation by water systems, similar to the approach taken for Stage 2 Disinfectants and 
Disinfection Byproducts Rule (DBPR). ASDWA recommends that large systems begin compliance 
sampling under the new scheme starting the next standard monitoring period after the compliance date, 
medium systems one year later, and small systems two years after the compliance date. Staggering the 
compliance dates is the only solution for limited laboratory capacity, as well as capacity within the states 
to review compliance determinations.  
 
For systems collecting compliance samples from sites meeting different tier definitions, the 90th 
percentile results should be calculated based off the samples with the highest lead or copper 
concentration, regardless of the tier.  
 
EPA should also address concerns about sample invalidation and should establish a maximum stagnation 
time for compliance samples. States recommend that EPA establish more definitive guidance and clarify 

 
4 
 
issues with sample invalidation that have arisen since the inception of the rule that were not made clear 
with the 2004 Memorandum “Lead and Copper Rule – Clarification of Requirements for Collecting 
Samples and Calculating Compliance.”  
 
Corrosion Control Treatment  
 
The rule relies heavily on the use of pipe-loop corrosion control treatment studies for LSL systems that 
exceed the action level, and states strongly advise against this prescriptive approach. Pipe-loop studies 
often have diminishing returns with respect to determination of the most effective treatment approach 
and are very cost- and time-intensive. Pipe loop studies also take much longer to execute (sometimes 
years) and are much more expensive than other types of studies (i.e., desktop studies, coupon studies, 
etc.) This means that the public health protection afforded by optimal corrosion control treatment could 
be delayed. States have provided EPA with examples where pipe loop studies did not show different 
results compared to coupon studies. States also have significant concerns with the number of staff hours 
needed for the reviews and approvals of the potentially larger number of pipe-loop studies. EPA should 
offer additional flexibility in implementing corrosion control treatment, leaving the discretion to states 
to determine if pipe-loop studies should be required and allowing systems to make incremental changes 
once corrosion control treatment is installed to achieve optimization for each individual system. 
Incorporating flexibility on this aspect of the rule could benefit public health and improve feasibility for 
both water systems and states. 
 
POU Filters 
 
States have expressed concern regarding the reliance of POU filters to mitigate lead levels in the 
proposed LCRI. Specifically, filters being used as a compliance option for small systems is problematic, 
as well as the provision for systems with three or more lead Action Level Exceedances (ALE) to distribute 
filters to the entire service area, and the requirement to provide POUs to individuals served by an LSL, 
GRR or unknown following a line disturbance. Not only are there efficacy concerns regarding the 
effectiveness of the filters, but there are also concerns around implementation and ensuring use of filters 
do not increase bacteriological risk for users.  
 
EPA should limit the use of small system flexibilities in lieu of corrosion control treatment to systems 
that are either in control of their entire distribution system or to those systems with 100 percent buy in 
from the community. State experience has determined that POU filters and plumbing replacement have 
only shown to be effective in systems meeting these criteria.  
 
The proposed LCRI targets the highest risk sites for monitoring and evaluating the action level, as such, 
filters distributed after an action level exceedance should be targeted at sites that are at risk of lead 
exposure, i.e., locations with LSL, GRR, or unknowns based on the system’s inventory. Providing filters 
to consumers served by known, non-lead lines could undermine public confidence in drinking water and 
introduce unnecessary cost and risk to the water system and their consumers.  
 
School and Childcare Sampling 
 
As written, many well-established lead sampling programs would not be eligible to meet the waiver 
requirements under the proposed LCRI. EPA should change the waiver deadline for school and childcare 

 
5 
 
sampling to January 1, 2014, as EPA’s proposed date of January 1, 2021, would exclude existing state 
and local sampling programs enacted through America’s Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 (AWIA) and 
the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act (WIIN), as well as other established programs 
implemented at the state and local level.   
 
Public Education 
 
Several new public notification requirements in the LCRR and in the proposed LCRI have not yet been 
implemented. In adding these requirements, EPA has added new reporting deadlines and certifications. 
EPA should consider streamlining the reporting deadlines down to one or two dates for when the system 
needs to provide reports or certifications to the primacy agency for review. Additionally, EPA should 
coordinate with states to develop templates prior to the compliance date of LCRI for each type of 
certification the PWS is required to submit to the primacy agency to ensure national consistency and 
clarity ahead of the compliance deadline.   
 
States agree that translating important public health information for non-English speakers is important; 
however, states have significant concerns with the considerable cost for translation services and strongly 
recommend that EPA remove the requirement for translation support to be a condition of primacy. Many 
states do not have the expertise or funds to support this effort. EPA should instead pursue a contract or 
public-private partnership to provide translation as a centralized service to water systems as needed.  
 
Implementation and Guidance 
 
ASDWA’s members recommend that EPA develop comprehensive decision-trees, flowcharts, or 
schematics clearly depicting the regulatory triggers and steps for various components of the rule, 
including for corrosion control treatment, public education, and sampling components of the rule. These 
tools should be developed and shared with primacy agencies ahead of the compliance date for the rule 
to aid in compliance determinations and training. 
 
EPA needs to expeditiously prioritize the development of LCRR and LCRI implementation guidance for 
state primacy agencies. Additionally, the LCRI needs updated data management capabilities for states to 
track requirements, particularly with LSL replacements. EPA should prioritize collaboration with states 
in implementation of the LCRR and LCRI over the next few years. Specifically, states recommend 
coordination on the following: 
• Establishing expectations around including connectors in the inventory and streamlining 
implementation of the new definitions in initial and baseline inventory efforts.  
• Developing in-depth guidance and training for the review and approval of CCT studies and CCT 
adjustments needed for source and treatment changes.  
• Addressing clarification questions regarding school and childcare facility definitions and the 
expectations for state drinking water programs to manage lists of such facilities. 
• Developing new and updating existing public education and notification templates for states and 
water systems ahead of the compliance deadline.  
• Establishing guidance for filter usage and expectations for various filter requirements.  
• Ensuring compliance tracking and schedules established by LCRR and LCRI are fully supported in 
SDWIS or DW-SFTIES, and updated data entry instructions are available ahead of the compliance 
deadline.  

 
6 
 
 
In addition to the comments discussed above, ASDWA’s Members have provided extensive and detailed 
input on the proposed regulation that has been synthesized into the attachments that follow: 
• 
Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comment 
• 
Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language 
• 
Appendix C: LCRI Cost of State Transactions Study 
ASDWA appreciates the opportunity to share states’ collective experiences to provide input on the final 
LCRI. As co-regulators with EPA, states request a continued dialogue during the rule writing process. 
States are willing to provide expertise and guidance on rule components that could be more streamlined 
and can help to identify new and innovative solutions that could address problems that have arisen 
during the last 30 years of implementation. States encourage OGWDW to confer with the Agency’s Office 
of Research and Development, and regional direct implementation staff, as well as states, in ensuring 
the LCRI is truly an improvement over the existing regulation—that it is implementable, feasible, and 
improves public health.  
 
ASDWA’s members look forward to continuing our partnership with EPA to implement the LCRI. If you 
have any questions about these comments, please feel free to reach out to me (aroberson@asdwa.org) 
or Ashley Voskuhl (avoskuhl@asdwa.org).   
 
Sincerely, 
 
J. Alan Roberson, P.E. 
ASDWA Executive Director 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 1 
Request for Comment 
ASDWA Response 
General Maters 
 
Whether the proposed revisions to the LCRR 
treatment technique are eﬀecƟve to prevent known or 
anƟcipated adverse health eﬀects to the extent 
feasible in accordance with the SDWA. 
ASDWA’s Members agree with many of the proposed 
revisions to the LCRR treatment technique and thank EPA for 
including many recommendaƟons from the LCRI Federalism 
ConsultaƟon into the proposed rule.  
Whether there are addiƟonal ways EPA could reduce 
the complexity of the regulatory approach used to 
address lead in drinking water consistent with the 
statutory standard for a treatment technique rule in 
secƟon 1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. Speciﬁcally, EPA 
requests comment on ways that the proposed LCRI 
could be simpliﬁed and ways that burden, including 
paperwork burden, could be reduced without aﬀecƟng 
the ability of the rule to prevent known or anƟcipated 
adverse health eﬀects. 
ASDWA has outlined several ways for EPA to reduce 
complexity within the LCRI in this comment package and 
emphasizes the need for addiƟonal streamlining of the CCT 
requirements, reporƟng deadlines and public educaƟon 
requirements.  
 
States strongly recommend EPA dedicate addiƟonal 
resources for state support, including the development of in-
depth and rouƟne (annual) corrosion control training and 
regulatory training for LCRI for both states and systems. 
AddiƟonally, States recommend that EPA develop 
compliance determinaƟon ﬂowcharts for the ﬁnal rule within 
a year of promulgaƟon to help states and systems prepare 
ahead of the compliance deadline.  
 
Throughout this comment package, there are numerous 
requests for clariﬁcaƟon from the states. EPA should 
consider meeƟng with ASDWA and states to ensure these 
issues are addressed ahead of ﬁnal promulgaƟon of the rule.  
Whether the proposed requirements of the rule are 
enforceable and promote compliance without the 
need for State or Federal enforcement acƟon. EPA also 
solicits comment on ways the rule could be modiﬁed 
to beter promote compliance. 
EPA’s atempt to establish that control equals access for 
water systems may impact the enforceability of the rule 
requirements to conduct LSL replacements. EPA should 
deﬁne control and determine if control equates to 
ownership, rather than access, to clarify these concerns. This 
is especially important for master meter communiƟes (e.g., 
mobile home parks, commercial parks, etc.) and systems that 
are exempt from the NPDWRs.  
 
 
 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 2 
Service Line Replacement 
 
Whether a reasonable eﬀort to obtain property owner 
consent should be more than four Ɵmes (e.g., ﬁve, six, 
or seven Ɵmes). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EPA should not require water systems to atempt to obtain 
property owner consent more than four Ɵmes with two 
diﬀerent forms and manners of communicaƟon. AddiƟonally, 
ASDWA’s members conƟnue to argue that homeowner and 
rental documentaƟon should be used to provide noƟﬁcaƟon. 
Although ASDWA understands this is outside of EPA’s 
regulatory authoriƟes, the Agency can sƟll push the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development to consider 
these acƟons.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets 
“control” for the purposes of the mandatory 
replacement provision (i.e., require systems to conduct 
full service line replacement in situaƟons where the 
system has access to conduct the full replacement). 
ASDWA recommends that EPA deﬁne “under the control” 
within the deﬁniƟon secƟon and provide further 
clariﬁcaƟon. Does control equal access or ownership?  Some 
states have reported having many systems that do not own 
any of the service lines, and these states are concerned that 
these systems may believe they are not required to remove 
LSLs. States have also brought up concerns about the 
enforceability of this provision considering the lack of clarity.  
EPA is seeking comment on the rate construct 
approach, including how to calculate compliance with 
a given service line replacement deadline and average 
annual rate calculated across a rolling three-year 
period. 
These calculaƟons may be confusing to implement. ASDWA 
recommends EPA include informaƟon on this calculaƟon in 
the implementaƟon guidance and provide that informaƟon 
at least one year prior to the compliance date of the rule.  
EPA is taking comment on whether States, as a 
condiƟon of primacy, or EPA when it is directly 
implemenƟng the program, should be required to set 
iniƟal shortened deadlines by a certain Ɵmeframe, 
such as no later than 60 days aŌer the compliance 
date. 
It is unclear to ASDWA how states would determine that it is 
“feasible” for a system to replace LSLs at a faster rate. This 
puts an unreasonable burden on the states. Expedited 
replacement plans should be based on the 90th percenƟle, 
not at the state’s discreƟon. 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 3 
The proposed use of a maximum threshold of 10,000 
annual service line replacements for systems with 
atypically high numbers of LSLs and GRR service lines 
as well as seeking comment on the alternate threshold 
of 8,000 annual service line replacements. EPA is also 
seeking feedback on other thresholds and supporƟng 
data.  
A maximum annual threshold for LSL removal of 10,000 and 
8,000 are both infeasible from a logisƟcal, workforce and 
supply perspecƟve. For context, Wisconsin was the ﬁrst state 
to create a dedicated LSL replacement funding program in 
2017 and has been a leader in lead service line replacement. 
Over this Ɵme period, they have only had one project that 
was able to accomplish more than 1,000 service line 
replacements in a year. This system completed 1,279 private 
side replacements in a year and half. The number of service 
lines removed in the projects that they have encountered 
are typically in the double digits, however, there have been a 
few that have been in the hundreds. AddiƟonally, another 
ASDWA member has a city that is currently doing full LSL 
replacement with signiﬁcant state and federal funding but 
has sƟll only managed to replace 481 LSLs in 2023. ASDWA 
recommends a threshold of 6,000 to 7,000 per year 
maximum.  
EPA is seeking comment on whether parƟal service 
line replacement should be prohibited during “planned 
infrastructure work” or with certain types of planned 
infrastructure work. 
ProhibiƟng parƟal LSLR during planned infrastructure work is 
not realisƟc. CoordinaƟng service line replacements with 
main line replacements and transportaƟon projects (for re-
paving), etc. is already challenging with the new 10-year 
Ɵmeline for LSL replacements. Requiring no parƟal 
replacements in these cases will only reduce the ability for 
this coordinaƟon to occur and increase costs. AddiƟonally, 
there are many other requirements that ensure any lead 
exposure from parƟally-replaced service lines will be 
miƟgated (e.g., the addiƟon of dielectric couplings and 
addiƟonal ﬂushing and risk miƟgaƟon requirements; public 
communicaƟon annually about presence of 
LSL/GRR/Unknowns; noƟﬁcaƟon aŌer change of ownership, 
etc.).  ASDWA recommends that EPA allow systems to do 
parƟal replacements during planned infrastructure work or 
repairs when they are unable to get cooperaƟon from the 
homeowner. 
 
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether 
all of the proposed sites should be included in Tier 3, if 
addiƟonal sites should be included, or if some should 
be included in a diﬀerent, lower priority Ɵer, such as 
Tier 4. Speciﬁcally, comment on whether sites served 
by galvanized service lines or containing galvanized 
premise plumbing that are idenƟﬁed as ever being 
downstream of an LSL or lead connector should be 
included in the same Ɵer as other sites with a current 
lead connector (e.g., copper service line downstream 
of a lead connector). 
Data from California water systems have shown that 
galvanized lines downstream of a previously removed lead 
gooseneck show lower levels of lead than copper service 
lines with lead solder. There is concern that if the galvanized 
lines are included in Ɵer 3, above the copper lines with lead 
solder, that the 90th percenƟle will be lower than it actually 
is. This concern is alleviated if EPA requires water systems to 
include the highest samples, regardless of Ɵer, to calculate 
the 90th percenƟle. AlternaƟvely, adding a Ɵer for copper 
lines with lead solder may be appropriate.  
 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 4 
Comment on the proposed updated deﬁniƟon of wide-
mouth botles that is “botles that are one liter in 
volume with a mouth, whose outer diameter 
measures at least 55 mm wide,” and speciﬁcally on the 
availability of qualifying botles. 
The current wide mouth botle deﬁniƟon is using the 
diameter of the outside opening. The diameter of the inside 
of the mouth is easier to measure and is more important to 
the botle’s use. EPA should reference the minimum 
diameter inside the botle mouth. 
Comment and any relevant data on the number and 
Ɵering of samples used to calculate the 90th percenƟle 
lead and/or copper levels for systems with LSLs for 
purposes of assessing CCT eﬃcacy. Speciﬁcally, 
whether samples from non-LSL sites that have higher 
lead concentraƟons than samples from LSL sites 
should be included and whether these higher values 
should replace lower values from LSL sites in the 90th 
percenƟle calculaƟon. 
ASDWA recommends that systems be required to include 
samples with the highest lead levels for calculaƟng the 90th 
percenƟle, regardless of the Ɵer. It will be very burdensome 
to go through all the results and pick and choose depending 
on Ɵers. It would also be diﬃcult to jusƟfy to the public why 
higher results aren’t included in the calculaƟon. It will also 
close a known and frequently exploited loophole in the lead 
and copper rule that allows systems to dilute their 90th 
percenƟle by taking addiƟonal samples from sites with lower 
results unƟl their 90th percenƟle drops below the AL. Using 
the highest samples will simplify this process and ensure the 
best public health protecƟon.   
Comment on whether State authority to specify 
sampling locaƟons when a system is conducƟng 
reduced monitoring should apply regardless of the 
number of taps meeƟng sample site criteria. 
States appreciate the ﬂexibility and authority to specify 
sampling locaƟons when a system is conducƟng reduced 
monitoring regardless of the number of taps meeƟng sample 
site criteria. However, states don’t expect to be doing it oŌen 
as it does increase workload. 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
EPA is proposing a threshold of systems serving greater 
than 50,000 persons to host the inventory and plan 
online, which is the required threshold under the 
LCRR. EPA is seeking comment on the size threshold at 
which systems must host their publicly accessible 
inventory, inventory summary data, replacement 
summary data, and service line replacement plan 
online, and whether it should be lowered relaƟve to 
the LCRR requirements. 
ASDWA agrees with these requirements for systems with 
populaƟons larger than 50,000; however, it is not clear if this 
requirement would be feasible for medium sized systems. 
EPA should provide states with the authority to require 
online posƟng of the inventory informaƟon at their 
discreƟon.  
 
Note: CCRs are required to be posted online for systems 
serving more than 100,000. ImplementaƟon would be easier 
and more streamlined if thresholds across NPDWRs were 
more aligned.  
EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate 
the accuracy of non-lead service lines in their 
inventory that were categorized using methods other 
than records review or visual inspecƟon of at least two 
points along the line. EPA is requesƟng comment on 
the number of validaƟons required, the proposed 95 
percent conﬁdence level approach used to develop the 
number of validaƟons required, the criteria for which 
methods used to categorize non-lead service lines 
should be included in the validaƟon pool (including 
whether non-lead lines categorized based on records 
should be subject to validaƟon), and the seven-year 
Ɵmeline for systems on a 10-year replacement 
deadline to complete the validaƟon requirements. 
The regulatory language refers to paragraphs (b)(2)(i) 
through (iii) of §141.84 as not being applicable to the 
validaƟon pool, but addiƟonal clariﬁcaƟon is needed. Does 
this apply to those that are non-lead by way of a 
predicƟve/staƟsƟcal method? If you’re relying on qualiﬁers 
like, “these homes were built aŌer the lead ban, therefore 
we assigned them as non-lead,” are those systems required 
to go validate those lines? ASDWA recommends that EPA 
provide further clariﬁcaƟons and examples of what should 
be included in the validaƟon pool. AddiƟonally, ASDWA 
recommends that if a water system uses a staƟsƟcal method 
that is at least as stringent as EPA’s, they should be allowed 
to meet this requirement without further invesƟgaƟon.  
 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 5 
It appears that any records included in paragraphs (b)(2)(i) 
through (iii) that may have only had one inspecƟon point 
would need to be included in the sampling pool. ASDWA’s 
members have concerns with the increased workload for 
systems that have already started or completed their iniƟal 
inventories. AddiƟonal clariﬁcaƟon and examples should be 
provided. For example, would an inspecƟon of a curb stop 
that shows the uƟlity-owned line and customer-owned line 
separated by a meter be considered 2-point, or does the 
point need to be a separate hole or locaƟon in order to 
count? AddiƟonally, the proposal notes that if the ownership 
of a service line is split, the water system will need to do 
veriﬁcaƟon on both sides. Does this mean that a system 
must do two-point veriﬁcaƟon for each porƟon of the line 
(so 4 points in total) or just two points for the enƟre line, one 
on the PWS side and one on the private side?  
 
States brought up concerns about duplicaƟve eﬀorts for 2-
point veriﬁcaƟon in cases where either the water system or 
the customer owns the enƟre service line. ASDWA 
recommends that EPA provide states the ﬂexibility and 
authority to allow a single point of inspecƟon or require 
addiƟonal inspecƟon points if deemed necessary.  
 
With the current methodology for determining the 
validaƟons required, larger systems are required to validate a 
lower percentage of lines compared to smaller systems. 
Small systems are required to validate 20% of their service 
lines while large systems with greater resources may only 
need to validate as litle as 0.78% of their lines. ASDWA’s 
members are concerned that this small sample size may not 
be representaƟve of all areas within a system’s distribuƟon, 
especially for large systems serving many neighborhoods 
built during diﬀerent Ɵme periods. The 95th percenƟle 
approach seems oversimpliﬁed for large distribuƟon systems 
with varied infrastructure characterisƟcs. ASDWA 
recommends that EPA add addiƟonal requirements for larger 
systems to demonstrate that their sample suﬃciently 
represents all areas of their distribuƟon system, especially 
those systems most likely to have LSLs/GRRs. One state 
suggested one way to address this issue would be to have 
large systems break up their distribuƟon system, according 
to characterisƟcs such as development date range, and 
validate each of these secƟons individually with a 95th 
percenƟle conﬁdence level.   
 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 6 
Comment on establishing a deadline for systems to 
idenƟfy all unknown service lines prior to their service 
line replacement deadlines. 
EPA should establish a deadline for systems to idenƟfy all 
unknown service lines prior to their service line replacement 
deadlines. Without this requirement, states are concerned 
that systems will wait unƟl the last minute to idenƟfy their 
service lines and will scramble to replace all the LSLs by the 
deadline. 
Lead AcƟon and Trigger Levels 
EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead acƟon 
level of 0.010 mg/L, as well as comment and 
supporƟng data on alternaƟve acƟon levels, such as 
0.005 mg/L, with regards to generally eﬀecƟve 
corrosion control treatment and idenƟfying systems 
most at risk of elevated levels of lead in drinking water. 
For feasibility of rule administraƟon and compliance, States 
support reducing the lead acƟon level to 0.010 mg/l and not 
to 0.005 mg/L. 
EPA is also seeking comment on the use of the acƟon 
level to determine when addiƟonal public educaƟon is 
required, and the use of the same acƟon level for 
public educaƟon as for the CCT provisions. 
For feasibility, as well as consistency and clear messaging, 
states recommend using the same lead acƟon level for both 
the public educaƟon requirements and the CCT-related 
requirements.  

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 7 
EPA is seeking public comment, data, and informaƟon 
on the anƟcipated beneﬁts and tradeoﬀs, including for 
public health and administraƟve burden on systems 
and States, if more small and medium systems are 
required to conduct a detailed OCCT demonstraƟon 
and take other acƟons if they exceed the proposed 
acƟon level of 0.010 mg/L or other lower values, while 
water systems are simultaneously required to 
mandatory conduct full service line replacement. 
The changes to the sampling scheme for LCRI (i.e., Ɵering 
changes and addiƟon of the 5th L to the sampling protocol), 
along with lowering the lead acƟon level will likely more 
than double the number of systems with lead ALEs, thus 
doubling the number of systems required to implement 
OCCT. This will place a signiﬁcant burden on state primacy 
agencies to review and approve such treatment, and the 
public health exposure risks are not well understood related 
to stagnation times at premise plumbing. Most states are 
already struggling to adapt to increasing regulatory 
requirements for emerging contaminants such as PFAS and 
are experiencing unprecedented challenges in recruiƟng and 
retaining engineers to review any drinking water treatment 
modiﬁcaƟons. The private sector is experiencing similar 
challenges in finding experienced design engineers to design 
and manage engineering projects. 
 
Both LSLR and CCT are criƟcal in addressing lead in drinking 
water and states support the requirement for small and 
medium water systems to uƟlize both methods in addressing 
that risk. However, states do not support the requirement for 
small and medium LSL systems with a lead ALE to conduct a 
pipe-loop demonstraƟon study to idenƟfy their CCT 
approach. Many states indicated they have never reviewed 
such a study and those states with the experience have 
indicated that pipe-loop studies have limited value 
compared to their cost and length of Ɵme to implement. 
Desktop or coupon studies can be less Ɵme intensive and 
expensive, placing less of a burden on the water system, as 
well as the state agency to review. One state with experience 
reviewing mulƟple types of CCT indicated that desktop 
studies can oŌen provide saƟsfactory results in a fracƟon of 
the Ɵme needed for pipe-loop studies, effectively providing 
public health protection more quickly  .   
Corrosion Control 
The proposed determinaƟon that the CCT treatment 
technique is feasible and prevents known or 
anƟcipated adverse health eﬀects to the extent 
feasible. 
Some of ASDWA’s Members agree that the CCT treatment 
technique described in the LCRI would prevent known or 
anticipated adverse health effects; however, as noted in 
other comments, meeting all requirements under the LCRI, 
including the requirement for pipe-loop studies may be 
difficult or infeasible for many systems.   
 
CollaboraƟon between states and EPA in developing 
guidance and training on CCT is criƟcal and should be 
prioriƟzed by the Agency.   

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 8 
Comment on whether it would be more appropriate to 
require water systems to re-opƟmize again following 
an acƟon level exceedance regardless of meeƟng their 
opƟmal water quality parameters and to provide the 
State with the authority to waive this requirement. 
Many states support requiring re-opƟmizaƟon following an 
ALE, regardless of whether the PWS is meeƟng their OWQPs. 
States disagree that systems should only be required to re-
opƟmize once. If a PWS met their water quality parameters 
and still incurred an ALE, either the system was not truly 
optimized, or the treatment is not effective in addressing 
lead and copper issues at that particular system.  States also 
support having the authority to waive this requirement and 
to have discreƟon regarding the level of re-opƟmizaƟon 
eﬀort needed (i.e., CCT Study, addiƟonal sampling, 
designaƟng a diﬀerent CCT dose, etc.), as the situaƟon at 
each system is unique.  
The proposed opƟon for a water system to delay OCCT 
unƟl aŌer the system has replaced all of its LSLs and 
GRR service lines, while the system achieves at least 20 
percent removal per year and must have no LSLs, GRR 
service lines, or lead status unknown service lines 
remaining at the end of the ﬁve-year period. 
Some states have expressed support for accelerated removal 
of LSLs to control lead and copper, especially states that are 
concerned about phosphate as a downstream contaminant. 
AddiƟonally, 5 years can be a typical Ɵmeframe for systems 
to complete installaƟon of CCT following an ALE.   
 
Other states have expressed concern about having to wait a 
full year aŌer the compliance date to know if a system is 
serious about complying with this provision of the rule, 
allowing them to prolong their current pracƟces. States are 
concerned that this component of the rule could be 
exploited by water systems with very few lead service lines. 
The proposal would allow potential lead exposure for up to 
five years. In addition, it is possible lead will likely remain in 
the system through other mediums (i.e. solder, internal 
plumbing, fixtures). Many states have water systems that 
have ALEs without having any LSLs. While 20% of pipes are 
removed each year, the remaining 80% may still release lead 
into the system if corrosion control treatments have not 
been optimized. 
 
States recommend that EPA make it clear that systems with 
CCT installed may not cease CCT to pursue a shorter LSLR 
schedule. AddiƟonally, EPA should leave discreƟon to States 
to allow systems to pursue a shorter LSLR schedule or 
require systems to install CCT in cases where the state deems 
it to be more protecƟve of public health. EPA should also 
clarify that this provision should not be applied to systems 
with copper ALEs. 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 9 
The treatment recommendaƟon and CCT study 
process can take mulƟple years to complete. For 
systems with exisƟng corrosion control, the system 
may be able to alter the exisƟng treatment (e.g., 
increase pH and/or orthophosphate dose) without a 
new CCT study on a much faster Ɵmeframe rather than 
waiƟng for study results that may recommend that 
same change. EPA is requesƟng comment on whether 
there are situaƟons and/or condiƟons where exisƟng 
treatment modiﬁcaƟons may achieve similar lead 
reducƟons rather than delaying new treatment for 
two-and-a-half years while a study is underway. 
States agree there are cases in which it is beneﬁcial for states 
to have discreƟon to modify exisƟng CCT rather than delay 
updated treatment doses, etc. while a CCT study is 
underway. 
 
Systems should be allowed to concurrently make treatment 
changes that may optimize CCT while also performing a CCT 
study with different dosages or treatment approaches. In 
the case of Newark, NJ, the water system installed zinc-
orthophosphate for corrosion control treatment and used all 
available research and guidance to determine the best dose 
for their system. In the meantime, the system ran a CCT 
study with different orthophosphate dosages on different 
materials. Systems with existing CCT should be able to utilize 
the same approach, as long as the treatment changes are 
reviewed and approved by the State. 
Compliance AlternaƟves for a Lead AcƟon Level Exceedance for Small Community Water Systems and Non-
Transient, Non-Community Water Systems 
EPA is proposing that small system ﬂexibiliƟes be 
limited to CWSs serving 3,300 persons and fewer and 
all NTNCWSs for the remaining compliance 
alternaƟves of point-of-use devices and plumbing 
replacement. EPA is seeking comment on whether the 
Agency should allow systems serving up to 10,000 
persons (or another threshold) to be eligible to use the 
small system compliance ﬂexibility provision. 
States do not believe this opƟon should be available to 
systems serving up to 10,000 people, and many states 
believe this opƟon should only be available to systems even 
smaller than 3,300 (e.g., systems serving less than 100 or 
500 people.) 
 
States conƟnue to have eﬃcacy concerns regarding the use 
of POU ﬁlters as a compliance opƟon, and many states 
conƟnue to advocate for EPA to limit the use of POU ﬁlters to 
systems with 100% buy-in from the community or complete 
control over their distribuƟon system. Providing ﬁlters in a 
small town or municipal seƫng indeﬁnitely is concerning for 
many states, due to the logisƟcs, the maintenance required, 
and potenƟal bioﬁlm risks. Many states recommend that EPA 
further limit the use of these two ﬂexibiliƟes to water 
systems that either control their distribuƟon plumbing or 
communiƟes that gain 100% buy-in from the community for 
the use of POU or plumbing replacement alternaƟves. Some 
states do not allow POU compliance opƟons at all, but other 
states indicated that this is a necessary opƟon for some 
small, rural systems; however, without 100% buy in or 
control of the distribuƟon system, the opƟons are infeasible.  
 
To ensure 100% long-term parƟcipaƟon by homeowners, 
Nevada recommends the following language be added to the 
rule: “POU agreements must be recorded with the 
property/land which is an equitable servitude running with 
the property/land.” This is to ensure property transfers 
disclose the requirement for POUs to be operated and 
maintained.  

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 10 
EPA is also seeking informaƟon, data, and analysis on 
whether point-of-use devices and plumbing 
replacement are as eﬀecƟve as OCCT at systems 
serving up to 10,000 persons (or another threshold). 
States do not agree that POU devices or plumbing 
replacement are as eﬀecƟve as OCCT for systems other than 
those in control of their enƟre distribuƟon system or those 
who have 100% buy in from the community.  
Public EducaƟon 
The proposed determinaƟon that the public educaƟon 
treatment technique is feasible and prevents known or 
anƟcipated adverse health eﬀects to the extent 
feasible. 
The public education treatment technique is feasible. 
However, more detailed information is needed from EPA to 
understand everything (all the PE information) that will be 
included in the rule and EPA guidance documents. These 
requirements will be difficult for systems and states to keep 
track of and ensure compliance with every component.  
Comment and supporƟng data on the capacity of 
water systems to conduct some or all of the required 
public educaƟon acƟviƟes in 30 days, or another 
period of Ɵme that is less than 30 or 60 days, aŌer the 
end of the tap sampling period in which a systemwide 
lead acƟon level exceedance occurs. 
ASDWA recommends that EPA keep the 60 days aŌer the 
sampling period. This will also address impacts to PWSs on 
lab capacity to report analyƟcal results Ɵmely. Furthermore, 
it will be diﬃcult for systems to undertake the long list of 
requirements and pay for prinƟng and mailing costs within a 
shorter Ɵme-period. 
Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed 
determinaƟon that water systems are capable of 
providing consumer noƟces of individual tap sampling 
results within three calendar days of obtaining those 
results, regardless of whether the results exceed the 
lead or copper acƟon level, or if a longer Ɵme frame is 
needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar 
days, 14 calendar days). 
ASDWA recommends the EPA allow at least 30 days. The 3-
day Ɵmeframe would be very difficult for small, rural water 
systems. Some water system staff only come in once a week 
and are off on weekends and holidays. Since most lead and 
copper compliance results are very low anyway, this 
provision adds significant burden and cost with a low public 
health benefit. Furthermore, since many systems would not 
be able to comply, states would need to spend resources 
tracking compliance, issuing violations, making sure that 
associated public notice occurs, and returning systems to 
compliance for this Monitoring and Reporting violation. This 
provision has serious feasibility impacts. 
 
For example, Alaska NaƟve Villages with limited internet for 
receiving the results from the state or the lab and rely on 
boat or plane delivery of writen noƟﬁcaƟon and is weather 
dependent. They have diﬃculƟes with communicaƟons 
(internet outages, spoty cell service). It is not out of the 
ordinary for them to receive a mail plane once every couple 
of weeks. Note: Three days is the required Ɵme for a 
postmark, not receipt. 
 
Clarity is needed on how to calculate the number of days 
when the state gets the results from the lab and then gives it 
to the water system, as well as how the states track it.  
Whether the proposed requirement for water systems 
to oﬀer lead sampling to consumers with LSLs, GRR 
service lines, or unknown service lines in the noƟce of 
service line material is eﬀecƟve at reducing adverse 
health eﬀects. 
ASDWA agrees that oﬀering lead sampling is eﬀecƟve at 
reducing adverse health eﬀects and will also help increase 
transparency and potenƟally get more customers into the 
P90 sampling pool. Note: These samples are not required to 
be included in the P90 sampling pool – if they don’t meet 
the compliance sampling Ɵering and protocol (e.g., if using 
3Ts or method 200.7) 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 11 
EPA is also requesƟng comment on the requirement 
for water systems to deliver consumer-iniƟated test 
results within three days of obtaining those results. 
See above, ASDWA recommends that EPA allow at least 30 
days. 
Whether the types and Ɵming of outreach acƟviƟes 
proposed for systems failing to meet the mandatory 
service line replacement rate are appropriate and 
whether other acƟviƟes should be considered. 
One town hall meeƟng or community event would not be 
feasible to reach enough customers for a larger system. The 
number of meeƟngs or events should be tailored to the 
demographics of the customers and community. 
Whether EPA should require systems to annually noƟfy 
consumers if they are served by a lead connector, in 
addiƟon to noƟﬁcaƟons for sites with lead, GRR, or 
lead status unknown service lines. 
ASDWA’s Members recommend that the inclusion of 
connectors in the inventory remain opƟonal—if connectors 
are opƟonal, noƟfying consumers that they are served by a 
lead connector should also be opƟonal. If connectors are 
required to be included in the inventory, EPA should also 
require systems to noƟfy customers if they are served by 
lead connector.  
 
Whether EPA should require addiƟonal public 
educaƟon requirements to further encourage swiŌ 
service line replacement faster than the 10-year 
replacement deadline. For example, should water 
systems that have LSLs, GRR service lines, or unknown 
service lines ﬁve years aŌer the compliance date for 
the LCRI be required to increase the frequency of the 
noƟﬁcaƟon of service line materials from annual to 
once every six months? 
The replacement rate will vary signiﬁcantly based on system 
speciﬁc circumstances. Some large systems with high 
percentages of service lines needing replacement will not be 
able to do it in faster than 10 years. 
EPA is seeking informaƟon and data on when a system 
provides translated materials to consumers with 
limited English proﬁciency, what resources are used to 
translate materials (e.g., State resources, community 
organizaƟons), and what barriers water systems may 
face in providing accurate translated materials. 
Many states don’t have translaƟon experƟse. EPA should 
develop translated templates and provide the necessary 
tools and resources. 
Whether the Agency should require States, as a 
condiƟon of primacy, to provide translaƟon support to 
water systems that are unable to do so for public 
educaƟon materials to consumers with limited English 
proﬁciency 
TranslaƟon support should not be a condiƟon of primacy. If it 
is a condiƟon, then EPA should provide templates, 
educaƟonal materials and resources, rather than requiring 
states to complete this work. States individually providing 
this service for each water system is cost prohibiƟve and 
inconsistent with other public noƟﬁcaƟon requirements. 
  
It is uncertain how PWS enforcement for this provision 
would work. Many states do not have resources for 
translaƟon and to verify that translaƟons are correct. Also, 
compliance must remain the responsibility of systems. States 
should be in an assisƟve role but should not have to take on 
tasks associated with compliance.   

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 12 
EPA is also requesƟng comment on addiƟonal ways to 
streamline public educaƟon and associated 
cerƟﬁcaƟon requirements (e.g., combine deadlines for 
systems to conduct public educaƟon or submit 
informaƟon to the State). 
ASDWA recommends that EPA streamline and combine 
deadlines and reporƟng requirements.  
 
The due dates for the public educaƟon and associated 
cerƟﬁcaƟon requirements do not align. States recommend 
that EPA work with ASDWA to idenƟfy ways to streamline 
deadlines for states and PWSs in the ﬁnal rule. 
 
For PWSs that fail to meet lead service line replacement 
rates, EPA should only require CWSs to publish in CCR and 
NTNCs to post in a conspicuous locaƟon or distribute 
informaƟon to each person served by the system. 
 
EPA should consider removing the requirement for individual 
systems to send PE materials to health departments, and 
consider providing the state with the opƟon to fulﬁll this 
requirement to ensure consistency.  
AddiƟonal Requirements for Systems with MulƟple Lead AcƟon Level Exceedances 
Whether water systems should be required to take 
addiƟonal acƟons when the system exceeds the lead 
acƟon level mulƟple Ɵmes and if so, what acƟons are 
appropriate and feasible, and when these addiƟonal 
acƟons should be required under the LCRI. 
In addiƟon to the requirements already outlined in the LCRI, 
States recommend that EPA require re-opƟmizaƟon 
following an ALE, regardless of if the PWS is meeƟng their 
OWQPs or if they have already re-opƟmized. EPA should 
allow the State to waive this requirement, but the default 
should be a re-opƟmizaƟon of CCT.  
Whether EPA should use three acƟon level 
exceedances in a ﬁve-year period for idenƟfying 
systems with mulƟple acƟon level exceedances where 
addiƟonal acƟon is warranted and, whether addiƟonal 
acƟons should be required sooner, or later, than the 
ﬁve-year period, or whether EPA should use a 
modiﬁed metric (number of consecuƟve acƟon level 
exceedances in a set Ɵme period) or a diﬀerent metric 
enƟrely (i.e., based on one or more factors other than 
the number of acƟon level exceedances in a set Ɵme 
period). 
ASDWA agrees that three ALEs in ﬁve years is a good 
indicaƟon that short-term protecƟve measures should be 
required by the system to protect consumers.  
The proposed public educaƟon acƟviƟes aŌer a system 
exceeds the lead acƟon level mulƟple Ɵmes. EPA is 
speciﬁcally seeking any informaƟon, data, or analysis 
on whether the proposed public educaƟon acƟviƟes 
support prevenƟng adverse health eﬀects in this 
situaƟon.  
ASDWA agrees that these acƟviƟes support prevenƟng 
adverse health eﬀects. 
EPA is also requesƟng comment on whether systems 
should be required to conduct more than one (e.g., 
two or three) of the public educaƟon acƟviƟes 
proposed. 
PWS demographics (size, type) should be considered for the 
diﬀerent types of acƟviƟes. The rule should provide 
authority for the states to require a speciﬁc or diﬀerent 
acƟvity based on the situaƟon at the system (e.g., one town 
hall alone may not be eﬀecƟve for a large municipality.) 
AddiƟonally, EPA should develop guidance on the 
expectaƟons for some of the requirements, e.g. the 
components of a “social media campaign.” 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 13 
Whether EPA should require water systems to make 
ﬁlters cerƟﬁed to reduce lead and replacement 
cartridges, along with instrucƟons for use, available to 
all consumers within 60 days of a system having 
mulƟple acƟon level exceedances and whether there 
are any supporƟng or contrary data on whether the 
proposed ﬁlter requirement would be protecƟve of 
public health. 
States have concerns with the provision for systems with 3 or 
more lead AcƟon Level Exceedances (ALE) to distribute ﬁlters 
to the enƟre service area. The LCRI targets the highest risk 
sites for monitoring and evaluaƟng the AL, as such, ﬁlters 
should be targeted at sites that are at risk of lead exposure, 
i.e., locaƟons with LSL, GRR, or unknowns based on the 
system’s inventory. High risk locaƟons may only represent a 
small percentage of consumers served by the system. 
Providing ﬁlters to consumers served by known, non-lead 
lines could undermine public conﬁdence in drinking water 
and introduce unnecessary cost and risk to the water system 
and their consumers. States recommend that EPA amend 
this requirement to require ﬁlter distribuƟon to consumers 
served by LSL, GRR, or unknown, and provide states 
authority to require distribuƟon to the full community at 
their discreƟon, based on sample locaƟons, existence of CCT, 
etc. 
 
States have also expressed concern regarding how heavily 
the LCRI relies on POU ﬁlters to miƟgate lead. These 
requirements increase the burden on water systems based 
oﬀ the assumed eﬃcacy of the ﬁlters to remove lead. EPA’s 
endorsement of such ﬁlters may provide consumers with the 
impression that the POUs will remove all potenƟal lead 
hazards. These ﬁlters generally rely on either GAC adsorpƟon 
or ion exchange resin, which is eﬀecƟve at soluble lead 
removal; however, POU ﬁlters are not always eﬀecƟve, 
especially for insoluble lead removal (Tang, et al.; Aljandani 
et al.) States recommend EPA develop addiƟonal guidance 
on educaƟon about ﬁlter use, which ﬁlters are acceptable for 
removing lead, and also provide informaƟon on ﬂushing 
procedures, another important component in lead 
educaƟon. EPA should ensure it is clear that POU devices 
may be eﬀecƟve for temporary lead removal, while ensuring 
public conﬁdence in tap water is maintained. 
The proposed requirements for systems to develop a 
ﬁlter plan and submit to the State aŌer the system has 
mulƟple acƟon level exceedances for the ﬁrst Ɵme, 
and whether EPA should require systems to take 
addiƟonal acƟons to facilitate ﬁlter distribuƟon. 
EPA should work with ASDWA to establish expectaƟons and 
guidance for what should be included in the ﬁlter plan. 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 14 
AlternaƟve requirements for systems with mulƟple 
acƟon level exceedances to provide ﬁlters to their 
consumers, such as requiring water systems to provide 
ﬁlters and replacement cartridges to consumers 
served by an LSL, GRR service line, or unknown service 
line or to all consumers, or to require systems to 
consult with the State upon meeƟng the criteria for 
mulƟple acƟon level exceedances, aŌer which the 
State determines the appropriate acƟon to reduce 
lead exposure. 
States have concerns with the provision for systems with 3 or 
more lead AcƟon Level Exceedances (ALE) to distribute ﬁlters 
to the enƟre service area. The LCRI targets the highest risk 
sites for monitoring and evaluaƟng the AL, as such, ﬁlters 
should be targeted at sites that are at risk of lead exposure, 
i.e., locaƟons with LSL, GRR, or unknowns based on the 
system’s inventory. High risk locaƟons may only represent a 
small percentage of consumers served by the system. 
Providing ﬁlters to consumers served by known, non-lead 
lines could undermine public conﬁdence in drinking water 
and introduce unnecessary cost and risk to the water system 
and their consumers. States recommend that EPA amend 
this requirement to require ﬁlter distribuƟon to consumers 
served by LSL, GRR, or unknown, and provide states 
authority to require distribuƟon to the full community at 
their discreƟon, based on sample locaƟons, existence of CCT, 
etc. 
 
Whether, in addiƟon to the proposed requirements, 
EPA should provide States discreƟon to determine 
appropriate acƟon following a mulƟple acƟon level 
exceedance that is tailored to meet speciﬁc system 
needs. 
States agree that EPA should provide states discreƟon to 
require acƟons in addiƟon to what is outlined in the federal 
regulaƟon.  
Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care FaciliƟes 
The proposed provision to allow States to issue 
waivers to community water systems from the 
requirement for lead sampling in schools and child 
care faciliƟes during the ﬁve-year period aŌer the LCRI 
compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead 
aŌer January 1, 2021 but prior to the LCRI compliance 
date and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver 
requirements of § 141.92(h). 
ASDWA recommends EPA change the January 1, 2021 
sampling date to January 1, 2014, as the 2014 date coincides 
with the ReducƟon of Lead in Drinking Water Act and also 
includes sampling eﬀorts that uƟlized funding opportuniƟes 
through America’s Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 and the 
Water Infrastructure Improvements for the NaƟon Act.  
Whether or not to allow States to waive the 
requirements of § 141.92 for CWSs in schools and child 
care faciliƟes that use and maintain ﬁlters cerƟﬁed to 
reduce lead, and if so, whether the waiver should only 
be allowed where schools and child care faciliƟes are 
required by State or local law to install POU devices 
and maintain them. 
ASDWA recommends EPA not create this addiƟonal waiver. 
This waiver has the potenƟal to signiﬁcantly increase state 
and system burden, and sampling at schools and child care 
faciliƟes even if they do have POU devices would be simpler 
and easier. States should not be issuing waivers at individual 
school or child care faciliƟes; addiƟonally, water systems 
have no obligaƟons to monitor building owned and operated 
devices. It is also important for EPA to note that not all states 
allow POU devices. 
 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 15 
Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and 
child care facility sampling results publicly available, 
and if so, how frequently and in what manner. 
ASDWA recommends the sampling results be made publicly 
available; however, the responsibility of sharing and 
delivering these results should not fall upon the water 
system, but instead the school or child care facility. EPA could 
also add language about speciﬁc results being available upon 
request of the school or child care facility. EPA should also 
leverage other regulatory authoriƟes over educaƟonal 
faciliƟes to supply the informaƟon, similar to requirements 
for asbestos disclosures.  
ReporƟng and Recordkeeping 
EPA is requesƟng comment on the expansion of the 
inventory reporƟng to include lead connectors and 
non-lead service lines. 
As outlined in other comments, states recommend that 
inclusion of connectors and non-lead lines be opƟonal. 
Including these addiƟonal data elements, without a data 
system to collect any of the inventory data, adds to the 
exisƟng burden for reporƟng. InformaƟon on systems’ 
individual approaches to connectors could be included as a 
part of the LSLR plan so as to not interfere with current 
inventory eﬀorts.  
EPA has heard concern over the ability of States to 
review all required site sample plans and provide 
approvals in Ɵme for the ﬁrst tap monitoring period, 
and is requesƟng comment on whether EPA should 
consider a phased approach or alternate approach to 
reduce the burden on States following the rule 
compliance date. 
ASDWA recommends that EPA use a phased-in approach for 
the review of sampling plans and the implementaƟon of 
those plans by the water systems. MulƟple states have noted 
that outreach to systems requesƟng updated sampling plans 
and Ɵme to review them all has taken mulƟple years and sƟll 
does not include 100% of systems. ASDWA’s members have 
stated that there is signiﬁcant back and forth aŌer the iniƟal 
sampling plan is submited and this should be considered in 
any deadlines included. States have reported that under the 
current rule, systems have struggled to inventory premise 
plumbing material, determine the presence of a soŌener or 
ﬁlter, and assign the correct Ɵer. Under the proposed LCRI, 
this will be further complicated by the need to inventory 
lead connectors. AddiƟonally, it will take systems Ɵme to ﬁnd 
new sampling sites if needed. 
 
ASDWA recommends that EPA provide large systems three 
years aŌer the eﬀecƟve date of the ﬁnal LCRI to complete 
new sampling plans and obtain approval by the state 
agencies. The associaƟon recommends that EPA require 
medium-sized systems to complete these acƟons within four 
years of the eﬀecƟve date of the ﬁnal rule and ﬁve years for 
small systems.   
EPA is requesƟng comment on whether States should 
be required to maintain records related to distribuƟon 
system and site assessments conducted by water 
systems. 
States should be required to keep informaƟon reported by 
water systems to the state (i.e., treatment recommendaƟon 
summarizing DSSA evaluaƟon); however, states should not 
be responsible for maintaining records for each individual 
elevated sample invesƟgaƟon as they are not required to be 
reported as part of the treatment recommendaƟon in 
141.82(j)(3). 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 16 
EPA is requesƟng comment on whether States should 
be required to maintain documentaƟon of 
determinaƟons of more stringent implementaƟon, 
including but not limited to condiƟons or approvals 
related to reduced compliance monitoring and 
addiƟonal informaƟon required to conduct a review or 
designate OCCT. 
ASDWA supports states’ ability to keep informaƟon reported 
by water systems regarding materials present at monitoring 
sites. However, states should not be responsible for 
maintaining records that belong to water systems. 
 
ASDWA recommends requirements remain consistent with 
exisƟng pracƟce and documented within primacy 
agreements. 
 
Primacy agencies with exisƟng lead service line inventory 
programs/requirements may collect addiƟonal informaƟon 
that does not align with the Federal requirements. For 
example, if a primacy agency considers goosenecks to be a 
lead line, but EPA does not. 
 
How should primacy agencies manage/report data in cases 
where the state requirements are more strict? 
Compliance Dates 
Whether there are other LCRR provisions besides the 
iniƟal inventory and noƟﬁcaƟons of service line 
material for which the October 16, 2024 compliance 
date should be retained. 
No addiƟonal compliance dates should be returned under 
the LCRI. 
 
Some states brought up concerns with moving the 
compliance date for risk miƟgaƟon measures related to LSLR 
to the LCRI compliance date. Water systems are already 
replacing LSLs and the BIL money for LSLR is going out now. 
Risk miƟgaƟon measures, such as noƟﬁcaƟons of 
replacements, sampling, and ﬁlters should be in place to 
protect public health. These states recommend using the 
compliance date under the LCRR for LSLR related risk 
miƟgaƟon measures.  
Consumer Conﬁdence Report 
EPA is requesƟng comment on the proposed 
requirement for systems to provide an informaƟonal 
statement in the CCR about the school sampling 
requirements with the informaƟon that consumers can 
contact the school or child care facility about any 
potenƟal sampling results. 
ASDWA recommends including a statement in the CCR 
indicating that “If you are interested in the sampling results 
for any school or licensed childcare facility in your area, 
please contact that facility to find out if they have tested and 
request results for that facility”. 
DeﬁniƟons 
EPA is seeking comment on all aspects of the proposed 
deﬁniƟons, and speciﬁcally the following: b. EPA is 
proposing to deﬁne a two-foot maximum length of 
connectors. EPA proposes that “connectors” that 
exceed two feet in length be treated as a service line. 
EPA is requesƟng comment on the deﬁned length of a 
connector 
ASDWA is appreciaƟve of EPA’s eﬀorts to deﬁne what 
consƟtutes a “connector.” However, the current deﬁniƟon 
should be further clariﬁed. The Agency should explicitly state 
that anything over the deﬁned length is considered a lead 
service line. This has a signiﬁcant impact on what is 
considered a “galvanized line requiring replacement” and 
should be clear in the deﬁniƟon. AddiƟonally, it would be 
helpful if the rule speciﬁed which connectors (i.e., only the 
connecƟon to main) are required to be included in the 
inventory when found. 
 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 17 
ASDWA recommends that EPA change the deﬁniƟon of a 
“connector” from two feet to three. States have noted 
concerns that many connectors are under exisƟng 
infrastructure and will be much more diﬃcult to remove 
than tradiƟonal LSLs. ASDWA members are concerned with 
the ﬁnancial resources that would be needed to remove 
these components. AddiƟonally, there are concerns that 
replacing the connectors could damage the mains they are 
atached to, causing more leaks and main breaks and 
associated exposure to bacteriological contaminaƟon. If EPA 
deems it is necessary to protect public health, ASDWA asks 
that the Agency provide speciﬁc studies that highlight 
connectors at this length being the cause of exposure rather 
than premise plumbing or other lead sources. 
 
There is also concern regarding states that have already been 
including connectors within inventories but have diﬀerent 
deﬁniƟons than what EPA has proposed. EPA should work 
with those states to ensure a streamlined implementaƟon of 
the new deﬁniƟons and inventory requirements.      
 
The deﬁniƟon for “galvanized line requiring replacement” 
should be clear that it is referring to the pipe between the 
main and the building inlet.  
 
EPA should further clarify what consƟtutes the “service line” 
and where the service line ends and the interior plumbing 
begins. In parƟcular, EPA should deﬁne what the “building 
inlet” is. Currently, there have been inconsistencies with 
deﬁning an LSL for the purposes of Drinking Water State 
Revolving Fund (DWSRF) program funding and what is 
included in the LCRR/LCRI. The DWSRF guidance from EPA 
has told states and water systems that an LSLR must be to 
the shut-oﬀ valve to qualify for funding. This is not consistent 
with the “building inlet” proposed in the LCRI. Rather than 
working oﬀ of guidance, all EPA programs should use the 
regulatory deﬁniƟon. In this case, ASDWA recommends that 
all EPA programs use the proposed LCRI deﬁniƟon. 
 
The deﬁniƟon of “service line” isn’t consistent with small 
system guidance from EPA. The proposed service line 
deﬁniƟon will exclude most NTNCWS and many non-
municipal community water systems (e.g., mobile home 
parks) because they do not have water mains. Under this 
deﬁniƟon, these systems will not be subject to inventory or 
replacement requirements of the LCRI. AddiƟonally, it would 
not be possible to assign such systems a Ɵer based on 
service line material because no service line would exist. If 
EPA adopts the proposed service line deﬁniƟon, then states 

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 18 
will not have authority to implement inventory or 
replacement requirements in accordance with this guidance. 
EPA needs to update the deﬁniƟon of a service line or clarify 
whether pipes that deliver water to building inlets that are 
not connected to the water main are deﬁned as a service 
line and regulated as such under the LCRI. 
 
ASDWA also conƟnues to recommend that EPA clearly 
deﬁnes "upstream" and "downstream" and the context for 
using those terms in the LCRI and other regulaƟons. 
Operators think of upstream and downstream in terms of 
the distribuƟon system as it relates to bacteria sampling, so 
it is criƟcal that the rule is clear regarding these deﬁniƟons. 
The rule needs to clarify if upstream and downstream is 
contained to a single service line for the LCRI as opposed to 
within the distribuƟon system. This would help to clarify 
GRR. 
QuesƟons from within Preamble 
 
While EPA is not proposing to establish a maximum 
stagnaƟon Ɵme in the LCRI because the Agency is 
concerned about samples being invalidated solely 
because the sample result it high, EPA is seeking 
comment and data, including modeling and sampling 
data, on potenƟal maximum stagnaƟon Ɵmes, and 
speciﬁcally how stagnaƟon Ɵmes inform corrosion 
rates. 
ASDWA recommends that EPA set a maximum stagnaƟon 
Ɵme of 18 hours to align with the 3Ts guidance. Including 
this requirement will help ensure that vacant homes and 
vacaƟon rentals are not included in the sampling pool. This 
maximum stagnaƟon Ɵme would also require schools to 
sample during the school week rather than ﬁrst thing 
Monday mornings or aŌer a school break.  
 
EPA should require water systems to include the stagnaƟon 
Ɵme when submiƫng samples. ASDWA also recommends 
that EPA give states the authority and the ﬂexibility to 
invalidate a sample based on this stagnaƟon Ɵme if the state 
determines it is necessary. EPA should not require states to 
invalidate samples in all cases when a sample does not meet 
the stagnaƟon Ɵme.  
 
States have noted that uƟliƟes may use this requirement as a 
loophole to avoid including high samples within their 90th 
percenƟle and giving states the opƟon to not invalidate 
these samples will help avoid this issue. States have stressed 
that the goal here is not to invalidate high samples, but 
instead to set the framework under which operators know 
to avoid taking samples.  

Appendix A: Responses to EPA’s Requests for Comments by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
A - 19 
EPA is seeking comment about the potenƟal inclusion 
of samples from lower-priority Ɵers (i.e., Tiers 3 
through 5) that have a higher lead or copper 
concentraƟon than samples from Tier 1 and 2 sites for 
calculaƟon of the 90th percenƟle for systems that do 
not have a suﬃcient number of samples from Tier 1 
and 2 sites. AddiƟonally, EPA is seeking comment on 
whether to require systems to use samples with the 
highest lead and copper concentraƟon regardless of 
sampling Ɵers, such as including samples from lower-
priority Ɵers ( i.e., Tier 3 through 5) in the 90th 
percenƟle calculaƟon for systems that are collecƟng 
compliance samples from all Tier 1 and 2 sites. 
ASDWA recommends that systems be required to include 
samples with the highest lead levels for calculaƟng the 90th 
percenƟle, regardless of the Ɵer. 
While water systems are required to noƟfy consumers 
of disturbances resulƟng from water main 
replacement under these proposed requirements, EPA 
is also requesƟng comment on whether to require 
distribuƟon of ﬁlters for this type of disturbance. 
In alignment with other ﬁlter-related comments, states do 
not recommend ﬁlters be distributed to consumers for this 
type of disturbance.  
 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 1 
 
DeﬁniƟons 
Reference Comment/Concern/QuesƟon to be Addressed 
RecommendaƟon for EPA 
§141.2 
The following terms are not deﬁned under SecƟon 
141.2 and are used in the proposed regulaƟon: 
• 
ValidaƟon Pool, SecƟon 141.84(b)(5) 
• 
Baseline Inventory, SecƟon 141.84(a)(2) 
• 
Low Lead, SecƟon 141.85(a)(2)(ii), is a term 
used to refer to another citaƟon rather than 
being deﬁned itself. 
• 
Lead Free, SecƟon 141.85(a)(1)(iii), is a term 
used to refer to another citaƟon rather than 
being deﬁned itself.  
• 
Program Year, SecƟon 141.90(e)(8), when the 
rest of the rule refers to “calendar year” 
EPA should deﬁne these terms in SecƟon 141.2, 
correct usage of the terms, or otherwise provide 
addiƟonal clariﬁcaƟon.  
§ 141.2  
The deﬁniƟons for small and medium size systems 
have been reversed from the LCRR, which was 
modiﬁed from the LCR.  Small system ﬂexibiliƟes 
were cited as up to 10,000 populaƟon (LCRR) and 
have been reduced to 3,300 populaƟon, but the 
other citaƟons for small systems have changed from 
3,300 to 10,000.  This makes things very confusing 
for states and water systems.  
The deﬁniƟons for small systems should be the 
same for all parts of the LCRI in order to eliminate 
this confusion.  States recommend staying 
consistent with the original LCR, with a small 
system deﬁniƟon equaling <3,300. 
§ 141.2 
In a scenario where samples are collected during the 
last weeks or days of a sampling, it is not possible for 
samples to be shipped, analyzed and reported in 10 
days. Some systems or states may not get their ﬁnal 
sample results for a reduced monitoring tap sampling 
period unƟl 1.5 months aŌer the end of the sampling 
period, aŌer considering the allowances for labs, 
shipping Ɵmes, etc. The shorter Ɵme may be possible 
for WQPs (since the current compliant rule (LCR) 
requires reporƟng January 10 and July 10 for WQPs 
according to the monitoring period), but not for the 
tap sampling period. 
EPA needs to clarify the diﬀerence between tap 
monitoring period and tap sampling period 
deﬁniƟons secƟon in 141.2 to ensure that the 
141.90 Ɵmeframes for reporƟng of sample results 
are feasible. 
§ 141.2 
The deﬁniƟon for Method detection limit (MDL) 
conﬂicts with the EPA deﬁniƟon of MDL in 40 CFR 
Part 136 Appendix B Rev. 2.0. This deﬁniƟon was 
revised in 2016 to say: “The method detecƟon limit is 
deﬁned as the minimum measured concentraƟon of 
a substance that can be reported with 99% 
conﬁdence that the measured concentraƟon is 
disƟnguishable from method blank 
results.”  However, the MDL deﬁniƟon in LCRR/LCRI 
sƟll says “…99 percent conﬁdence that the analyte 
concentraƟon is greater than zero…”  
EPA should ensure that the deﬁniƟon of Method 
DetecƟon Limit (MDL) in SecƟon 141.2 aligns with 
the deﬁniƟon in 40 CFR Part 136 Appendix B Rev. 
2.0.  
 
 
 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 2 
 
Service Line Inventory and Replacement 
Reference Comment/Concern/QuesƟon to be Addressed 
RecommendaƟon for EPA 
§142.16 
(d)(8) 
ASDWA’s members have concerns with the proposed 
requirement for states to idenƟfy any State laws, 
including statutes and consƟtuƟonal provisions, that 
pertain to a water system’s access to conduct full 
service line replacement and noƟfying water systems 
in wriƟng whether any such laws exist or not 
ASDWA members have argued that the water 
suppliers should be responsible for determining 
whether laws, statutes or consƟtuƟonal 
provisions exist that pertain to a water system’s 
access to conduct full LSLR. ASDWA recommends 
that EPA delete this paragraph. Applicable State 
laws are oŌen not under the authority of the 
state agencies and/or many ordinances may be 
set at a local level. This requirement will create a 
signiﬁcant burden for state staﬀ to research and 
idenƟfy laws, statutes, consƟtuƟonal provisions 
or local ordinances to develop and maintain a list. 
§141.84 
ASDWA’s members are concerned that the 
requirement for full removal of LSLs will give the 
public a false sense of security that there will no 
longer be any risk of lead exposure from drinking 
water.  
EPA should ensure that the messaging from the 
Agency about these replacements does not imply 
that naƟonwide LSLR will completely eliminate 
the risk of lead in drinking water. Premise 
plumbing, including legacy lead pipes, lead 
solder, and brass ﬁxtures will conƟnue to remain 
a potenƟal source of lead in drinking water and 
the importance of eﬀecƟve corrosion control 
should conƟnue to be emphasized. Clear 
messaging requirements should include 
informaƟon for homeowners that if they have 
concerns about lead hazards within their home, 
they should contact a local licensed plumber or 
environmental hazards assessment professional 
for an assessment. 
 
§141.84 
Flexibility is needed for the LCRI for systems showing 
a “good-faith-eﬀort” to comply with the rule.  
ASDWA conƟnues to recommend that EPA 
incorporate good-faith-eﬀort ﬂexibility into LSLR 
provisions. This ﬂexibility could be similar to the 
allowance in the Revised Total Coliform Rule for a 
PWS to request a deadline extension aŌer 
consultaƟon with the state. 
 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 3 
 
§141.84 
There is signiﬁcant confusion and concern over the 
inclusion of lead connectors within system 
inventories. EPA had consistently stated that the 
inventory requirements from the LCRR would remain 
in the LCRI. With this in mind, some systems are 
already far ahead in developing their inventories and 
were not acƟvely seeking out records for their 
connectors. Are these systems required to go back 
and edit their inventories to include these 
components? AddiƟonally, states would have to send 
out new inventory templates to all of their systems. 
 
 
 ASDWA recommends that EPA make including 
connectors opƟonal for service line inventories. 
Some systems have already started their 
inventories and this would require them to go 
back and redo them. AddiƟonally, if a system has 
found that their enƟre inventory is non-lead, they 
would otherwise not be required to submit 
updated inventories. If connectors are required 
these systems will be forced to do their enƟre 
inventories again. States believe that this is an 
unnecessary burden. However, some states have 
already been requiring systems to include 
connectors in their inventories. Leaving this 
component of the inventories as opƟonal will 
give states the ﬂexibility to include connectors if 
they deem it necessary.  
§141.84 
Requiring systems to identify where lead connectors 
have been replaced in the past increases the 
workload on the system owners and operators. It 
makes more sense to allow them to focus their time 
and resources on the other inventory and 
replacement requirements, rather than having them 
review records to determine where lead connectors 
don't exist anymore. 
ASDWA recommends that EPA remove the 
requirement to idenƟfy where lead connectors 
have been replaced in the past, and instead make 
the “Replaced Lead” category opƟonal. 
 
§141.84 
Since there can be connectors from the main, 
between the meter, etc., but not always, there's a big 
question of how many connectors to report and 
which ones. If there are multiple connectors 
associated with a single service line, how will those 
be tracked individually?  Will we need unique IDs for 
the connectors as well? 
If EPA maintains the inventory requirement for 
connectors, ASDWA recommends that the 
Agency provide further clariﬁcaƟon.  

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 4 
 
§141.84 
(b)(4) 
 
“(4) 
If a consumer noƟﬁes the water system of a 
suspected incorrect categorizaƟon of their service 
line material in the inventory, the system must 
respond to the consumer with an oﬀer to inspect the 
service line within 60 days of receiving the 
noƟﬁcaƟon.” 
 
Currently, it is unclear what EPA means by “Inspect” 
the service line within 60 days. One ASDWA member 
noted that in the northern areas of the naƟon, they 
someƟmes have up to 5-6 months of frozen 
ground/snow cover, which would make meeƟng this 
requirement diﬃcult. 
 
Additionally, it is unclear how systems will be 
required to "offer" to inspect the customer service 
line. Will systems be required to include a statement 
in their publicly available inventory or in their CCR 
that customers who suspect the inventory incorrectly 
categorized their service line material can contact 
the system to request an inspection? 
ASDWA recommends that EPA clarify what the 
Agency means by “inspecƟon” and include 
examples of what is suﬃcient. Is it a visual 
inspecƟon where the service line enters the 
building? If not and ﬁeld inspecƟon is required 
then some states (for example, Northern states) 
will need addiƟonal Ɵme (60-90 days).  
 
AddiƟonally, ASDWA recommends that EPA 
provide clariﬁcaƟon on what is meant by 
requiring systems to “oﬀer” customers to inspect 
the customer side service line. 
§141.84 
(a)(4) 
ASDWA members have concerns over the new 
requirement to include street addresses within 
service line inventories rather than unique locaƟonal 
idenƟﬁers. 
 
One state noted that they have received many 
inventories from non-community systems and non-
municipal community water systems includes 
services lines to multiple buildings located at the 
same address. In such instances, they use the 
business, which does not include specific addresses 
for each service line, but instead includes a general 
locational identifier, such as a building name. For 
these small systems, there may only be one building, 
and having them go back to list their street address 
seems like an unnecessary burden. Additionally, For 
NTNCWS that do have more than one building, while 
reviewing inventories, we have already determined 
whether or not their locational identifiers are 
sufficient, so it also seems unnecessary for them to 
go back and list the same street address for each 
building. 
 
Additionally, ASDWA members have noted that the 
inclusion of home addresses may push utilities that 
are not required to post their inventories online to 
only make it available on request.  
ASDWA recommends that EPA clarify whether a 
street address MUST be used if available, or if 
another unique locaƟonal idenƟﬁer can be used 
instead. States have expressed concern that 
requiring a street address could be complicated 
due to privacy laws that may be in place. 
AddiƟonally, some states noted that there are 
service lines without any street addresses, 
parƟcularly in very rural areas. Finally, there is 
concern with sensiƟve sites such as military 
installaƟons. ASDWA recommends that systems 
be allowed to use either a street address or 
locaƟonal idenƟﬁer.  
 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 5 
 
§141.84 
(a)(6) 
“(6) 
When a water system has no lead, galvanized 
requiring replacement, or lead status unknown 
service lines, no known lead connectors or unknown 
connectors, it may comply with the requirements in 
paragraph (a)(5) of this secƟon using a writen 
statement in lieu of the publicly accessible inventory, 
declaring that the distribuƟon system has no lead, 
galvanized requiring replacement, or lead status 
unknown service lines, no known lead connectors or 
no unknown connectors.”  
 
Based on this statement, it is unclear whether or not 
a declaraƟon can be made if there are “replaced 
lead” connectors. 
ASDWA recommends that EPA clarify this 
statement.  
§141.84 
(b)(3)(ii) 
ASDWA’s members have noted that full-service line 
replacement within 6 months is not feasible for water 
systems in colder areas of the country. For example, 
due to temperature condiƟons in many parts of 
Alaska, service lines can only be replaced during a 5-
month window during the spring and summer.  
ASDWA recommends that EPA add a clause to 
allow states to add addiƟonal Ɵme as is 
reasonable/feasible for water systems to 
complete the replacement. 
§141.84 
(d)(4) 
It is unclear how the 10-year deadline for LSL 
replacement will work for those systems that are 
unable to complete mandatory replacement under 
the exclusions in 141.84(d)(2) and (3), such as being 
unable to obtain customer consent.  
ASDWA recommends that EPA clarify this 
component of the rule.  
§141.84 
(h)(iv) 
Oﬀering to collect a follow-up 1st and 5th liter sample 
for every emergency repair may result in large costs 
for water systems. In a mulƟfamily complex, a single 
replacement could be very expensive with 1st and 5th 
liter samples for every resident that requests one. 
Especially with other required miƟgaƟon eﬀorts such 
as the pitcher ﬁlter/POU devices and 6 months of 
replacement cartridges. Does the water system have 
the right to request the consumer pay for the sample 
analysis? Would one 1st and 5th liter count as the 
follow-up for the enƟre mulƟ family complex? 
ASDWA recommends that EPA clarify this 
component of the proposed rule. AddiƟonally, 
ASDWA recommends that the rule only require 
water systems to oﬀer to sample, as customers 
have the right to refuse that tesƟng.  

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 6 
 
§ 141.84 
(b)(3)  
“Water systems that discover a lead or galvanized 
requiring replacement service line that was 
previously inventoried as non-lead must update their 
inventory in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this 
secƟon and complete the following requirements:…”  
 
 “Although not speciﬁcally stated in the proposed 
rule, a State could require the system to take acƟon 
to improve inventory accuracy.” 
 
Some ASDWA members noted that if this 
requirement is not explicitly stated in the rule, they 
will not have the authority to require systems to take 
action to improve the accuracy of their inventory 
when systems discover lead or GRR lines during 
validation that were previously identified as non-
lead.  
ASDWA recommends that EPA include a 
requirement for systems to take steps to improve 
the accuracy of their inventory when previously 
categorized non-lead service lines are idenƟﬁed 
as lead or GRR. 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 7 
 
§ 141.84 
(h)(1)(iii) 
and 
(h)(3)(iii) 
and 
§141.85 
(g)(2)  
States have expressed concern regarding how heavily 
the LCRI relies on POU ﬁlters to miƟgate the 
anƟcipated spike in lead from lead line disturbances. 
These requirements increase the burden on water 
systems which is deemed necessary because of the 
assumed eﬃcacy of the ﬁlters to remove lead. 
Because these POUs would be distributed by the 
systems to consumers based on an EPA regulaƟon, 
consumers will be under the impression that the 
POUs will remove all potenƟal lead hazards. These 
ﬁlters generally rely on either GAC adsorpƟon or ion 
exchange resin—treatment that is eﬀecƟve at soluble 
lead removal. POU ﬁlters have in some cases been 
shown to be ineﬀecƟve at insoluble lead removal 
(Tang, et al.; Aljandani e al.). 
 
AddiƟonally, EPA repeats a manufacturer’s claim in 
the preamble to the LCRI that some lead ﬁlter 
cartridges can last 6 months and that “assuming 
typical water use” this means a PWS may need to 
only supply one ﬁlter cartridge when required to do 
so under the regulaƟon. One state invesƟgated this 
claim made by Brita and found that the company 
only calculated usage based on drinking 11 glasses 
((8 oz. each) of water per day against the 120-gallon 
ﬁlter life. See htps://www.brita.com/products/elite-
replacement-ﬁlters/. This translates to 0.66 
gallons/day over six-months per residence. When you 
take into consideraƟon all the consumpƟve uses (e.g., 
drinking, cooking, and preparing baby formula) for 
which this ﬁlter should be used following an LSL 
disturbance or an LSLR this volume is woefully 
inadequate, and EPA should not be suggesƟng that 
one ﬁlter might be suﬃcient. One such ﬁlter barely 
covers a single adult’s daily drinking water 
consumpƟon (2 L = 0.53 gallons). If more than one 
adult lives in the residence this too will reduce the 
life of the ﬁlter cartridge. 
  
States recommend EPA develop addiƟonal 
guidance on educaƟon about ﬁlter use and 
provide informaƟon on ﬂushing procedures 
following a replacement or line disturbance. EPA 
should ensure it is clear that POU devices may be 
eﬀecƟve for temporary lead removal, while 
maintaining public conﬁdence in tap water. 
 
Further, EPA should invesƟgate and verify 
manufacturers’ claims regarding ﬁlter usage and 
the expected ﬁlter life for typical usage. EPA 
should provide guidance for states and water 
systems to determine the number of ﬁlters 
needed to ensure a 6-month lifespan in a typical 
residence.  
 
 
 
 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 8 
 
Corrosion Control Treatment 
Reference 
Comment/Concern/QuesƟon to be Addressed 
RecommendaƟon for EPA 
Preamble 
Exhibit 1 
– FR 
84890  
In Exhibit 1 in the preamble, under the secƟon on CCT, 
EPA indicates that “Systems with P90 lead level > 0.010 
mg/L: No CCT: Must complete CCT installaƟon 
regardless of their subsequent P90 levels if system has 
started to install CCT. " 
 
What does "started to install CCT" mean in this 
context? Does this refer to aŌer the systems obtain 
approval and install chemical feed pumps, or does this 
refer to the installaƟon period as a whole? Or does this 
refer strictly to aŌer the system starts feeding the 
designated treatment to the system? 
States recommend that EPA clarify what it 
means when a system has “started to install 
CCT” in the context of this rule.  
§ 141.81 
and § 
141.82 
Overall, SecƟons 141.81 and 141.82 remain as complex 
as writen under the LCR. With so many condiƟonal 
statements and complexity throughout these two 
secƟons, it will remain diﬃcult for primacy agency staﬀ 
to ensure state-wide compliance with the 
requirements, train new staﬀ on the requirements, and 
answer quesƟons from systems about the 
requirements. 
 
 
ASDWA’s members recommend that EPA 
develop comprehensive decision-trees, 
ﬂowcharts, or schemaƟcs clearly depicƟng the 
regulatory triggers and steps for corrosion 
control treatment (CCT) opƟmizaƟon, re-
opƟmizaƟon, and opƟmal water quality 
parameter (OWQP) designaƟon. These tools 
should be developed and shared with primacy 
agencies ahead of the compliance date for the 
rule to aid in compliance determinaƟons and 
training.  
§ 141.80 
(a)(1)(i) 
and 
§141.81 
In the proposed rule, EPA has determined that systems 
with CCT installed, but who have not previously been 
“deemed opƟmized” because they have not had an 
ALE, will now be required to be opƟmized by the State 
and subject to OWQPs, regular WQP monitoring, etc. 
These systems are currently going above and beyond 
exisƟng requirements and ASDWA’s Members have 
expressed concern that such systems may now be 
incenƟvized to cease this treatment so as to not be 
subject to OWQP monitoring requirements.  
States request that EPA provide addiƟonal 
clariﬁcaƟon for states to handle such systems. 
Are all systems with CCT who are not currently 
deemed opƟmized expected to be deemed to 
have opƟmized CCT and subject to OWQP 
monitoring? What is the expected Ɵmeframe 
for implemenƟng this requirement?  
§ 141.81 
(a)(1)(iii) 
The LCRI refers to large systems without CCT to 
complete steps and install OCCT.  The LCR has already 
required almost all large water systems (except those 
who previously met the (b)(3) requirements under LCR) 
and water systems that newly meet the large water 
system criteria to install CCT.  As writen, it appears 
that in the LCRI water systems that increase populaƟon 
to greater than or equal to 50,001 and therefore meet 
the criteria to “become” large water systems, don’t 
have to install CCT unless they exceed the PQL or 
copper acƟon level according to 141.81(a)(1)(iii). 
EPA should ensure all large water systems have 
CCT installed, designated opƟmal and 
designated with OWQPs in accordance with 
141.81(a)(1). This requirement should apply to 
all medium systems that become large systems 
upon the change in populaƟon.    

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 9 
 
§ 141.81 
(a)(3) 
This secƟon refers to small water systems (serving <= 
10,000 people) and non-transient, non-community 
water systems (NTNCWS).  
If a NTNCWS serves a populaƟon larger than 
10,000, does it fall under this secƟon or should 
it be considered a medium water system for 
purposes of this rule? 
§ 
141.81(a) 
and (b) 
Some states have expressed concerns that EPA has 
simply replaced the trigger level with the PracƟcal 
QuanƟﬁcaƟon Limit (PQL) for triggering systems into 
CCT requirements. Under the proposed rule, systems 
with 90th percenƟle results between the PQL and the 
AL will be subject to standard monitoring, installaƟon 
of OCCT and subject to OWQPs. Maintaining two 
separate levels to trigger water systems into diﬀerent 
requirements is confusing and not a simpliﬁcaƟon of 
the rule. 
 
Further, determining which systems are “deemed” 
opƟmized has become even more complex with the 
proposed regulatory language.  
States recommend that EPA further clarify and 
simplify the language in this secƟon. States 
recommend that EPA move forward with using 
a single number to trigger treatment technique 
requirements, rather than using the AL as well 
as the PQL for triggering CCT-related acƟons 
under the rule. AlternaƟvely, some states 
suggest leaving the re-opƟmizaƟon 
determinaƟon up to the state, especially for 
exceedances of the PQL and not the AL, in lieu 
of using the PQL as a “trigger level.” 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 10 
 
§ 
141.81(d) 
and (e) 
Overall comments on pipe loop requirements: 
Corrosion Control Treatment is not “set it and forget it” 
and achieving and maintaining eﬀecƟve and opƟmized 
corrosion control treatment (OCCT) is just as much of 
an art as it is a science. While it’s laudable that EPA 
wants to try to encourage systems to invest in pipe-
loop studies in an atempt to get it “right” the ﬁrst 
Ɵme, there are diminishing returns with this 
requirement. In almost every case, there are two viable 
corrosion control methods: pH/alkalinity adjustment 
and/or orthophosphate inhibitor addiƟon. A 
determinaƟon of which combinaƟon of method to use 
at a parƟcular system can oŌen be made using theory 
and best pracƟce, along with an evaluaƟon of water 
quality parameters.  
 
States have concerns that EPA’s proposed 
requirements for pipe-loop studies are overly 
prescripƟve, especially when applied to small water 
systems. Desktop and bench-scale evaluaƟons are 
much more cost eﬀecƟve and expediƟous when 
compared to pipe-loop studies.  Pipe-loop tesƟng could 
be cost-prohibiƟve for water systems and take many 
months to reach the same conclusions that otherwise 
would be idenƟﬁed through alternaƟve evaluaƟon 
approaches.  
 
Further, the Ɵmeframe allowed under the proposed 
rule for pipe-loop studies, while it may be necessary 
for compleƟng such studies, may put consumers at 
unnecessary risk, when the system could install and 
operate CCT more quickly based on a desktop or 
bench-scale evaluaƟon. This also holds true for water 
systems that already have CCT installed and need to re-
opƟmize; in such cases, allowing up to 30 months for a 
CCT study could be unnecessary, and depending on the 
speciﬁc details of the situaƟon, a slight adjustment to 
exisƟng CCT may be more eﬀecƟve at addressing 
elevated lead levels across the water system. This delay 
in public health beneﬁt from CCT is a concern, and 
likely unjusƟﬁed. 
EPA should allow states discreƟon in 
determining the ﬁnal Ɵmelines for the 
compleƟon of CCT studies, allowing them to 
establish shorter Ɵmeframes where feasible.  
 
States recommend that EPA establish diﬀerent 
maximum Ɵmelines for re-opƟmizaƟon vs. 
iniƟal CCT installaƟon.  
 
AddiƟonally, pipe-loop corrosion control studies 
should be opƟonal, and required on a case-by-
case basis as determined by the state and 
based on an evaluaƟon of the water quality and 
exisƟng treatment at the PWS. This 
determinaƟon should be made by the state in 
collaboraƟon with the system and their 
engineer and should be based on the materials 
in the distribuƟon system, the complexity of the 
water quality, and potenƟal expediency of the 
installaƟon of viable CCT. 
 
EPA should oﬀer further ﬂexibility in 
implemenƟng CCT, allowing systems to make 
incremental changes once CCT is installed, as 
this would have a stronger, more expedient 
impact on public health than requiring pipe-
loop studies in all cases for systems with LSLs. 
Pipe-loop studies are a tool that should be used 
by LSL systems with complex water quality who 
anƟcipate future source or treatment changes 
that would aﬀect corrosion. EPA should leave 
this determinaƟon to the state primacy 
agencies and should collaborate with ASDWA in 
developing comprehensive guidance for making 
these determinaƟons based on the most up-to-
date science. 
 
Overall, incorporaƟng this recommendaƟon 
would maintain or improve health protecƟon in 
most cases, reduce burden and improve 
feasibility. 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 11 
 
§ 
141.81(d) 
and 
§141.82 
A strong understanding of the theory and science 
behind corrosion is important when making CCT 
determinaƟons. There is a criƟcal need for up-to-date, 
in-depth guidance and training to ensure the best state 
of the science informaƟon from EPA ORD, and other 
experts in the ﬁeld of corrosion control, is passed on to 
state regulators and review engineers. Currently, there 
is limited knowledge at the state level in reviewing and 
approving pipe-loop studies, as many CCT studies have 
historically been submited using EPA’s CCT Desktop 
EvaluaƟon Form or equivalent, in accordance with 
EPA’s LCR implementaƟon guidance documents.  
 
A poll of ASDWA’s members revealed that only 7 
primacy agencies (concentrated in 3 regions), have at 
least one staﬀ person with experience reviewing and 
approving these types of studies. The remaining states 
indicated that there are no staﬀ with such experience. 
 
One state with experience reviewing pipe-loop studies 
indicated that oŌen the results were inconclusive or 
without staƟsƟcal signiﬁcance to recommend one CCT 
opƟon over another. At this state, typical pipe-loop 
study reviews ranged from 20-40 hours, depending on 
complexity. The potenƟal increase in state workforce 
burden is concerning for many states.  
ASDWA recommends that EPA prioriƟze the 
development of in-depth guidance and training, 
in collaboraƟon with states, for the review and 
approval of CCT studies, speciﬁcally pipe-loop 
studies. This should include an update to EPA’s 
Guidance “OpƟmal Corrosion Control 
Treatment EvaluaƟon Technical 
RecommendaƟons” and should cover CCT 
studies in response to ALEs, as well as CCT 
studies and EvaluaƟons ahead of a source or 
treatment change.  
 
ASDWA’s members recommend that this 
comprehensive training be deployed ahead of 
the LCRI compliance date, updated and oﬀered 
on a regular basis, and be easily accessible by 
all primacy agencies.  
§ 141.81 
and 
§141.82 
States have expressed concerns that there is no 
guidance about safe cessaƟon of CCT. It is not clear 
when or if a system with CCT or OCCT would be 
allowed to stop applicaƟon of CCT.   
States recommend that CCT-related training 
and guidance cover steps to be taken when a 
system plans to stop CCT following complete 
replacement of LSLs and GRRs. In addiƟon, EPA 
should give states discreƟon to require 
conƟnued CCT in cases where cessaƟon could 
pose a risk to public health.  

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 12 
 
§141.81 
(d)(4) and 
(7) and 
§141.81 
(e)(4) and 
(7) 
Numerous states have reiterated the request for EPA to 
allow ﬂexibility in deadlines for designaƟng OCCT and 
OWQPs at a parƟcular water system. Because of 
system deadlines, states receive a wave of studies and 
recommendaƟons, making it diﬃcult to review all of 
them in a Ɵmely manner. AddiƟonally, states are facing 
unprecedented workforce challenges due to 
congressionally directed spending, FTE caps at state 
agencies, and engineer shortages, all while regulatory 
requirements increase.  
ASDWA recommends that EPA modify the 
language such that the state “should” designate 
OWQPs or OCCT within 6 months. States 
recognize the importance of deadlines in 
federal rules and in many cases encourage EPA 
to include deadlines where possible. However, 
unprecedented challenges have made it 
diﬃcult for many states to comply with the 6-
month deadline outlined in this secƟon. 
AddiƟonally, the 6-month deadline limits states’ 
ability to fully evaluate WQPs, require 
addiƟonal WQP monitoring periods, or even 
require re-opƟmizaƟon of treatment before 
moving forward with ﬁnal OWQP designaƟon. 
AddiƟonal ﬂexibility is needed to address these 
concerns and to ensure states have suﬃcient 
Ɵme to make data-driven, science-based 
decisions during these high-volume review 
Ɵmeframes. 
§ 
141.81(d) 
ASDWA’s Members have expressed concern that as 
writen in the proposal, re-opƟmizaƟon is only 
required once following an ALE, as long as a PWS is 
maintaining OWQPs. Several states expressed that if a 
system exceeds the AL more than once, that the state 
would want the system to re-opƟmize with each 
exceedance. AddiƟonally, states want to ensure that 
they maintain the authority to require re-opƟmizaƟon 
as needed in conjuncƟon with source or treatment 
changes.  
 
Based on historical experience providing technical 
assistance to water systems installing and working to 
opƟmize CCT, many systems may need several rounds 
of adjustment to achieve opƟmizaƟon or re-
opƟmizaƟon. States that are only able to enforce the 
minimum federal requirements have expressed 
concern about pushback from systems if the state 
atempts to require re-opƟmizaƟon more than once 
when the regulaƟon implies systems will only need to 
opƟmize once.   
States recommend EPA clarify the rule language 
to clearly require re-opƟmizaƟon as oŌen as 
required by the state and remove references to 
re-opƟmizaƟon only one Ɵme. While states can 
require them to re-opƟmize under SecƟon 
141.81(a), this again brings up the concern 
from states who are unable to be more 
stringent than federal rule. It should be clariﬁed 
in the regulatory language that a system may 
have to undergo re-opƟmizaƟon as oŌen as is 
necessary to protect public health. 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 13 
 
§ 141.81 
(f)(1)(i)(a) 
Some states have expressed support for accelerated 
removal of LSLs to control lead and copper, especially 
states that are concerned about phosphate as a 
downstream contaminant. However, some states have 
expressed concern about having to wait a full year 
aŌer the compliance date to know if a system is 
serious about complying with this provision of the rule, 
allowing them to prolong their current pracƟces. States 
are concerned that this component of the rule could 
be exploited by water systems with very few lead 
service lines. AddiƟonally, this provision adds 
complexity and may potenƟally allow PWSs to delay 
OCCT.  
States recommend that EPA make it clear that 
systems with CCT installed may not cease CCT 
to pursue a shorter LSLR schedule. AddiƟonally, 
EPA should leave discreƟon to States to allow 
systems to pursue a shorter LSLR schedule or 
require systems to install CCT in cases where 
the state deems it to be more protecƟve of 
public health. EPA should also clarify that this 
provision should not be applied to systems with 
copper ALEs.  
§ 141.81 
(d) to (f) 
SecƟon 141.81(f) speciﬁcally calls out Galvanized 
Requiring Replacement (GRR), in addiƟon to LSL lines; 
however, only LSL, not GRR, are called out in 
paragraphs 141.81(d) and (e). Is this intenƟonal, or 
should GRR also be speciﬁcally menƟoned in 
paragraphs (d) and (e)?  
Clarify whether paragraphs 141.81(d) and (e) 
apply to GRR service lines.  
§ 141.82 
One state indicated that it has reviewed proposals that 
indicate that orthophosphate addiƟon will increase 
DBP formaƟon.  Will EPA oﬀer guidance, either relaƟng 
to DBPs or other contaminants and treatment opƟons, 
on how to consider the eﬀects of OCCT on WQPs and 
other drinking water quality treatment processes? 
ASDWA strongly recommends OW, ORD, and 
states work together to develop more 
comprehensive simultaneous compliance 
guidance and training. While some states, such 
as Colorado and Ohio have developed CCT-
related guidance, and ASDWA collaborated with 
AWWA to develop a CCT training module, more 
guidance from EPA to ensure simultaneous 
compliance with all NPDWRs is a criƟcal need.  
§ 141.82 
(d) 
Do the States have the authority to require small 
systems, and systems with no lead service lines, to 
complete a demonstraƟve CCT study with a primary 
focus on reducing corrosion at sites with copper with 
leaded solder? If yes, would coupons be allowed as the 
only form of demonstraƟon performed? 
Clarify states’ authority to require 
demonstraƟon studies for systems with copper 
and lead solder corrosion issues.  
§ 141.82 
(f)(4) 
This component of the regulatory language is not 
straighƞorward and may be confusing for states and 
systems. One state asked: How does a system not have 
CCT when they feed orthophosphate? It is not clear 
why EPA is being so prescripƟve in this component of 
the rule and the language is diﬃcult to interpret.  
EPA should provide examples of when feeding 
orthophosphate does not count as CCT and 
should add this clariﬁcaƟon into state 
implementaƟon guidance.  
§ 141.82 
(g) 
States request that EPA provide addiƟonal clariﬁcaƟon 
regarding the requirements that apply to consecuƟve 
water systems.  As writen, the requirements are not 
clear and seem to diﬀer from exisƟng LCR 
requirements. Are consecuƟve systems always 
required to monitor for their wholesaler’s OWQPs, and 
are they subject to excursion violaƟons?  
EPA should clarify when consecuƟve systems 
are subject to OCCT and OWQP requirements.  

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 14 
 
§ 141.82 
(j) 
ASDWA appreciates that the Agency re-named the 
“Find-and-Fix” component of the regulaƟon to 
“DistribuƟon System and Site Assessment” (DSSA) to 
more accurately reﬂect the requirements.  
 
States have some implementaƟon concerns around the 
DSSA requirements. The requirement to collect a 
follow-up sample from a sample tap within a half-mile 
radius, as outlined in the rule, is not realisƟc in many 
rural areas. AddiƟonally, it is not clear if the half-mile 
radius is measured by radial distance or by pipe length.  
 
It is also not clear which components of DSSA would be 
required for small systems, those both with and 
without CCT installed. 
 
Finally, states have expressed concerns regarding the 
workforce burden for the DSSA provisions, both at the 
state and system-level. Not only is there a signiﬁcant 
increase in data collecƟon and reporƟng following any 
elevated samples, this requirement adds signiﬁcant 
complexity to the rule. Systems do not currently have 
the capabiliƟes to report this data and states do not 
have the capability to collect or store this data in 
SDWIS.  
States recommend that EPA clarify the 
requirement to collect a sample within a half-
mile radius of the original sample locaƟon 
under DSSA. AddiƟonally, to address concerns 
in rural areas that may be more than a half-mile 
from another tap sample locaƟon, EPA should 
include a clariﬁcaƟon that the sample should be 
collected from a sample locaƟon within 0.5 
miles or at the next closest tap sample locaƟon.  
 
States also recommend that EPA further clarify 
which components of DSSA are required for 
which systems, especially small systems. A post-
sampling ﬂowchart or decision tree could be 
helpful to ensure systems and states 
understand the requirements following an 
individual elevated sample result.   
 
States recommend that EPA give states the 
opƟon to waive some or all of the DSSA 
requirements depending on the situaƟon at the 
system. AddiƟonally, states recommend EPA 
ensure DW-SFTIES includes ways for states to 
capture and track all the follow up acƟons 
based on elevated sample results.  
§ 141.82 
(j)(1)(ii)(B) 
In most states, review of OCCT would not be 
completed by sanitary survey inspectors, and instead 
would be completed by state review engineers with 
experƟse in corrosion control treatment.  
EPA should collaborate with ASDWA and states 
on implementaƟon guidance for this 
requirement. EPA should provide clear 
expectaƟons as to the documentaƟon and 
evaluaƟon of OCCT needed during sanitary 
surveys and should disseminate this 
informaƟon though guidance and training.  
§ 141.87 
(b)(1)(i) 
Wording in the rule indicates Table 5.  The Table is 
labeled Table 1 
Change from Table 5 to Table 1. 
§ 141.87 
(c)(4)  
As currently writen, this paragraph leaves ambiguity 
for water systems and states as to the interpretaƟon of 
“9 days.” 
  
ASDWA recommends that EPA more clearly Ɵe 
this secƟon with SecƟon 141.82(g) to clarify 
when and how the reduced WQP monitoring 
determinaƟon would be made by the state.  
 
 
 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 15 
 
Compliance Monitoring 
Reference 
Comment/Concern/QuesƟon to be Addressed 
RecommendaƟon for EPA 
§141.86 
ClariﬁcaƟon is needed on how systems qualiﬁed for 
reduced sampling. Currently, it appears that systems 
on triennial monitoring will have to go back down to 
six-month monitoring rather than annual monitoring.  
 
There is concern that very few, if any, systems will 
qualify for reduced monitoring if it is required to have 
samples below the PQL.  
 
There is also confusion about systems without any 
unknown service lines, lead service lines, or galvanized 
requiring replacement. 
 
States need addiƟonal clariﬁcaƟon on how 
systems qualify for reduced sampling. Currently, 
it appears that systems on triennial monitoring 
will have to go back down to six-month 
monitoring rather than annual monitoring. 
AddiƟonally, there is a concern that few, if any, 
systems will qualify for triennial monitoring if 
the PQL is used as the qualiﬁer. AddiƟonally, 
ASDWA recommends that water systems 
(regardless of size) without lead, GRR, or 
unknowns should be able to maintain their 
current monitoring schedule. This will help 
alleviate concerns with lab capacity and state 
staﬀ workload.  
§141.86 
States are concerned with a possible need to maintain 
records of customer refusals from systems. This would 
be a signiﬁcant burden on state staﬀ. 
EPA should require systems to maintain records 
regarding customer refusals for Ɵer 1 sampling. 
However, systems should only submit 
documentaƟon to the state cerƟfying that they 
have collected and are maintaining this 
informaƟon.  
 
§141.86 
(a)(1)(iii) 
States have brought up logisƟcal concerns regarding 
sampling at water systems uƟlizing POU devices for 
compliance with the NPDWRs, including those that will 
be uƟlizing the POU small system ﬂexibility outlined in 
141.93. Are such POU devices required to be 
connected to the tap? States anƟcipate water systems 
may uƟlize pitcher-ﬁlters, is this acceptable? Would 1st 
and 5th L samples sƟll be required to be collected if the 
site is served from a known LSL or GRR? 
EPA should provide clariﬁcaƟon on these 
requirements. A 5th L sample from a pitcher 
ﬁlter seems infeasible. 
§141.86 
(a)(3) 
The requirement to collect samples from “every site 
containing lead pipe and/or served by a lead service 
line” is nearly impossible for community water systems 
to carry out given the available Ɵme and resources. As 
it is, community water systems struggle with geƫng 
parƟcipaƟon, but rarely are they able to sample 
exactly the same homes with each round of lead tap 
sampling. AddiƟonally, states are likely not posiƟoned 
to be able to enforce this. 
EPA should modify the language to take out 
“every” and instead include “all available sites.” 
 
“Available” should mean sample sites that are 
accessible and allow for individuals to collect 
samples within the guidelines and 
requirements of the LCRI.  
 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 16 
 
§141.86 
(b)(1)  
ASDWA members highlighted that the rule has always 
allowed acidiﬁcaƟon up to 14 days aŌer collecƟon, but 
that this period could and should be increased. One 
state noted that laboratory technicians and laboratory 
directors have stated that no mater how long a 
sample sits, all lead and copper adhering to the sides 
of the botle will resolubilize in the required 18-hours 
period (found in EPA method 200.8) aŌer nitric acid 
has been added for two reasons, to preserve the 
sample and the required period of Ɵme to resolubilize 
metals before analysis can begin. This state has had 
water systems that are waiƟng on a single sample (one 
of twenty or more) to complete their required number 
of samples, that then must recollect all but one sample 
because the others are over the 14-day limit.  
ASDWA recommends that EPA change the 
acidiﬁcaƟon Ɵme to a longer period, such as 
“up to 30 days”.  This would eliminate many of 
the issues associated with recollecƟons.  
§141.86 
(d)(2)(i)  
ASDWA members think that water systems that reduce 
to annual monitoring aŌer two six-month monitoring 
periods should begin annual monitoring at the 
reduced number of samples, not remain on the 
standard number of samples. This change will help 
with lab capacity issues and associated costs.  
ASDWA recommends that EPA keep the annual 
monitoring requirements at the reduced 
number of samples.  
§ 141.86 
(f)(2) 
There is currently uncertainty as to what type of 
documentaƟon EPA requires to invalidate a sample. Is 
a leter/email acceptable, or does EPA want more 
documentaƟon? 
ASDWA recommends that EPA clarify the 
expectaƟons for this documentaƟon. 
 
 
Public EducaƟon & NoƟﬁcaƟon 
Reference 
Comment/Concern/QuesƟon to be Addressed 
RecommendaƟon for EPA 
§ 141.85 
Guidance and draŌ templates are needed for all the 
various Public EducaƟon and Public NoƟces 
EPA should ensure guidance and draŌ 
templates for all the various Public EducaƟon 
and Public NoƟces are developed ahead of the 
compliance deadline.  
§ 141.85 
A CommunicaƟon plan or strategy should be added to 
this secƟon so that water systems are prepared to 
conduct PE requirements. 
ASDWA recommends that systems be required 
to submit a communicaƟon strategy at the start 
of the LCRI rule. This will ensure that systems 
are prepared and not scrambling to produce 
and distribute public educaƟon materials. To 
help systems do this, EPA should work with 
water systems and states to develop a 
template. 
§ 141.85 
(b)(1) 
ClariﬁcaƟon is needed for translation of public 
education materials for public water systems serving a 
large proportion of non-English speaking consumers, 
as determined by the state.  
ASDWA recommends that EPA deﬁne the term, 
“large proporƟon.” Is it one immigrant 
populaƟon or all of them combined? Is this 
what must be “determined by the state?” 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 17 
 
§ 141.85 
(b)(7) 
ClariﬁcaƟon is needed for when a water system may 
request an extension from the State, in wriƟng, to 
complete public educaƟon requirements in a Ɵme 
period beyond the 60-day deadline aŌer a lead ALE. 
(ii) The State may only grant the extension on a case-
by-case basis if the system has demonstrated that it 
is not feasible to complete the acƟviƟes in (b)(2)(ii) 
through (vi) of this secƟon. 
ASDWA recommends that EPA clarify the 
circumstances for which a state can grant an 
extension. 
§ 141.85 
(c)(1) 
 
The statement that a water system “must oﬀer to 
sample for lead in the tap water of any customer who 
requests it,” is unclear. Who is expected to pay for 
sampling analysis when it is requested by the 
customer. 
ASDWA recommends that EPA clarify what is 
meant by the term “oﬀer” to explain who is 
responsible for the cost of customer requested 
sampling. 
§ 141.85 
(c)(1-2) 
For Supplemental Monitoring and noƟﬁcaƟon of 
Results, States are concerned that homeowners will 
want too much sampling. This could become a burden 
for the water system. 
ASDWA recommends that EPA consider the 
system cost and burden for substanƟally 
increased numbers of customer sampling 
requests. 
§ 141.85 
(d)(2) 
 
For the supplemental monitoring 3-day noƟﬁcaƟon 
requirement, what is meant by “learns of the tap 
monitoring results”. When does the clock start? 
ASDWA recommends that EPA clarify the 
meaning of the term, “learns of the tap 
monitoring results” so systems understand 
when the clock starts for the 3-day noƟﬁcaƟon 
(or 30 days per ASDWA’s recommendaƟon). 
§ 141.90 
(j)(1) 
When does the clock start? Within 24 hours of 
receiving results from who? 24 hours will be a 
challenge. What if results are received on a Friday 
night? 
ASDWA recommends that EPA clarify when the 
24-hour clock starts.  
§ 141.85 
(j)(3) 
What is an adequate ﬁlter plan? Should this be added 
under the lead service line replacement plan and 
outline within the plan. 
ASDWA recommends that EPA provide guidance 
on what is required in the ﬁlter plan (for Lead 
ALEs). AddiƟonally, EPA could require that the 
ﬁlter plan be submited in advance with the LSL 
Replacement plan. 
§141.85(j) 
States have expressed concerns with the provision for 
systems with 3 or more lead AcƟon Level Exceedances 
(ALE) to distribute ﬁlters to the enƟre service area. The 
LCRI targets the highest risk sites for monitoring and 
evaluaƟng the AL, as such, ﬁlters should be targeted at 
sites that are at risk of lead exposure, i.e., locaƟons 
with LSL, GRR, or unknowns based on the system’s 
inventory. High risk locaƟons may only represent a 
small percentage of consumers served by the system. 
Providing ﬁlters to consumers served by known, non-
lead lines could undermine public conﬁdence in 
drinking water and introduce unnecessary cost and 
risk to the water system and their consumers. 
States recommend that EPA amend this 
requirement to require ﬁlter distribuƟon to 
consumers served by LSL, GRR, or unknown, 
and provide states authority to require 
distribuƟon to the full community at their 
discreƟon, based on sample locaƟons, 
existence of CCT, etc.  

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 18 
 
§141.85 
(j)(3) 
A 15-day turnaround Ɵme for a state to review and 
approve systems’ ﬁlter distribuƟon plan will be 
challenging to implement. AddiƟonally, this Ɵmeframe 
does not align with any other aspect of the rule.  
States recommend streamlining all ALE 
requirements, including the POU plan 
requirements, and recommend adding 
ﬂexibility for states review to this provision. 
AddiƟonally, EPA should work with ASDWA to 
establish expectaƟons and guidance for the 
ﬁlter plan. The review Ɵme should be extended 
to 45 days. 
 
School and Childcare Sampling 
Reference 
Comment/Concern/QuesƟon to be Addressed 
RecommendaƟon for EPA 
§ 141.2  
The existing definitions for school and child-care 
facility need additional clarity. A lack of clear 
definitions results in several questions: How should 
daycares that offer pre-school be categorized? What 
does licensed mean for child-care facilities? Is there a 
minimum population served to qualify for either 
definition? How do mixed-use buildings that include 
child-care factor into these definitions, for example a 
high rise with a day care on one floor of the building? 
How will residential child-care facilities be treated, and 
how can we ensure the sampling is not duplicated? 
EPA should add addiƟonal details for the 
various deﬁniƟons of schools and the deﬁniƟon 
of child care facility. 
§ 141.92 
(a) 
Many states already have a lead tesƟng in schools and 
child-care faciliƟes program, and other states are 
concerned about starƟng a program but want to 
ensure it is a streamlined process with other state 
agencies.  
 
ASDWA strongly recommends that EPA allow 
states to use their exisƟng lead tesƟng in 
schools and child-care faciliƟes programs and 
add language in the LCRI that would allow 
states without an exisƟng program to develop a 
program as stringent as EPA’s proposed LCRI. 
Many states already have an exisƟng tesƟng 
program, and honoring these programs would 
signiﬁcantly reduce burden on the states and 
systems.  
 
AddiƟonally, adding language to the LCRI for 
states to develop a program that do not have 
one already would allow states to begin 
working with other state agencies like the 
Department of Public InstrucƟon (DPI) or 
Health and Human Services (HHS) to streamline 
paperwork that would otherwise be placed on 
the water system or city administraƟon. Much 
of the paperwork proposed by EPA could be 
handled by the state DPI or HHS which may 
already have email addresses and physical 
addresses for schools and child-care faciliƟes. 
§ 141.92 
(a) 
Sampling for lead only gives a snapshot of lead levels 
at schools and child-care faciliƟes. The bigger focus for 
ASDWA is aware of the jurisdicƟonal issues 
between EPA, schools and child-care faciliƟes, 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 19 
 
resolving issues with lead in schools and child-care 
faciliƟes should be on remediaƟon. 
and remediaƟon; however, ASDWA 
recommends EPA conƟnue to support 
remediaƟon acƟviƟes in schools and child-care 
faciliƟes in any way possible.   
§ 141.92 
(a)(b) 
In the proposal, the list of schools and child-care 
faciliƟes appears to include all schools and child-care 
faciliƟes, where the general requirements exclude 
schools and child care faciliƟes with full plumbing 
replacement or those constructed aŌer January 1, 
2014. 
ASDWA recommends that EPA revise the rule to 
clarify that the list of schools and child-care 
faciliƟes should exclude those with full 
plumbing replacement or those constructed 
aŌer January 1, 2014 or the date the State 
adopted standards that meet the deﬁniƟon of 
lead free in accordance with secƟon 1417 of 
the Safe Drinking Water Act.  
§ 141.92 
(b)(1) 
ClariﬁcaƟon is needed from EPA on the review process 
expected by states when receiving the CWS list of 
schools. AddiƟonal clariﬁcaƟon is needed on how the 
list will be maintained, as child-care faciliƟes will go 
online and oﬄine very quickly.  
ASDWA recommends that EPA provide clarity 
on the review process for which states are 
responsible in the proposed rule with regards 
to the compiled list of schools and child-care 
faciliƟes. State drinking water programs do not 
have enough informaƟon or resources to assess 
the validity of a community water system’s list 
of schools and child-care faciliƟes. ASDWA 
recommends that while the list may be turned 
into the state, there should be no expectaƟon 
that the state drinking water program review 
the list for accuracy. 
 
AddiƟonal clarity is needed on the maintenance 
of the list of schools and child-care faciliƟes. 
Based on the proposal, ASDWA assumes this list 
will be made once every ﬁve years and the list 
will not be updated unƟl the next ﬁve-year 
period.  
§ 141.92 
(b),(c),&(f) 
There is concern over how data will be tracked and 
used for compliance with lead tesƟng in schools and 
child care faciliƟes. Where will the various lists be 
hosted and how will the state receive and store them? 
Where will data from sample results be stored? How 
will this new data be entered, and will it allow users to 
enter things like sample volume? 
ASDWA recommends that EPA clarify how data 
will be stored, entered, and used for 
compliance with regards to lead tesƟng in 
schools and child-care faciliƟes. 
§ 141.92 
(c)(2)(i-ii) 
Elementary schools and childcare facilities are handled 
differently than secondary schools. 
ASDWA recommends EPA have the default for 
secondary schools be the same as elementary 
schools and child-care facilities, as secondary 
schools often have programs serving younger 
children at their facilities. 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 20 
 
§ 141.92 
(d)(b) 
ClariﬁcaƟon is needed from EPA on schools or child-
care faciliƟes that decline to parƟcipate, and whether 
these enƟƟes are able to be permanently counted for 
the 20 percent per year requirement.  
ASDWA recommends that EPA provide 
addiƟonal detail on how schools and child-care 
faciliƟes that are non-responsive or decline to 
parƟcipate in sampling be counted in the 20 
percent requirement per year for school/ child-
care facility sampling. ASDWA recommends 
that once a school or child-care facility declines 
to parƟcipate, the school or facility will be 
permanently counted in the 20 percent 
requirement and will not need to be contacted 
again to fulﬁll future 20 percent requirements 
in subsequent years. 
§ 141.92 
(e)&(f) 
The proposal needs to provide clarity on the handling 
of schools requesƟng sampling and how the water 
systems will record these requests and submit them to 
the state for compliance. 
ASDWA recommends that EPA provide 
addiƟonal detail describing how water systems 
should record school or child-care facility 
requests for addiƟonal tesƟng and how these 
recorded lists should be submited to the state 
for compliance. ASDWA also recommends that 
the proposal detail how states shall use 
sampling request lists submited by their water 
systems. 
§ 
141.92(f) 
In some states, the state Department of EducaƟon 
(DOE) conducts sampling eﬀorts for schools and child-
care faciliƟes. How will this violaƟons work for these 
enƟƟes? 
ASDWA wants to make EPA aware that in some 
states, the state Department of EducaƟon 
(DOE) conducts sampling eﬀorts for schools and 
child-care faciliƟes. In the proposal, EPA needs 
to consider how this may inﬂuence sampling 
violaƟons and potenƟal jurisdicƟonal issues.   
 
 
 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 21 
 
Data Management 
Reference Comment/Concern/QuesƟon to be Addressed 
RecommendaƟon for EPA 
§ 141.90 
Lack of Suﬃcient Rule Support in SDWIS 
Given the Ɵmelines associated with SDWIS 
modernizaƟon, primacy agencies lack a suﬃcient data 
system to eﬀecƟvely manage the rule.  
 
ASDWA’s members are concerned with porƟons of 
LCRR moving forward in SDWIS State with uncertainty 
with how LCRI would impact data and record keeping 
longer term.  
 
To ensure compliance with exisƟng requirements from 
LCRR related to inventory management, primacy 
agencies employed a variety of soluƟons – from low-
tech, in-house, applicaƟons to expensive 3rd party-
developed add on modules.  
 
State primacy agencies have templates and processes 
in place for collecƟng and managing inventory data, 
and now there will likely be an expansion of the data 
collected there, which will require new templates, 
processes, and training, and further calls into quesƟon 
the informaƟon already collected.  
 
Finally, ASDWA members expressed concerns over data 
migraƟon – what will DW-SFTIES accept/manage and 
what will be leŌ to state-developed systems? 
EPA must consider how the Ɵmelines for SDWIS 
modernizaƟon, including Ɵme necessary to 
transiƟon into producƟon, will impact primacy 
agencies’ ability to eﬀecƟvely implement the 
rule.  
 
It is criƟcal that primacy agencies understand 
what, if any, funcƟonality will be lost because of 
the transiƟon to the new data system. EPA must 
conƟnue to communicate transparently about 
development Ɵmelines and capabiliƟes of DW-
SFTIES, so primacy agencies understand how 
transiƟon will impact their programs.  
 
Where possible, EPA must provide updated 
templates, guidance, and data entry 
instrucƟons (DEI) with enough lead Ɵme to 
allow primacy agencies to plan for and 
implement changes. 
§ 141.90 
Records/Tracking 
There are many reports and records listed throughout 
this secƟon of the rule.  Primacy agencies and PWSs 
need clariﬁcaƟon on what each enƟty needs to keep 
track of the various informaƟon/reports that EPA 
requires, what type of data, and in which format. 
 
In addiƟon, what type of tracking will the primacy 
agency need to do? For example: Is the date on a leter 
going out to the system going to be good enough 
documentaƟon for a recorded entry into SDWIS or is 
addiƟonal documentaƟon going to be required? And if 
yes, what documentaƟon is needed? 
 
EPA should provide addiƟonal guidance and 
clariﬁcaƟon. 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 22 
 
§ 141.90 
There are now 24 cerƟﬁcaƟons in the LCRI.  Some 
cerƟﬁcaƟons in the LCRR have been changed from a 
cerƟﬁcaƟon to “water system must demonstrate”, 
which is sƟll a cerƟﬁcaƟon.  If those are counted the 
total goes up to 26. Most are in this secƟon 141.90, but 
one cerƟﬁcaƟon is in 141.86(h).  The rule has goten 
more complex not less. 
Reduce the number of cerƟﬁcaƟons so states 
don’t have to track as many things.  This will 
help make the rule less complex.  
§ 141.90 
(a)(2)(i) 
Please see the comment immediately above about 
Lead and Copper tap samples that also apply for 1st and 
5th liter sample results noƟﬁcaƟon. 
Remove the 10-days aŌer the end of the tap 
sampling period requirement for lead and 
copper tap sampling and return it to the 
requirements in the LCR/LCRR, which under the 
LCRI is deﬁned as Tap Monitoring Period. 
§ 141.90 
(a)(2)(ii) 
The LCRI states that the water system can collect a 
replacement sample 20 days aŌer the state invalidates 
a sample, but it also states that documentaƟon for 
each tap water lead and copper sample for which the 
water system requests invalidaƟon be submited within 
10 days aŌer the end of the tap sampling period. One 
state reports that its state laboratory cannot have all 
samples that are collected by the end of the tap 
sampling period, September 30, analyzed and reported 
by October 10th ; therefore, invalidaƟons cannot be 
requested by the proposed date in the rule because 
not all sample results have been reported.  
Remove the 10-day aŌer the end of the tap 
sampling period requirement for requesƟng an 
invalidaƟon.  Make a change to the rule to 
request an invalidaƟon within 10 days aŌer 
receiving sample results.  
§ 141.90 
(a)(2)(iii) 
This part of the LCRI requires the water system to 
noƟfy the state they are going to perform a future 
requirement, to supply results to the public within 60 
days of the end of the monitoring period.  SecƟon 
141.86(h)(3) requires the water systems to make the 
results available and cerƟfy to the state that it has 
been completed.  Some states display these results on 
Drinking Water Watch so this requirement is taken care 
of, but many other states that don’t do this will need to 
track another item.  Also, secƟon 141.85(d)(1) requires 
that individual results be given to the speciﬁc customer 
that collected the sample. 
To reduce the complexity of the rule, this 
requirement should be removed because it is 
duplicaƟve of other rule requirements. If a 
water system doesn’t comply with 40 CFR 
141.86(h)(3), they will receive a violaƟon and 
be required to do PN and have it included in the 
CCR. Also, tracking a water system’s noƟﬁcaƟon 
to the state that they will complete a future 
requirement is unnecessary. 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 23 
 
§ 141.90 
(a)(2) 
ReporƟng within the ﬁrst 10 days following the end of 
each sampling period is not possible for lead and 
copper tap samples. A state required to provide 
laboratory services by statute report that samples 
collected during the last weeks or days of a sampling 
period cannot be shipped, analyzed, and reported in 10 
days. The state normally gets their ﬁnal sample results 
for a reduced monitoring tap sampling period 1.5 
months aŌer the end of the sampling period.  This may 
be possible for WQPs since the current rule (LCR) 
requires reporƟng January 10 and July 10 for WQPs 
according to the monitoring period, but not the 
sampling period.  EPA should look at the deﬁniƟons 
secƟon in 141.2 and review the diﬀerence between tap 
monitoring period and tap sampling period. 
 
History:  The Proposed LCRR published in 10-10-2019 
had the citaƟon in 40 CFR 141.90(a)(1) “applicable 
monitoring period”.  The ﬁnal rule pre-publicaƟon 
version published in 12-21-2020 had the citaƟon in 40 
CFR 141.90(a)(1) “applicable tap sampling monitoring 
period”.  The deﬁniƟon for tap sampling monitoring 
period was virtually the same as monitoring period.  
The ﬁnal LCRR published on 1-15-2021 remained the 
same with the citaƟon in 40 CFR 141.90(a)(1) as 
“applicable tap sampling monitoring period”.  The pre-
publicaƟon of the LCRI published 11-21-23 changed the 
citaƟon to 40 CFR 141.90(a)(2) with the quote 
“applicable sampling period”.  This changed the intent 
of the LCR and the LCRR from 10-days following the 
end of each applicable monitoring period/tap sampling 
monitoring period, which is December 31 for reduced 
monitoring to the end of the sampling period which is 
September 30 for reduced monitoring.  The 
requirement changed from, using the LCRI deﬁniƟon of 
monitoring period “tap monitoring period” to, using 
the LCRI deﬁniƟon of sampling period “tap sampling 
period”. 
Change the citaƟon from sampling period to 
tap sampling monitoring period as found in 40 
CFR 141.90(a)(1) of the LCRR or more 
appropriately to the LCRI deﬁniƟon tap 
monitoring period.  If it remains as tap sampling 
period, it is a deﬁnite implementaƟon issue 
that causes compression of the tap sampling 
period as well as increases laboratory capacity 
problems and costs.  
 
As noted in the same paragraph of the rule 40 
CFR 141.90(a)(2) “For tap sampling period with 
a duraƟon of less than six months, the end of 
the sampling period is the last date samples can 
be collected as speciﬁed in 141.86.” This 
statement reinforces that EPA wants results 
reported on October 10 following the end of 
the reduced monitoring period.  But, based on 
years of experience working with the lead and 
copper rule, states believe that it is oŌen not 
possible for samples to be submited in the last 
month of the tap sampling period (September) 
and have them shipped, preserved, analyzed, 
QAQC processed, signed oﬀ on and reported in 
10 days/all by October 10th. 
 
If the citaƟon is not corrected the tap sampling 
period will be compressed, causing the enƟre 
month of September to be lost for lead and 
copper tap sampling. In state experiences it 
takes 1.5 months to have all samples analyzed 
and reported for the annual, triennial, and 
nine-year reduced monitoring periods each 
year.  Backing up from October 10, the last date 
samples could be submited would be around 
August 20th of each year. 
  
Also, September is when Missouri samples our 
schools because class has resumed, and water 
is again being used.  Sample results are then 
reﬂecƟve of water children are actually 
consuming. 
§ 141.90 
(b)(2) 
What kind of explanaƟon or documentaƟon will EPA 
accept for the WQP sample sites for jusƟﬁcaƟon on 
why PWS didn’t use the same sample sites? 
EPA should provide addiƟonal 
guidance/clariﬁcaƟon. 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 24 
 
§ 141.90 
(c) 
ASDWA’s members raised concerns over the staggered 
reporƟng schedule, which can be very resource 
intensive for both the PWS and the primacy agency. 
   
There are now 24 cerƟﬁcaƟons in the LCRI.  Some 
cerƟﬁcaƟons in the LCRR have been changed from a 
cerƟﬁcaƟon to “water system must demonstrate”, 
which is sƟll a cerƟﬁcaƟon.  If those are counted the 
total goes up to 26. Most are in this secƟon 141.90, but 
one cerƟﬁcaƟon is in 141.86(h). 
EPA should streamline the reporƟng deadlines 
down to 1 or 2 dates for when the system 
needs to provide reports or cerƟﬁcaƟons to the 
primacy agency for review.  
 
EPA should idenƟfy ways to combine and 
streamline cerƟﬁcaƟons throughout. EPA 
should develop templates prior to the 
compliance date of LCRI for each type of 
cerƟﬁcaƟon the PWS is required to submit to 
the primacy agency to ensure naƟonal 
consistency and clarity ahead of the compliance 
deadline.   
 
EPA must ensure all compliance tracking and 
schedules are fully supported in SDWIS and 
DW-SFTIES.  
§ 141.90 
(e)(10) 
What is valid documentaƟon of customer refusal? Does 
every atempt need to be tracked by the state, or a 
single cerƟﬁcaƟon that all steps were followed? 
 
ASDWA members are concerned about Ɵmeliness 
associated with sampling if the customer is not 
responsive and sampling Ɵmelines are missed. 
 
EPA should develop a template to track 
acceptable customer refusal. This template 
could be used by the PWS for tracking purposes 
and submited once to the primacy agency for 
the enƟre system, rather than per connecƟon. 
EPA should further develop guidance to aid 
uƟlity staﬀ with tracking and reporƟng 
customer engagement to the state.  
 
§ 141.90 
(f)(3)  
Because systems are required to report monitoring 
data within 10 days from the end of the monitoring 
period and are required to send consumer noƟﬁcaƟon 
within 3 days of learning of the results, states brought 
up that the 3 month allowance for cerƟfying consumer 
noƟce is unnecessarily ﬂexible.  
 
Some states recommended that consumer 
noƟce be cerƟﬁed to the state 30 days from the 
date of the last consumer noƟce issued.  
 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 25 
 
§ 141.90 
(h)(1) 
Timelines/90th PercenƟle 
141.90(h)(1) implies the State cannot do the 90P 
calculaƟon for water systems if data are reported late.  
 
Primacy agencies must complete a number of steps in 
order to provide 90th percenƟle data to water systems, 
including a comparison of the 1st and 5th L sample 
results to idenƟfy which sample will be used, and for 
mixed Ɵer systems idenƟfy which sites will be used in 
the calculaƟon based on the results. AddiƟonally, 
primacy agencies must then approve the results and 
report to the water system, all within 5 days.   
 
Primacy agencies must also approve the sample plans 
before sampling begins. States who have recently 
undergone eﬀorts to update their sampling plans have 
be very Ɵme intensive, requiring signiﬁcant back and 
forth with uƟliƟes.  
 
These logisƟcal concerns are not addressed in LCRI.   
ASDWA recommends that EPA provide longer 
Ɵmelines to allow for these processes.  
 
EPA should explore potenƟal funcƟonality in 
CMDP to facilitate beter Ɵmelines. 
 
§ 141.90 
(h)(3) 
States are concerned that the Ɵmeframes in the rule, 
and parƟcularly the 15-day Ɵmeframe for doing the 
P90 calculaƟons, that includes reporƟng the results no 
later than 10 days aŌer the end of the monitoring 
period.  
 
For example, the P90 cannot be calculated soon 
enough if samples are collected at the end of the tap 
sampling period, including the last day, because they 
cannot be shipped, preserved, analyzed, QAQC 
processed, signed oﬀ on and reported in 10 days/all by 
October 10 or 15, for samples collected in September. 
ASDWA members recommend a 30-day buﬀer 
to the exisƟng Ɵmeline or changing the 
“trigger”, so the clock starts when the primacy 
agency receives sample results. 
 
An unintended consequence of this rule change 
is that EPA is pushing the requirement to 
laboratories, who are for the most part 
unregulated. There are no updated 
requirements for the labs to complete QA/QC 
etc. within a certain Ɵmeframe in LCRI or LCRR. 
Therefore, states will most likely be unable to 
meet the 15-day reporƟng requirement, as 
writen. 

Appendix B: Comments on Proposed Regulatory Language by the AssociaƟon of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
B - 26 
 
§ 141.86 
(f)(3) and 
§141.90 
(h)(3) 
States expressed concern with replacement sample 
Ɵmelines under 141.86((f)(3). Under 141.86((f)(3) The 
water system must collect replacement samples for any 
samples invalidated under this secƟon… Any such 
replacement samples must be taken as soon as 
possible, but no later than 20 days aŌer the date the 
State invalidates the sample or by the end of the 
applicable monitoring tap sampling period, whichever 
occurs later. In addiƟon, there is the requirement that 
all PWS must have all lead and copper sample results 
out within 10 days by the end of the monitoring period 
and noƟﬁcaƟon back to the State. What happens if a 
PWS must recollect a sample that arrived at the lab 
Sept 29th and was then invalidated? According to the 
rule, the PWS has 20 days to recollect the sample. If 
the sample is recollected on October 15th, then the 
PWS missed the 10 days lead and copper sample 
results noƟﬁcaƟon deadline requirements. Also, the lab 
must analyze the sample, which takes 10 days. So, the 
PWS is now at day 25 aŌer the sampling period. 
Mailing (oﬃcial way to receive paperwork) the sample 
results to the state may take 2-5 days - now 30 days 
have passed. The State sƟll needs to calculate the 90th 
percenƟle, review, generate the 
informaƟon/paperwork and send it out to the system. 
This is well past 30 days altogether, but sƟll under the 
60 days.   
Where states calculate P90 and samples were 
invalidated, ASDWA recommends changing the 
language to “(3) The State has provided the 
results of the 90th percenƟle lead and copper 
calculaƟons, in wriƟng, to the water system 
within 15 days of the end of the tap sampling 
period or aŌer receipt of the replacement 
laboratory sample/s results submited to the 
State program.” This will ensure the Ɵmelines 
will match up with the invalidaƟon of a sample 
by a Lab at the end of a monitoring period or 
the Ɵme for lab to get all the sample result back 
to the State to do the P90 calculaƟon. 
§ 142.15  
Does the data in SDWIS used by primacy agencies to 
submit the required quarterly reports to EPA saƟsfy 
record keeping or is the primacy agency required to 
maintain hard copies of all the records?  
EPA should provide addiƟonal guidance and 
clariﬁcaƟon. 
 
 

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
C - 1 
Summary of Costs of States’ Transactions Study (CoSTS) 
 
To understand the impact to state drinking water programs from the proposed regulatory changes in the Lead 
and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI), ASDWA expanded on its previous Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) 
Cost of States’ Transactions Study (CoSTS) with updated cost estimates reflecting changes in the proposed rule. 
ASDWA’s updated CoSTS estimates that the LCRI will place a significant burden on states annually, estimating 
that a total of 5,141,769 state staff hours will be needed each year. Additionally, CoSTS estimates that the rule 
will necessitate approximately 799,115 upfront state hours for initial implementation and transition to the new 
rule. This time burden translates to over $300 million a year for state implementation—approximately three 
times the amount of Public Water System Supervision (PWSS) program funding for state implementation for all 
the primacy requirements under the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA.) 
 
Basis for Cost of States’ Transactions Study 
 
ASDWA would like to thank EPA for the use and consideration of ASDWA’s LCRR CoSTS in the development of 
the economic analysis for proposed LCRI. ASDWA’s members have invested significant time validating the tasks 
and hours for each task for the proposed LCRI, and ASDWA commends EPA for structuring the Agency’s 
Economic Analysis similar to CoSTS. States appreciate EPA’s acknowledgement of the ever-increasing burden 
being placed on state drinking water programs and emphasize the importance of working together through 
cooperative federalism to ensure new and updated regulations can be feasibly implemented.  
 
As with the previous version, this version of CoSTS relies significantly on EPA’s LCRI Economic Analysis in both 
the layout and presentation of information and the numbers used. The estimates in CoSTS are intended to serve 
as a national approximation, and many states may have a higher or lower level of burden due to differences in 
population and individual state rules, policies, or internal procedures. To develop the national estimate, ASDWA 
utilized feedback from state workgroups to give recommendations on individual hourly estimates, assumptions 
of information included in estimates, and the organization of different line items to specify burden for specific 
activities. ASDWA’s LCRI CoSTS estimates states will annually incur 5,141,769 hours of burden and 799,115 hours 
of one-time burden at the beginning of LCRI implementation. An important consideration is that the estimates 
developed in the LCRI CoSTS reflect specific regulatory line items and do not consider every potential impact to 
states from the final rule. For example, calls from consumers, the media, and other state level staff will likely 
result in a sizable impact on staff burden. The number of public notifications in both the LCRR and LCRI will 
almost certainly result in increased calls from consumers to both states and water systems. As such, the LCRI 
CoSTS may in fact underestimate the amount of dedicated staff time needed for effective rule implementation 
and oversight.  
 
Analysis of State Workforce Capacity 
 
Unfortunately, while an estimated 5,141,769 hours of staff time is needed annually for effective rule 
implementation and oversight, states will be incapable of dedicating this amount of time to oversight of a single 
rule. ASDWA’s 2018 Resource Needs Report estimated 3,600 state drinking water regulatory staff (including 
inspectors, engineers, compliance, management, and administrative staff) across all 57 primacy agencies, with 
a total availability of 7,200,017 hours based on an estimated 2,000-hour work year. Comparatively, ASDWA’s 
PFAS CoSTS estimated that the proposed PFAS regulation, an MCL rather than a treatment technique, would 
require an estimated 325,850 hours annually, or 4% of total available state staff time annually. This comparison 

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
C - 2 
emphasizes the complexity of the LCRI and indicates that there are likely opportunities to streamline this 
regulation ahead of final promulgation.  
 
In the context of state drinking water programs, it’s an unrealistic expectation to assume that primacy agencies 
will dedicate 71% of their time implementing a single rule, while simultaneously ensuring state-wide compliance 
with all other SDWA implementation activities, including oversight of the 91 regulated contaminants, as well as 
managing programs for operator certification, capacity development, source water protection, and the drinking 
water state revolving fund (DWSRF); conducting sanitary surveys; providing technical assistance to water 
systems; ensuring compliance and pursuing enforcement; conducting engineering plan review and approval; 
and managing massive amounts of data for all of these activities. States have significant concerns that they are 
being set up to fail based on the unrealistic expectations put forward by these rule changes without comparable 
increases in funding.  
 
Analysis of State Funding Constraints 
 
Funding options for state drinking water programs are limited, as funding for the states’ ability to fulfill their 
mission of overseeing safe drinking water comes from a limited number of sources. The primary sources for 
state funding come from EPA’s Public Water System Supervision Program (PWSS) and from the set-asides from 
EPA’s Drinking Water State Revolving Loan Fund (DWSRF). Some states can supplement federal funding through 
the states' general funds and fees from water systems collected during plan reviews, inspections, etc., but this 
is highly variable by state and will not serve as a substitute for sustainable funding from both the DWSRF and 
PWSS programs. 
 
State drinking water programs have been chronically underfunded, and ASDWA’s Members have been 
advocating for over 10 years the critical need for increases to PWSS and the DWSRF. The DWSRF and PWSS 
funding sources have not kept up with inflation, seeing only minor increases in the past decades. Inflation 
impacts have resulted in a significant overall funding decline for state programs, while programs simultaneously 
take on more oversight responsibilities.  
 
Historically, states used PWSS grants to implement their drinking water programs; however, for much of the 
past decade, this funding has remained relatively stagnant. As regulatory responsibilities increased and PWSS 
funding stayed the same, states began to rely more heavily on the DWSRF set-asides to bridge this gap and 
maintain their regulatory programs with the increased responsibilities. While the passage of the Infrastructure 
and Investment in Jobs Act (IIJA) added a significant amount of funding for DWSRF, and thus an increase in the 
availability of state set-asides for program implementation, the recent increases in using DWSRF funds for 
Congressionally Directed Spending (CDS) projects has resulted in a net-loss for state programs compared to pre-
IIJA DWSRF set-aside availability. Due to states’ historical reliance on the DWSRF set-asides to supplement the 
relatively flat PWSS funding, Congress’ utilization of the DWSRF funds for CDS projects has put state drinking 
water programs at risk at a time when states need more funding for their programs, not less.  
 
ASDWA’s 2019 State Resources Needs Report further emphasized how much state primacy agencies have been 
stretched beyond their capacity. The analysis found that drinking water programs needed a 65% increase in 
available funding (from $574 million to $949 million) and an 82% increase in existing FTEs (from 4,121 to 7,518) 
for effective program implementation in 2020. The analysis projected that by 2029, state drinking water 
program funding and workforce would need to double to ensure safe drinking water programs are effective. 

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators  
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
C - 3 
This analysis did not include estimates for addressing new and emerging issues, such as addressing PFAS and 
cybersecurity.  
 
The potential fiscal impacts to state drinking water programs from the proposed LCRI can be estimated by 
comparing the estimated staff hours needed for LCRI implementation to the current levels of Federal funding 
from the PWSS program. Using the national average loaded hourly rate for state employees of $59.90 (salary 
plus benefits and overhead) and the time estimates outlined in CoSTS, full implementation of the final LCRI 
would cost the states $307,991,963 annually and $47,866,988 for initial regulatory startup. In addition to the 
91 contaminants regulated under the SDWA, states have struggled with meeting both the regulatory 
requirements and additional actions to address non-regulated contaminants such as cyanotoxins, cybersecurity, 
and PFAS over the past decade as increases to PWSS have not aligned with increases in regulatory oversight 
needs. While the FY21 increase of 5.4% to PWSS funding (to $112 million) was a small step to closing the funding 
gap, the proposed LCRI alone is expected to cost almost three times as much as the current PWSS funding 
available to implement SDWA. Without significant increases to PWSS and full appropriation of DWSRF funding 
to counteract the impact of CDS spending, states will be forced to make tough decisions about how to prioritize 
support to existing programs to implement the final LCRI. 
 
States support EPA’s efforts to update the regulation addressing lead in drinking water and are ready to take 
whatever steps are necessary to protect our Nation from the risks of lead in drinking water; however, 
implementation at current funding levels is unsustainable, if not impossible. Additional funding would allow 
states to more effectively implement the LCRI, and manage other emerging issues, using contracted support or 
through the creation of additional positions at the state. Without this support, our collective goal of protecting 
public health through safe drinking water will continue to face capacity and implementation challenges.  
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
ASDWA Cover Letter Comments CoSTS on Proposed LCRR 
 
ASDWA LCRR CoSTS in Excel 
 
ASDWA LT_LCR CoSTS 
 
ASDWA PFAS CoSTS 
 
PWSS Table from EPA 
 
ASDWA CDS White Paper 
 
ASDWA 2019 Resource Needs Report 
 
Employment Cost Index - September 2023 (bls.gov) 
 
 

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Costs of States Transactions Study (CoSTS) for EPA's Proposed LCRR
Association of State Drinking Water Administrators (ASDWA)
1/31/24 Version
The summary below is based on nine categories taken from EPA's Proposed LCRI Economic Analysis and also pulls data from EPA's LCRR Economic Analysis.
Hours are estimated annually and in some categories include actions that may happen only once every five years, for example.
All totals are being shown as whole numbers.
For the  number of systems, this model uses data from SDWIS  downloaded on 1/2/24 that included community water systems (CWS) and non-transient non-community water systems (NTNCWS).
In some cases, ASDWA assumes one-time activities in EPA's LCRI Economic Analysis may actually occur on an annual basis.
Estimates for this model are based on federally available data and not individual state capabilties.
Regulatory Start-Up
587,151
                       
-
                                     
Data Reporting
181,300
                       
-
                                     
Tap Sampling
1,418,292
                    
3,920
                                
Lead Testing in Schools & Child Care Facilities
634,208
                       
133,280
                            
Corrosion Control Treatment
1,029,893
                    
-
                                     
Sample Site Assessment
220,966
                       
-
                                     
Lead Service Line Inventory and Replacement
941,305
                       
138,859
                            
Point-of-Use Filter Requirements
21,236
                         
51,959
                              
Public Education & Notification Requirements
107,419
                       
471,097
                            
Totals
5,141,769
                    
799,115
                            
Estimated One-Time 
Staff Hours
Estimated Annual  
State Staff Hours

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Regulatory Start-Up
Model Inputs
EPA Exhibit 4-144 Economic Analysis
Model Outputs
CWS
NTNCWS
Annual Hours Input
Large systems >50,000
1,054
      
1,048
       
6
              
Medium 3,301-50,000
8,655
      
8,462
       
193
          
Small 25-3,300
56,931
39,889
     
17,032
    
Total number of systems
66,640
Adoption of Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRI)
States
Hours Ea. Total Hour Hours Ea.
49
3,200
       
156,800
  
640
Modify State Data Management System
Unclear how the modernized SDWIS might accommodate LCRR/LCRI and what state changes might be needed.
States
Hours Ea. Total Hours
49
3,700
       
181,300
  
740
System Training and Technical Assistance
States
Hours Ea. Total Hours
49
4,000
       
196,000
  
800
State Staff Training
Assume three state size categories for training for state staff to properly trained on all components of LCRI.
Lead service line inventories & replacement, corrosion control treatment, public education, sampling & simultaneous compliance
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
Large
9
2,000
       
18,000
    
196
Medium
20
1,000
       
20,000
    
196
Small
20
500
          
10,000
    
196
Not Wyoming or DC
Total
49
48,000
    
This total for state staff training is in the same range as what was estimated for the Revised Total Coliform Rule (RTCR).
Based off EPA Exhibit 4-146 Economic Analysis
1,040
       
2,347
       
1,560
       
104
          
5,051
       
Annual Tot 587,151
  
State Annual Administrative Activities
Coordinate with EPA
Provide ongoing TA
Report to SDWIS/FED
Train Staff for Annual Adminstration 

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Data Reporting
Model Inputs
Large systems >50,000
1,054
       
Model Outputs
Medium 3,301-50,000
8,655
       
Annual Hours Input
Small 25-3,300
56,931
Total number of systems
66,640
States
Hours Ea. Total Hours
49
3,700
       
181,300
  
740
Annual To 181,300
  

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Tap Sampling
Model Inputs
EPA Exhibit 4-144 Economic Analysis
Model Outputs
One time
# of systems
Systems with LSLs
Systems without LSLs
# systems with ALE
Large systems >50,000
1,054
           
Complex Sampling Plans
527
         
527
              
183
                              
Medium 3,301-50,000
8,655
           
Moderate Sampling Plans
4,328
      
4,328
           
866
                              
Small 25-3,300
56,931
Simple Sampling Plans
14,233
    
42,698
        
4,953
                           
Total number of systems
66,640
19,087
    
 Total # systems
47,553
        
Total # systems
6,002
                           
Assume based on Exhibit 5-28 in EPA's LCRR Economic Analysis showing minimum sample number that because more samples are being taken more time spent reviewing.
Assume review includes ensuring system used accurate sample sites and followed new protocol for providing instructions and making results available within 60 days.
Assume more follow-up will be needed as system size decreases.
Assume violations increase as system size decreases.
Assume hours spent on systems without LSL are less in all aspects.
Assume that this includes both lead and copper tap sampling.
Assumes 30% of all CWSs will have LSLs - 50% of large and medium CWSs and 25% of small CWSs have LSLs.
EPA's LCRR Economic Analysis used for the percentages for systems with ALEs.
"Tracking" in this workbook entails: sending monitoring schedules, tracking annual compliance schedules, finding sampler and sending sampling reminder, back and forth questions on protocols, etc.
Review of Compliance Monitoring Plans Based on LSL Inventories
Large Systems with LSL
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
Medium Systems with LSL
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Small Systems with LSL
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Tracking
Tracking
Tracking
# of systems
527
1
527
              
# of systems
4,328
            
1
4,328
                       
# of systems
14,233
            
1
14,233
                         
Review
Review
Review
527
6
3,162
           
4,328
            
4
17,310
                    
14,233
            
2
28,466
                         
Follow-up
Follow-up
Follow-up
15%
79
4
316
              
25%
1,082
            
4
4,328
                       
40%
5,693
              
4
22,772
                         
Reporting
Reporting
Reporting
527
0.5
264
              
4,328
            
0.5
2,164
                       
14,233
            
0.5
7,116
                           
Violations
Violations
Violations
2%
11
4
42
                
20%
866
               
4
3,462
                       
33%
4,697
              
4
18,787
                         
Return to
Return to
Return to
Compliance
11
4
42
                
Compliance
866
               
4
3,462
                       
Compliance
4,697
              
4
18,787
                         
Plan
Plan
Plan
Re-eval.
474
3
1,423
           
Re-eval.
3,895
            
2
7,790
                       
Re-eval.
12,809
            
2
25,619
                         
90%
Total
5,776
           
90%
Subtotal
42,842
                    
90%
Subtotal
135,780
                      
5,776
                       
42,842
                         
Total
48,618
                    
5,776
                           
Total
184,399
                      

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Review of Compliance Monitoring Plans Based on LSL Inventories
Large Systems without LSL
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
Medium Systems without LSL
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Small Systems without LSL
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Tracking
Tracking
Tracking
# of systems
530
1
530
              
# of systems
186
               
1
186
                          
# of systems
63,565
            
1
63,565
                         
Review
Review
Review
530
2
1,060
           
186
               
1
186
                          
63,565
            
1
63,565
                         
Follow-up
Follow-up
Follow-up
15%
80
2
159
              
25%
47
                  
2
93
                            
40%
25,426
            
2
50,852
                         
Reporting
Reporting
Reporting
530
0.5
265
              
186
               
0.5
93
                            
63,565
            
0.5
31,782
                         
Violations
Violations
Violations
2%
11
2
21
                
20%
37
                  
2
74
                            
33%
20,976
            
2
41,953
                         
Return to
Return to
Return to
Compliance
11
2
21
                
Compliance
37
                  
2
74
                            
Compliance
20,976
            
2
41,953
                         
Plan
Plan
Plan
Re-eval.
159
2
318
              
Re-eval.
56
                  
1
56
                            
Re-eval.
19,069
            
1
19,069
                         
30%
Total
2,374
           
30%
Subtotal
763
                          
30%
Subtotal
312,740
                      
2,374
                       
763
                              
Total
3,138
                       
2,374
                           
Assumes in the above estimate that systems without LSL will still require some review of their monitoring plans due to changes in requirements.
Total
315,877
                      
States
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
49
80
                
3,920
           
Total Hours to Build Template

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Review of Monitoring Data 
Large Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
Medium Systems
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Small Systems
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Tracking
Tracking
Tracking
# of systems
1,054
               
2
2,108
           
# of systems
8,655
            
1
8,655
                       
# of systems
56,931
            
1
56,931
                         
Review
Review
Review
1,054
               
4
4,216
           
8,655
            
3
25,965
                    
56,931
            
2
113,862
                      
Follow-up
Follow-up
Follow-up
15%
158
4
632
              
25%
2,164
            
4
8,655
                       
40%
22,772
            
4
91,090
                         
Reporting
Reporting
Reporting
1,054
               
0.5
527
              
8,655
            
0.5
4,328
                       
56,931
            
0.5
28,466
                         
Violations
Violations
Violations
2%
21
4
84
                
20%
1,731
            
4
6,924
                       
33%
18,787
            
4
75,149
                         
Return to
Return to
Return to
Compliance
21
4
84
                
Compliance
1,731
            
4
6,924
                       
Compliance
18,787
            
4
75,149
                         
Total
7,652
           
Subtotal
61,451
                    
Subtotal
440,646
                      
7,652
                       
61,451
                         
Total
69,103
                    
7,652
                           
Total
509,748
                      
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
Large
Medium
Small
Total *1.2%
2
27,767
          
84,320
                    
389,475
  
683,172
      
13,884
            
Assumes denied requests and 1.2% samples invalidated annually.
Above estimate utilizes numbers from the section 141.86 in the LCR for monitoring requirements.
Total #Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
66,640
2
133,280
      
Small Sys. w/ LSL
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
Medium Sys. w/ LSL Hours Ea.
Total HourLarge Sys. w/ LSL
Hours Ea. Total Hours
14,233
1
14,233
         
4,328
                       
1
4,328
      
527
                          
2
1,054
           
Small Sys. w/o LSL
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
Medium Sys. w/o LS Hours Ea.
Total HourLarge Sys. w/o LSL
Hours Ea. Total Hours
63,565
                         
1
63,565
         
186
                          
1
186
         
530
2
1060
Systems w/ No CCT
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
Systems w/ CCT
Hours Ea. 
Total Hours
Assumes the above calculation will happen twice per year (5 hours*2 and 8.5 hours*2)
Systems w/ No CCT
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
Systems w/ CCT
Hours Ea. 
Total Hours
Total #Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
6,002
0.5
3,001
           
Annual Total
1,418,292
   
One-Time Total
3,920
           
Review Source Water Monitoring 
Results
17
17,918
    
Review Copper WQP Sampling Data 
and Compliance with OWQPs
6,002
                           
10
60,019
         
17
17,918
    
Review Lead WQP Sampling Data and 
Compliance with OWQPs
6,002
                           
10
60,019
         
1,054
                       
1,054
                       
Review Sample invalidation Requests
13,884
# Invalidated samples/year
Review Customer Notification 
Certifications
Review Monitoring Results & 90th 
Percentile Calculations

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Lead Testing in Schools and Child Care Facilities
Model Inputs
Model Outputs
Large systems >50,000
1,054
      
Medium 3,301-50,000
8,655
      
Small 25-3,300
56,931
Total number of systems
66,640
Assume the number of hours per state includes the following:
States
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
49
1,000
                                                 
49,000
            
Total number of systems
Initial tech.
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
 assistance
66,640
                                               
3
199,920
  
Tracking
 # of systems
66,640
                                               
0.5
33,320
    
Review
66,640
                                               
1
66,640
    
Follow-up
15%
9,996
                                                 
1
9,996
      
Reporting
66,640
                                               
1
66,640
    
Violations
10%
6,664
                                                 
0.5
3,332
      
Return to
Compliance
6,664
                                                 
0.5
3,332
      
Total
383,180
  
Total #SystemsHours Ea. Total #Systems
66,640
1
66,640
    
The above estimate assumes states will only review the list to ensure it was completed, not checking for accuracy.
Total #SystemsHours Ea. Total Hours
66,640
1
66,640
    
Hours Ea. Total Hour
Hours Ea. Total Hours
1
65,586
    
3
3,162
      
Total #SystemsHours Ea. Total Hours
                         
                                                 
Annual Total
634,208
  
One-Time Tota 133,280
  
    
 
    
   
Review School and Child Care Facility Sampling 
Results After Individual Sampling Events
66,640
2
133,280
  
Ongoing conversations with systems on number of licensed schools and child care facilities in their area, coordinating with other entities (Dept. of Ed., Dept of Social 
Services, etc.), providing updated guidance. Answering questions from the public, schools, and child care facilities. 
Provide Templates, Translations, and Review 
Updated System Sampling Instructions
Review List of Schools and Child Care Facilities
Review School and Child Care Facility Testing 
Program Materials
Medium & Small Systems
65,586
                                
Large Systems
1,054
                           

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Corrosion Control Treatment
Model Inputs
# of systems
CWS
NTNCWS
# systems with ALE
Model Outputs
Large systems >50,000
1,054
               
1,048
        
6
                                
183
           
Medium 3,301-50,000
8,655
               
8,462
        
193
                            
866
           
Small 25-3,300
56,931
39,889
      
17,032
                      
4,953
        
Total number of systems
66,640
6,002
        
Assumes categories based upon EPA's Exhibit 4-160 in the LCRI Economic Analysis.
Assumes NTNCWS are counted.
Assume "review" includes: review CCT study and determine type of CCT to be installed, along with approaval of engineering plans.
Assumes large systems are already conducting CCT, so only counting ALEs
Assumes 50% of medium systems have CCT installed will be required to conduct CCT studies to designate OCCT, and add medium systems assumed to have ALEs
Assumes NO small systems currently have CCT, and is only accounting for estimated number of small systems with ALEs - 50% CCT, 25% POU, 25% lead plumbing replacement
Large sys. 
w/ ALE 
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
Medium sys. w/ ALE 
and CCT that needs 
to be optimized 
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Tracking
Tracking
# of systems
183
                                    
2
                             
367
                   
# of systems
5,193
        
2
              
10,386
                    
Review
Review
183
                                    
40
                           
7,336
               
5,193
        
50
            
259,650
                  
Follow-up
Follow-up
25%
46
                                      
10
                           
458
                   
25%
1,298
        
10
            
12,983
                    
Reporting
Reporting
183
                                    
1
                             
183
                   
5,193
        
1
              
5,193
                      
Violations
Violations
2%
4
                                        
6
                             
22
                     
20%
1,039
        
6
              
6,232
                      
Return to
Return to
Compliance
4
                                        
4
                             
15
                     
Compliance
1,039
        
4
              
4,154
                      
Periodic CCT
Periodic CCT
Re-eval.
18
                                      
40
                           
734
                   
Re-eval.
519
           
20
            
10,386
                    
10%
Subtotal
9,115
               
10%
Subtotal
308,984
                  
Small sys. w/ ALE 
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
Tracking
# of systems
2,476
                                 
2
                             
4,953
               
Review
2,476
                                 
25
                           
61,912
             
Follow-up
25%
619
                                    
10
                           
6,191
               
Reporting
2,476
                                 
1
                             
2,476
               
Violations
33%
495
                                    
6
                             
2,972
               
Return to
Compliance
495
                                    
4
                             
1,981
               
Periodic CCT
Re-eval.
248
                                    
20
                           
4,953
               
10%
Subtotal
85,439
             

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Small System Flexibility
Assumes NO small systems currently have CCT, and is only accounting for estimated number of small systems with ALEs
Assumes 50% small systems with ALEs implement  CCT.
Assumes 25% small systems with ALE implement POU and remaining 25% replace lead bearing plumbing.
POU
25% small systems 
Small Systems Lead Bearing
25% small systems
Hours Ea. 
Total Hours
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Tracking
Tracking
# of systems
1,238
                                 
2
2,476
               
# of systems
1,238
        
2
2,476
                      
Review
Review
1,238
                                 
4
4,953
               
1,238
        
4
4,953
                      
Follow-up
Follow-up
50%
619
                                    
4
2,476
               
50%
619
           
4
2,476
                      
Reporting
Reporting
1,238
                                 
0.5
619
                   
1,238
        
0.5
619
                          
Violations
Violations
33%
409
                                    
4
1,634
               
33%
409
           
4
1,634
                      
Return to
Return to
Compliance
409
                                    
4
1,634
               
Compliance
409
           
4
1,634
                      
Periodic CCT
Periodic CCT
Re-eval.
124
                                    
4
495
                   
Re-eval.
124
           
4
495
                          
10%
Subtotal
14,289
             
10%
Subtotal
14,289
                    
Small Sys.
Hours Ea.
Total Hours Medium Sys.
Hours Ea.
Total Hour Large Sys.
Hours Ea. Total Hours
4,953
2
9,906
        
866
                            
4
3,462
      
183
                          
8
1,467
             
Small Sys. w/ LSL
Hours Ea.
Total Hours Medium Sys. w/ LSL Hours Ea.
Total Hour Large Sys. w/ LSL
Hours Ea. Total Hours
2,476
28
69,342
      
5,193
                         
50
259,650
  
527
                          
50
26,350
           
States
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
49
40
                     
1,960
        
Small Sys.
Hours Ea.
Total Hours Medium Sys. w/o LSLHours Ea.
Total Hour Large Sys. w/o LSL Hours Ea. Total Hours
56,931
2.5
142,328
    
8,655
                         
3.5
30,293
    
1,054
                      
4.5
4,743
             
Small Sys.
Hours Ea.
Total Hours Medium Sys. w/o LSLHours Ea.
Total Hour Large Sys. w/o LSL Hours Ea. Total Hours
786
46
36,142
      
129
                            
84
10,840
    
16
                            
82
1,294
             
For the above estimate, EPA assumes 4.6% of all CWS and 3.3% of all NTNCWS will change treatment each year. 
4.6% divided by 3 (small, medium and large) 1.5% multiplied by each total system size plus 3.3% divided by 3 (small, medium, large) 1.1%.
Annual Total
1,029,893
                         
Review Water Quality Data with Sys. 
During Sanitary Survey
Review CCT Guidance and 
Applicability to Individual Systems
Consulting System on Treatment 
Change
Review of OWQPs
Review Revised CCT Study and 
Determine Needed CCT Adjustment

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Sample Site Assessment
Model Inputs
# of systems
CWS
NTNCWS
Model Outputs
Large systems >50,000
1,054
                
1,048
      
6
              
Medium 3,301-50,000
8,655
                
8,462
      
193
          
Small 25-3,300
56,931
39,889
    
17,032
    
Total number of systems
66,640
# of systems
% for DSSA # of systems required for DSSA 
All systems
66,640
30%
19,992
    
Assumes NTNCWS included in system count.
Consult w/ Sys. Before DSSA CCT Adjustments
Total #SystemsHours Ea. Total Hours
66,640
2
133,280
       
Review Report on DSSA Responses
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
Hours Ea. Total Hours
1
65,586
              
2
2,108
      
Grand Total
220,966
  
Medium & Small Systems
Large Systems
65,586
                               
1,054
                          

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Lead Service Line (LSL) Inventories and Replacement Plans
Model Inputs
Model Outputs
One Time
# of systems CWS
NTNCWS
Systems with LSLs
Systems without LSLs
For NTNCWS Using Exhibit 4-17 2.5% assumption
Large systems >50,000
1,054
           
1,048
           
6
               
524
               
Complex LSL Inventories & LSLR Plans
530
          
0
Medium 3,301-50,000
8,655
           
8,462
           
193
          
4,231
            
Moderate LSL Inventories & LSLR Plans
4,424
      
5
Small 25-3,300
56,931
39,889
         
17,032
     
9,972
            
Simpler LSL Inventories & LSLR Plans
46,959
    
426
Total number of systems
66,640
49,399
         
17,231
     
14,727
         
 Total number of systems with LSLs
51,913
    
Total no. of systems
without LSLs
Review Updated Service Line Inventory with Lead Connector Information
Total #Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
66,640
1
66,640
     
Review Annual Service Line Inventory Updates
66,640
1
66,640
     
Review Validation Report
49,399
0.5
24,700
     
Above estimate assumes only CWS are counted. 
Review SLR Plan
Large Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hour Medium Syst Hours Ea.
Total Hour Small SystemsHours Ea.
Total HourNTNCWS with LSLs Hours Ea. Total Hours
524
                              
18
9,432
       
4,231
           
10
42,310
     
9,972
            
6
59,834
    
431
                          
6
2,584
            
Review System's Annual Service Line Replacement Report
Small Sys.
Hours Ea.
Total Hour Medium Sys. Hours Ea.
Total Hour Large Sys.
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
9,972
                           
1
9,972
       
4,231
           
1
4,231
       
524
               
3
1,572
      
Small NTNCWS
Hours Ea. 
Total Hour Medium NTNHours Ea. 
Total Hours
426
1
426
5
1
5
Review Baseline Annual Service Line Replacement Report
Large Systems
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Medium Systems
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Small Systems
Hours Ea. Total Hours
NTNCWS with LSLs
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Tracking
Tracking
Tracking
Tracking
# of systems
524
               
1
524
              
# of systems
4,231
           
1
4,231
                       
# of systems
9,972
      
1
9,972
           
# of systems
431
          
2
861
                
Review
Review
Review
Review
524
               
8
4,192
           
4,231
           
4
16,924
                    
9,972
      
2
19,945
        
431
          
6
2,584
             
Follow-up
Follow-up
Follow-up
Follow-up
10%
52
3
157
              
10%
423
              
2
846
                          
25%
2,493
      
1
2,493
           
40%
172
          
4
689
                
Reporting
Reporting
Reporting
Reporting
524
0.5
262
              
4,231
           
0.5
2,116
                       
9,972
      
0.5
4,986
           
431
          
0.5
215
                
Violations
Violations
Violations
Violations
2%
10
3
31
                 
20%
846
              
2
1,692
                       
33%
3,291
      
1
3,291
           
33%
142
          
4
568
                
Return to
Return to
Return to
Return to
Compliance
10
3
31
                 
Compliance
846
              
2
1,692
                       
Compliance
3,291
      
1
3,291
           
Compliance
142
          
4
568
                
Periodic LSLR
Periodic LSLR
Periodic LSLR
Periodic LSLR
Plan Re-eval.
1,048
            
4
4,192
           
Plan Re-eval.
8,462
           
2
16,924
                    
Plan Re-eval.
19,945
    
1
19,945
        
Plan Re-eval.
861
          
1
861
                
200%
Total
9,390
           
200%
Subtotal
44,426
                    
200%
Subtotal
63,922
        
200%
Subtotal
6,347
             
9,390
                       
44,426
        
63,922
           
Total
53,816
                    
9,390
           
44,426
           
Total
117,738
      
9,390
             
Total
124,085
        

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Initial tracking, review and follow-up for LSL inventories - complexity of inventories based on system size and whether system has LSLs or not
Assume all systems have to conduct an inventory to determine if they have LSLs or not
Assume review of systems with LSLs will take more time than systems that don't have LSLs
Assume 100% of LSL inventories would need to be re-evaluated annually.
Systems would find more LSLs than in original inventory or find a few LSLs in the system that were unknown initially
Assumes large NTNCWS are not included due to less than 1 being reported for having LSLs based off Exhibit 4-17 in EPA's Economic Analysis
Assumes 30% of all CWSs will have LSLs - 50% of large and medium CWSs and 25% of small CWSs have LSLs
Lead Service Line Inventories-First inventory after first three years plus two annual re-evaluations in years four and five
Large Systems with LSLs
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Medium Sys. with LSLs
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Small Sys. with LSLs
Hours Ea. Total Hours
NTNCWS with LSLs
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Tracking
Tracking
Tracking
Tracking
# of systems
524
1
524
              
# of systems
4,231
           
1
4,231
                       
# of systems
9,972
      
1
9,972
           
# of systems
431
          
1
431
                
Review
Review
Review
Review
524
8
4,192
           
4,231
           
8
33,848
                    
9,972
      
4
39,889
        
431
          
4
1,723
             
Follow-up
Follow-up
Follow-up
Follow-up
15%
79
                 
4
314
              
25%
1,058
           
4
4,231
                       
40%
3,989
      
4
15,956
        
40%
172
          
4
689
                
Reporting
Reporting
Reporting
Reporting
524
               
0.5
262
              
4,231
           
0.5
2,116
                       
9,972
      
0.5
4,986
           
431
          
0.5
215
                
Violations
Violations
Violations
Violations
2%
10
                 
4
42
                 
20%
846
              
4
3,385
                       
33%
3,291
      
4
13,163
        
33%
142
          
4
568
                
Return to
Return to
Return to
Return to
Compliance
10
                 
4
42
                 
Compliance
846
              
4
3,385
                       
Compliance
3,291
      
4
13,163
        
Compliance
142
          
4
568
                
Annual LSLI
Annual LSLI
Annual LSLI
Annual LSLI
Re-evaluation
1,048
            
8
8,384
           
Re-evaluation
8,462
           
8
67,696
                    
Re-evaluation
19,945
    
4
79,778
        
Re-evaluation
861
          
4
3,445
             
200%
Total
13,760
         
200%
Subtotal
118,891
                  
200%
Subtotal
176,908
      
200%
Subtotal
7,639
             
13,760
                    
118,891
      
176,908
        
19,674 Total
132,651
                  
13,760
        
118,891
        
Total
309,559
      
13,760
           
Total
317,198
        
Large Systems without LSLs
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Medium Sys. without LSLs Hours Ea. Total Hours
Small Sys. without LSLs Hours Ea. Total Hours
Small NTNCWS without LSLHours Ea. Total Hours
Medium/Large NTNCWS witHours Ea. Total Hours
Tracking
Tracking
Tracking
Tracking
Tracking
# of systems
530
1
530
              
# of systems
4,424
           
1
4,424
                       
# of systems
46,959
    
1
46,959
        
# of systems
16,606
    
1
16,606
           
# of systems
188
          
2
376
           
Review
Review
Review
Review
Review
530
2
1,060
           
4,424
           
2
8,848
                       
46,959
    
2
93,918
        
16,606
    
2
33,212
           
188
          
2
376
           
Follow-up
Follow-up
Follow-up
Follow-up
Follow-up
10%
53
                 
2
106
              
10%
442
              
2
885
                          
20%
9,392
      
2
18,784
        
40%
6,642
      
2
13,285
           
40%
75
            
2
151
           
Reporting
Reporting
Reporting
Reporting
Reporting
530
               
0.5
265
              
4,424
           
0.5
2,212
                       
46,959
    
0.5
23,479
        
16,606
    
0.5
8,303
             
188
          
0.5
94
              
Violations
Violations
Violations
Violations
Violations
2%
11
                 
2
21
                 
10%
442
              
2
885
                          
20%
9,392
      
2
18,784
        
33%
5,480
      
2
10,960
           
33%
62
            
2
124
           
Return to
Return to
Return to
Return to
Return to
Compliance
11
                 
2
21
                 
Compliance
442
              
2
885
                          
Compliance
9,392
      
2
18,784
        
Compliance
5,480
      
2
10,960
           
Compliance
62
            
2
124
           
Total
2,003
           
Subtotal
18,138
                    
Subtotal
220,706
      
Periodic LSLI
Periodic LSLR
2,003
                       
18,138
        
Plan Re-eval.
4,982
      
3
14,946
           
Plan Re-eval.
56
            
3
169
           
Total
20,142
                    
2,003
           
30%
Subtotal
108,272
        
30%
Subtotal
1,415
        
Total
240,848
      
220,706
        
108,272
    
18,138
           
220,706
    
2,003
             
18,138
      
Total
349,120
        
2,003
        
Annual Tot
941,305
       
Total
350,535
    
One-Time T
138,859
       
Total LSL Replacement and Inventory 
791,819
        

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Point-of-Use (POU)
Model Inputs
# of systems
CWS
NTNCWS
Model Outputs
Large systems >50,000
1,054
                               
1,048
       
6
               
One Time
Medium 3,301-50,000
8,655
                               
8,462
       
193
          
Small 25-3,300
56,931
39,889
     
17,032
     
Total number of systems
66,640
49,399
     
17,231
     
Review of POU Plan
Small Sys
Hours Ea. Total Hours
9,972
2
19,945
            
Small NTNCW
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Medium NTNCW
Hours Ea. Total HoursLarge NTNCW
Hours Ea. Total Hours
426
2
852
                 
5
                                       
3
14
            
0
                             
4
1
               
Provide Templates for POU Outreach Materials for Small Sys. And NTNCWS
Small Sys and NTNCWS
Hours Ea. Total Hours
57,120
0.5
28,560
            
Review POU Public Education Materials
Small Sys
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Small and Medium NTNCHours Ea. Total HoursLarge NTNCW
Hours Ea. Total Hours
4,953
0.5
2,476
              
199
                                  
0.5
100
          
6
                             
2
12
            
Review Sample Invalidation Request for POU Monitoring
Systems
Hours Ea. Total Hours
666
2
1,333
              
Review Customer Notification Certifications
Systems
Hours Ea. Total Hours
19,680
0.5
9,840
              
Review Annual POU Program Report
Small Sys 
Hours Ea. Total Hours
Small NTNCWS
Hours Ea. Total HoursMedium NTNCWS Hours Ea. Total HoursLarge NTNCHours Ea. Total Hours
19,680
0.5
9,840
              
426
0.5
213
5
2
10
0
3
0
Annual Total
21,236
                            
One-Time Tota
51,959
                            

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Public Notification and Education
Model Inputs
Model Outputs
total # of 
systems
CWS
NTNCWS
One Time
# systems 
with ALE
# systems with 
LSL/sites >AL
Large systems >50,000
1,054
      
1,048
       
6
                          
183
            
756
                     
Medium 3,301-50,000
8,655
      
8,462
       
193
                     
866
            
4,042
                  
Small 25-3,300
56,931
39,889
     
17,032
                
4,953
         
6,661
                  
Total number of systems
66,640
49,399
     
17,231
                
6,002
         
11,459
                
Review Copy of 3 Calendar Day Notice and Certification
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
66,640
0.5
33,320
    
Provide Templates for Updated CCR and Translating Material
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
49,399
2.5
123,498
  
Translating CCR Updates Annually
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
49,399
0.5
24,700
    
Provide Templates for Local and State Health Departments Lead Outreach
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
49,399
0.5
24,700
    
Review Lead Outreach Materials for State and Local Health Departments
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
49,399
1.5
74,099
    
Participate in Joint Communication Efforts with Local and State Health Departments
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
49,399
1
49,399
    
Review Public Education Materials for Service Line Distrubances
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
14,727
1.5
22,091
    

Appendix C: Cost of States’ Transactions Study by the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators 
EPA Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801
Provide Templates for Inventory-Related Outreach Materials
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
15,158
0.5
7,579
      
Review General Inventory-Related Outreach Materials
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
66,640
1.5
99,960
    
Review Public Education Certifications
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
6,002
1
6,002
      
Provide Template and Review Revised Lead Langauge
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
15,158
2
30,316
    
Consult with CWS on Other Public Education Activities in Response to a Lead ALE
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
6,002
2
12,004
    
Provide Templates for Systems with ALEs
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
6,002
2
12,004
    
Review Outreach Materials Provided by Systems with Multiple Lead ALEs
Systems
Hours Ea.
Total Hours
6,002
2
12,004
    
Consult on Filter Program for Systems with Multiple Lead ALEs
Small Sys
Hours Ea.
Total Hour Medium SyHours Ea.
Total Hours
Large Sys. Hours Ea. Total Hours
4,953
2
9,906
      
866
          
6
5,193
                  
183
          
8
1,467
      
Review Plan for Making Filters Available
Small Sys
Hours Ea.
Total Hour NTNCWS Hours Ea.
Total Hours
14,925
2
29,850
    
426
          
1
426
                     
Annual Total
107,419
   
471,097
   
One-Time Total

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0789 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0791 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
To: United States Environmental Protection Agency  
  
From: Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility   
  
Date: February 2, 2024 
  
RE: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 Lead and Copper Rule Improvements   
  
  
Thank you for the opportunity to comment publicly on the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency’s (“EPA”) proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (“LCRI”) document EPA-
HQ-OW-2022-0801. Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility (“PEER”) writes to 
offer changes to the proposed LCRI for consideration.  
  
The proposed LCRI aims to achieve complete lead pipe replacement in ten years, locate legacy 
lead pipes to replace them, improve tap sampling informed by best practices, lower the lead 
action level from 15 µg/L to 10 µg/L, and strengthen certain protections to reduce lead exposure. 
PEER supports many of the EPA’s proposed improvements, which mark a step in the right 
direction for lead regulation.   
  
However, PEER has several concerns about the proposed LCRI. First, there is no safe level of 
lead exposure; therefore, the EPA should lower the action level from 10 µg/L to as close to 0 
µg/L as possible. Second, the EPA should specifically name safe alternatives to lead pipes and 
discourage unsafe, regrettable alternatives, such as pipes made with Chlorinated Polyvinyl 
Chloride (“CPVC”) and Polyvinyl Chloride (“PVC”). Third, the EPA should discourage partial 
pipe replacement on public property and require full lead pipe replacement to avoid unwanted 
asymmetric public health impacts on communities of color.   
  
The Lead Action Level Should be Reduced from 10 µg/L to 0 µg/L  
  
I.There Is No Safe Level of Lead Exposure  
  
Lead is a metabolic poison that, when ingested, attacks organs and many different body systems, 
including the blood-forming, nervous, urinary, and reproductive systems.1 Lead is toxic to adults, 
but fetuses, infants, and children are at greatest risk of lead poisoning.2 Even at blood lead 
concentrations as low as 3.5 µg/L, lead can impact intelligence in children and increase 
behavioral and learning difficulties.3 Therefore, at 10 µg/L, the proposed allowable concentration 
in the LCRI, there would likely be adverse health impacts on children and other sensitive 
groups.  
   
II.Long-term Exposure to Lead Harms Human Health  

 
PEER • 962 Wayne Ave • Suite 610 • Silver Spring, MD 20910 • 202-265-7337 • www.peer.org 
  
Further, studies show that cumulative lead exposure over time can cause adverse health impacts 
for everyone, while high, limited exposure to lead can be lethal.4 Despite EPA admitting that 
there is no safe level of lead, it only reduced the action level to 10 µg/L, which could still cause 
adverse health impacts over a longer period of time.5 To remedy this issue and completely reduce 
the risk of lead contamination in drinking water, EPA must reduce the action level from 10 µg/L 
to as close to 0 µg/L as possible.   
  
EPA Must List Copper Pipes as a Safe Alternative to Lead  
  
I.CPVC and PVC are Unsafe, Regrettable Alternatives that the EPA Should 
Specifically Advise Against  
  
When used in pipes, CPVC and PVC can leach harmful chemicals into drinking water, which 
cause health hazards, including cancer, endocrine system disruption, reproductive impairment, 
and developmental problems in children.6 A 2018 systematic review and meta-analysis found 
increased odds of developing asthma and allergies in adults and children exposed to PVC 
indoors.7    
  
Moreover, CPVC and PVC are not acceptable alternatives to lead since they cause adverse health 
problems that the LCRI aims to avoid. For example, EPA has classified vinyl chloride, a toxic 
gas used to make PVC, as a known human carcinogen through inhalation and oral route.8 
Exposure to vinyl chloride is linked to an increased risk of liver, brain, and lung cancers, as well 
as lymphoma and leukemia.9 Further, PVC pipes may even contain lead due to the use of lead 
compounds as stabilizers during manufacturing.10 Thus, replacing lead pipes with CPVC or PVC 
piping would only replace one toxic type of pipe with another and is not a feasible long-term 
solution for public health. EPA should advise against using CPVC and PVC pipes to replace lead 
pipes in the LCRI.   
  
II.Copper is a Safe Alternative to Lead that EPA should Specifically Advocate For  
  
Copper is an essential nutrient for humans contained in many foods.11 High-level exposure to 
copper through ingestion causes, at worst, minor gastrointestinal distress, unlike high-level 
exposure to lead and PVC, which can be lethal.12 Although ingesting high levels of copper every 
day over time can cause more serious health problems, such as kidney or liver damage13, EPA 
already regulates copper in the Lead and Copper Rule, which significantly minimizes the risk of 
serious health impacts by optimizing corrosion control.14  
   
III.The Benefits of Copper Outweigh the Relatively Insignificant Costs Compared 
to Lead and PVC  
  
Copper is a safe, lead-free, impermeable, long-lasting, durable, and sustainable alternative to 
lead and PVC.15 Although the upfront capital cost of installing PVC as a pipe alternative is low 
compared to copper, the long-term economic and public health costs of PVC pipes are high.16 
Moreover, because copper pipes are more durable and reliable than PVC pipes, they do not 
require frequent maintenance, making the life-cycle cost of copper pipes lower than that of PVC 
pipes.17 Thus, EPA should advocate using copper pipes to replace lead pipes.   

 
PEER • 962 Wayne Ave • Suite 610 • Silver Spring, MD 20910 • 202-265-7337 • www.peer.org 
  Complete Lead Pipe Replacement Is Required Under Executive Order 12898  
  
I.Lead Pipes Disproportionately Harm Minority Communities, an Environmental 
Justice Issue EPA Should Focus On  
  
Residential segregation and redlining have contributed to childhood lead exposure in minority 
communities.18 Particularly, there is an increased prevalence of lead poisoning in Black 
communities, specifically for Black children whose average blood lead levels were 5.6 µg/L – 
twice that of White children.19 One of the more famous examples of disproportionate lead 
exposure for low-income communities was in Flint, Michigan, where people were exposed to 
lead at 13,200 parts per billion – EPA’s federally acceptable level at the time was 15 parts per 
billion.20  
   
Lead exposure has disproportionate developmental impacts on children of color. For example, 
one study found that non-Hispanic Black children were more likely to be exposed to lead in early 
childhood, which correlated with lower reading test scores.21 Another study from the Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences found that overall, non-Hispanic Black children were eighty 
percent more likely to experience economic disadvantage compared to White children.22 The 
study also found that Black children lived in areas of greater residential segregation.23 Further, 
reading scores declined with higher levels of blood lead levels, and blood lead levels and 
residential segregation interacted to impact reading scores negatively among Black children.24  
  
II.The Current Proposed Rule only Partially Replaces Lead Pipes in Opposition to 
the Goals of Executive Order (“EO”) 12898  
  
The last major issue with the proposed LCRI is that lead pipes would only need to be replaced if 
they are located on public property. This would, in turn, lead to only partial lead pipe 
replacement, which is insufficient to quell the risk of lead contaminating the water supply. As 
required by EO 12898, EPA has the responsibility to “make achieving environmental justice part 
of its mission by identifying and addressing, as appropriate, disproportionately high and adverse 
human health or environmental effects of its programs, policies, and activities on minority 
populations and low-income populations.”25 Thus, partial lead pipe replacement should be 
reserved only for dire situations. As part of EPA’s strategy to implement environmental justice, 
total lead pipe replacement must be required by the LCRI.   
  
Conclusion  
  
PEER asks that EPA strongly consider these outstanding issues with the LCRI. EPA should 
prioritize eliminating lead exposure entirely, specifically for communities of color, by requiring 
complete lead pipe replacement. EPA should specifically list copper as the only safe alternative 
to lead and actively discourage the use of PVC, which causes many of the same health issues as 
lead. Ultimately, there is no safe level of lead in drinking water, and EPA should seriously 
consider this fact when implementing the Safe Drinking Water Act through the LCRI.   
  
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1132 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
TO:  
The Environmental Protection Agency 
 
FROM:  
State of Kansas; Office of the Attorney General of Kansas 
 
RE:  
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking: “National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI)” 
 
Docket No.: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
The Attorneys General of Kansas, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Iowa, Idaho, Louisiana, 
Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, and 
Wyoming submit the following public comment regarding the Environmental Protection 
Agency’s (EPA’s) proposed rule entitled National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
for Lead and Copper: Improvements (LCRI), 88 Fed. Reg. 84878 (December 6, 2023).  
This proposed rule creates a heavy-handed mandate on states that is nigh impossible to 
comply with and is also a financial burden on already squeezed middle class families.  It 
is unworkable, underfunded, and unnecessary and should be withdrawn.   
 
I. 
Introduction 
In 1974, Congress passed the Safe Drinking Water Act, authorizing the Environmental 
Protection Agency to regulate the nation’s drinking water.1  The Act required the EPA to 
identify possibly harmful contaminants in the water, set “maximum containment goals,” 
and promulgate regulations to achieve those goals.2  In response, the EPA identified lead 
as one such contaminant.  By law, the States must enact laws and regulations over their 
own drinking water that are at least as stringent as the standards promulgated by the EPA.  
                                                           
1 Pub. L. 93–523, Dec. 16, 1974, 88 Stat 1660, as codified by 42 U.S.C.A. § 300g-1 et seq. 
2 See generally 42 U.S.C.A. § 300g-1. 

 
 
2 
 
And States such as Kansas have in fact passed laws and regulations to control lead levels 
in the water.3 
About three years ago, the EPA approved the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (the 
2021 rule).4  The rule would require pipe replacement only if the amount of lead reached 
a certain threshold and the rule set a reasonable timeline for such replacement.5  The 2021 
regulations were set to take effect in October of this year, and the States had taken 
measures to comply.  But the rule has not yet taken effect.  
Rather than wait and see what the outcome of the 2021 Rule will be, the EPA is now 
proposing even more stringent standards.  The proposed rule mandates that every State, 
public water system, and even individual homeowners6 replace their lead pipes within the 
next ten years with very few exceptions.  The proposed rule requires a “rolling average” 
of ten percent replacement every year.7  This despite the fact that, while Congress 
authorized an additional $15 billion toward replacing lead pipes and “associated activities 
directly connected to the identification of the [lead pipes] and planning for the 
replacement of [the pipes]”8 in the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act,9 neither this 
Act nor Safe Drinking Water Act mandate pipe replacement. 
The proposed rule is unlawful for three primary reasons: (1) it implicates the major 
questions doctrine, (2) it violates the commerce clause, and (3) it is arbitrary and 
capricious.  Ultimately, this proposed rule is unworkable, underfunded, and unnecessary.  
It creates an almost impossible burden for each state and its citizens without evidence of 
a tangible benefit over the 2021 rule that was already set to go into effect.  The EPA 
should change course and withdraw the proposed rule. 
 
II. 
The proposed rule implicates the Major Questions Doctrine 
The proposed rule requires not just States and public water systems, but every 
homeowner to replace every lead pipe line in the country within the next ten years.  The 
sheer expense and scale of this rule is staggering.  It will affect millions of homeowners, 
                                                           
3 See, e.g., Kan. Admin. Reg. 28-15a-80. 
4 86 Fed. Reg. 71574. 
5 88 Fed. Reg. 84884–97. 
6 Private homeowners would be required to replace the service line connecting their homes to the main 
line. 
7 88 Fed. Reg. 84916. 
8 Id. at 84881. 
9 Pub. L. 117–58, November 15, 2021, 135 Stat 429. 

 
 
3 
 
raise utility prices for American families, and cost, by some estimates, $60 billion in 
compliance alone10—almost none of which is offset by the federal government. 
 
By EPA estimates, there are over 54,100 lead pipes in Kansas alone.11  Other estimates 
place the number at closer to 160,000.12  The EPA estimates it will cost an average of 
“$4,700, ranging from $1,200 to $12,300 per line replaced.”13  But in many cases, the 
actual costs have been far higher.  For example, in 2022, a Chicago homeowner received 
a $28,500 quote to remove the service line that connects her home to the city main.14  
Using the EPA’s estimates, the proposed rule is expected to cost $28 to $47 billion just in 
compliance costs.15  Others estimate this cost is likely to exceed $60 billion.16  Add to 
this the increased water prices to which each American family will be subjected, and the 
overall cost could easily reach hundreds of billions of dollars.  This will increase 
exponentially if each and every State, public water system, and homeowner is required to 
replace their lead service lines on the same extremely short timeline. 
 
No agency can act without Congressional authorization.  The greater the scope of the 
proposed action, the clearer that Congressional authorization must be.  As the EPA itself 
has previously acknowledged, “under the major questions doctrine, a clear statement [is] 
necessary to conclude that Congress intended” to grant an agency authority to enact a 
measure “projected to have billions of dollars of impact.”17 
 
The sweeping and consequential nature of the proposed rule implicates this doctrine.  
Therefore, the EPA must be able to point somewhere in either the Safe Drinking Water 
Act or the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act where Congress clearly gave its 
                                                           
10 Rachael Frazin, Lead Pipe Replacement Funds in Bipartisan Deal Draw Skepticism, The Hill (Aug. 8, 
2021), https://shorturl.at/bmuD5. 
11 EPA, Fact Sheet 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment April 2023, 
https://shorturl.at/hwTUZ. 
12 Allison Kite, Kansas and Missouri Have 256,000 Lead Pipes. EPA Wants Them Removed Within 10 
Years, Missouri Independent (Dec. 1, 2023), https://shorturl.at/ksvz8. 
13 EPA, Strategies to Achieve Full Lead Service Line Replacement, Oct. 2019, https://shorturl.at/lHZ57. 
14 Monica Eng, Eye-Popping Lead Removal Prices, Axios (July 21, 2022), https://shorturl.at/cvCFG. 
15 See Sophia Campbell and David Wessel, What would it cost to replace all the nation’s lead water 
pipes?, Brookings Institute (May 13, 2021), https://shorturl.at/zDGKP. 
16 Annie Snider, Biden Says Bipartisan Deal Will Solve the Country’s Lead Problem. It Won’t., Politico 
(Aug. 2, 2021), https://shorturl.at/hjnuC. 
17 West Virginia v. EPA, 597 U.S. 697, 716 (2022).  In West Virginia, “the EPA’s own modeling 
concluded that the rule would entail billions of dollars in compliance costs (to be paid in the form of 
higher energy prices).”  Id. at 714.  In addition to resulting in higher water prices, the proposed rule will 
result in $28 to $47 billion in direct costs, a great share of which will be borne by private homeowners, 
the States, and public water systems. 

 
 
4 
 
approval for this course of action.  It cannot, because such clear authorization does not 
exist.  The EPA may set containment goals for certain contaminants and require corrosion 
control, but nowhere in either Act did Congress grant the EPA authority to require full-
scale replacement, and certainly not on the proposed timeline.  And there is no authority 
for the EPA to force private homeowners to bear the brunt of the costs. 
 
III. 
The proposed rule invokes the outer limits of the Commerce Clause 
The proposed rule also invokes the outer limits of the Commerce Clause, so 
Congressional authorization cannot be merely implied.  Congress has the power to 
“regulate commerce . . . among the states.” U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 3.  “[T]he grant of 
authority to Congress under the Commerce Clause, though broad, is not unlimited.”18  
Congress’s power does not extend to purely local, non-economic activity; it is limited to 
commercial activities that substantially affect interstate commerce or noneconomic 
activity with a direct nexus to interstate commerce.19  “Inaction” is not a commercial 
activity.20  Neither Congress nor an agency can compel people to engage in commerce, 
thus creating a market to regulate.21 
 
The proposed rule does not simply regulate the pipes that are owned and operated by 
public water systems; it seeks to regulate the pipes that connect each individual house 
with the main, even though these pipes are privately owned by the homeowner and on 
private property (and only supply water to that one household).  This is akin to the federal 
government seeking to dictate the size of a church parking lot because cars happen to 
drive on it.   
 
The implications of that type of exercise of power are not theoretical.  For example, it is 
not hard to imagine a scenario where, through no fault of their own, a family lives in a 
home that happens to have lead pipes already under the ground.  Perhaps they have 
owned that home for decades and have no plans to sell it, and they have found ways to 
deal with whatever lead may be present in their water supply (whether through filters or 
otherwise).  The proposed rule still compels that family to act.  If it takes effect, they will 
be required to pay thousands of dollars—possibly close to $30,000—out of pocket to dig 
up and replace the pipes, regardless of the amount of lead actually in the water, the 
effectiveness of cheaper mitigation efforts, etc.  It is suspect at best as to whether 
Congress even has the power to require this, much less an unelected federal bureaucracy.   
                                                           
18 Solid Waste Agency v. Army Corps of Engrs., 531 U.S. 159 (2001). 
19 See id. at 561–62. 
20 Nat’l Fed’n of Indep. Bus. v. Sebelius, 567 U.S. 519, 552 (2012). 
21 Id. 

 
 
5 
 
By comparison, the Supreme Court recently curtailed an overreach by this same agency, 
striking down the EPA’s definition of “waters of the United States” under the Clean 
Water Act.22  The Court held the agency could only regulate wetlands that actually 
connected to navigable waters such that they were “‘indistinguishable’ from those 
waters.”23  Absent a demonstrable interstate nexus, the EPA cannot regulate bodies of 
water sitting on people’s properties.  Similarly, the EPA must demonstrate that the 
subject of the regulation here—pipes that have lain underground for decades—have such 
a clear connection to interstate commerce that the EPA can require individual, private 
homeowners to dig them up and replace them.  The proposed rule falls short of 
demonstrating that. 
 
At a minimum, this invokes the outer limit of Congress’ commerce power and there 
should be clear authorization. 
 
When deciding whether an agency’s proposed action derives from a permissible 
interpretation of a statute, the Court has held it will construe the statute to avoid 
[constitutional] problems unless such construction is plainly contrary to the intent of 
Congress,”24 and “[w]here an administrative interpretation of a statute invokes the outer 
limits of Congress’ power, we expect a clear indication that Congress intended that 
result.”25  There is no “clear indication” that Congress intended a full-replacement 
requirement when passing either the Safe Drinking Water Act or the Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs Act.  While the EPA may promulgate regulations to contain 
contaminants in the water, these regulations must be “economically and technologically 
feasible.”26  And while Congress has authorized funds for the replacement of lead pipes,27 
it has not mandated that all lead pipes must be replaced within ten years. 
 
It is also doubtful whether Congress would have the authority to force many Americans 
to make a purchase they do not wish to make under the guise of regulating interstate 
commerce.  The EPA justifies its proposed rule by pointing to the aggregate effects lead 
exposure could have on the healthcare system.28  By not replacing lead pipes, the 
proposed rule argues, individual health concerns could, in the aggregate, effect the 
                                                           
22 Sackett v. EPA, 598 U.S. 651, 684 (2023). 
23 Id. 
24 Solid Waste Agency, 531 U.S. at 173. 
25 Id.; accord VanDerStok v. Garland, 86 F.4th 179, 188 (5th Cir. 2023) (“How do we know when an 
agency has exceeded its statutory authority?  Simple: the plain language of the statute tells us so.”). 
26 42 U.S.C.A. § 300f(1). 
27 See 135 Stat 429. 
28 See 88 Fed. Reg. 84880. 

 
 
6 
 
national healthcare system.29  But the Supreme Court already rejected a very similar 
argument.  No matter the aggregate effect uninsured individuals had on the healthcare 
system, Congress could not force them to purchase health insurance.30  Congress cannot 
require a “mandatory purchase to solve almost any problem.”31  And the fact that 
everyone will likely participate in the healthcare market at some point “does not 
authorize Congress to direct them to purchase particular products in th[at] or other 
markets today.”32  The EPA cannot, therefore, require private homeowners to dig up their 
existing pipes and purchase replacements. 
 
IV. 
The proposed rule is arbitrary and capricious  
The EPA has no authority to enact regulations that are “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of 
discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.”  5 U.S.C.A. § 706(2)(a).  The 
proposed rule fails this test because it will cost the States, public water systems, and 
individual households billions of dollars without resulting in any measured benefit, the 
agency lacks clear Congressional authorization to impose these burdens, and the 
proposed rule does not adequately explain why it is departing from past practice. 
 
As things currently stand, States and public water systems are required to contain the 
levels of lead in the water.  They do so by “install[ing] and operat[ing] optimal corrosion 
control treatment.”  Many factors determine the amount of lead that can be in the water; 
‘[t]he amount of lead in drinking water depends heavily on the corrosivity of the water.”   
While the EPA is tasked with establishing containment levels for lead and enacting 
regulations to meet those levels, never before has the agency required a complete 
replacement, and certainly not on such a tight timeline.  And nowhere does either Act 
authorize a regulation of this scale. 
 
As the rule acknowledges, “corrosion control is generally effective in reducing lead to 
low levels.”33  While it may be accurate to say “there are no known safe levels of lead,”34 
this is not a reason to require across-the-board replacement within the next ten years.  By 
the same logic, there are no known safe speeds which will not result in injury in the event 
of a car accident.  But rather than outlaw cars, governments focus their efforts where it 
will do the most good: requiring lower speeds in school zones, regulating seat belts, and 
outlawing drunk driving.  That is what should happen here.  The States should be free to 
                                                           
29 Id. 
30 Nat’l Fed’n of Indep. Bus., 567 U.S. at 558. 
31 Id. at 553. 
32 Id. at 557. 
33 88 Fed. Reg. 84880. 
34 Id. at 84799. 

 
 
7 
 
continue to utilize their resources to contain contaminates and replace pipes where it is 
most urgently needed while monitoring those that might pose a problem in the future. 
 
As the proposed rule also acknowledges, the full replacement requirement will not be 
effective at eliminating all lead sources from the water.35  The EPA may claim these heart 
conditions will be drastically reduced if there is no lead in the water, but the rule will not 
result in no lead contaminant in the water.  Because many homes have lead in their 
internal plumbing and many pipes have lead connectors—neither of which are affected 
by the proposed rule—the rule will not result in completely eliminating lead.  The EPA 
therefore can only speculate at what might happen if one source of lead is removed, and 
the justification for the costly, unprecedented change is simply inadequate. 
 
Finally, there is a clear alternative with the 2021 rule.  The changes brought about by this 
rule will likely be effective at removing some level of lead contaminant from the water.  
It is nonsensical to add expensive, nearly impossible-to-comply-with requirements on top 
of this without taking into account the effect this rule has when it has been implemented. 
 
V. 
The proposed rule is unworkable, underfunded, and unnecessary 
 
In addition to being unlawful, this proposed rule creates a mandate that is unworkable, 
underfunded, and unnecessary.  It also increases utility expenses for ordinary Americans 
at a time when inflation is already making it difficult for them to make ends meet.  
Energy and utility prices have already increased, and this administration has failed to 
control inflation across the economy. 
 
The federal government will not be the ones that bear the brunt of this excessive cost.  
Congress has only appropriated $15 billion toward lead pipe replacement.  Members of 
Congress have said it is “laughable” to believe this would cover the costs to completely 
replace the Nation’s pipes.36  Not all of this money will even go directly toward the 
replacements; a certain percentage will be siphoned off by the EPA’s own administrative 
expenses.37  And even the money that makes it to communities must be paid back.  
“[H]alf of the money provided by the bill would come in the form of loans that 
communities have to repay, putting a large share of the funding beyond the reach of many 
of the communities that need it most.”38 
 
                                                           
35 See Snider, supra n.15. 
36 Id. 
37 See 42 U.S.C.A. § 300j-19b(c). 
38 Snider, supra n.15. 

 
 
8 
 
So, the EPA expects most private homeowners and the most in-need municipalities to pay 
for the replacement by themselves,39 an enormous expense many Americans cannot 
afford.  If that’s not bad enough, the EPA also expects this rule will lead to increased 
water prices for all American families, in some cases by hundreds of dollars per year.40  
Under President Biden, Americans are already burdened by high energy and utility 
prices, which are increasing at rates that outstrip even the crushing inflation witnessed in 
other household expenses over the last few years.41  And at least partly due to the 
inflation that this administration failed to control, most—over 60%—do not have savings 
set aside for emergencies, let alone to pay for unnecessary pipe replacements.42 
 
There is no need for any of this.  In 2021, the EPA approved the 2021 Lead and Copper 
Rule Revisions.43  The 2021 rule, which requires replacement only if the amount of lead 
in the water exceeds a specified level and avoids unrealistic timelines for completion, 
does not take effect in October of this year.44  It is irrational to replace that rule, which 
has not yet gone into effect, with a stricter one, especially, as many other commenters had 
already said, it will be nearly impossible for States, PWSs, and individual households to 
completely replace their lead pipes in the next ten years.  Add to that the unfunded 
mandate, and the goals of the proposed rule will never actually be realized.  But it does 
not have to be this way.  The EPA can and must change course by abandoning this 
proposed rule. 
 
VI. 
Conclusion 
 
All of the undersigned states want clean water for their citizens and are taking steps to 
ensure that will happen. The proposed rule is not only heavy handed but also an 
unreasonable way to achieve this goal.  It sets an almost impossible timeline, will cost 
billions, and will infringe on the rights of the States and their residents—all for benefits 
that may be entirely speculative.  The EPA should withdraw the rule. 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
39 88 Fed. Reg. 84993. 
40 Id. at 84987. 
41 See United States Energy Information Administration, U.S. Residential Electricity Bills Increased 5% 
in 2022, After Adjusting for Inflation (May 31, 2023), https://shorturl.at/iSWY0. 
42 See Jessica Dickler, Only 19% of Americans Increased Their Emergency Savings in 2023. That ‘Puts 
Households in a Bind,’ Expert Says, CNBC, Oct. 25, 2023, https://shorturl.at/jwCU1. 
43 86 Fed. Reg. 71574. 
44 88 Fed. Reg. 84884–97. 

 
 
9 
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
 
Attorney General for Kansas 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Attorney General for Arkansas  
 
Attorney General for Florida 
 
 
 
Attorney General for Georgia  
 
Attorney General for Idaho 
 
 
Attorney General for Iowa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attorney General for Louisiana 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
Attorney General for Mississippi 
 
Attorney General for Montana  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Attorney General for Nebraska  
 
Attorney General for South Carolina 
 
 
 
Attorney General for South Dakota 
 
Attorney General for Texas 
 
  
 
Attorney General for Utah 
 
 
Attorney General for Wyoming

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0816 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Chair 
Marta Reczko 
City of Margate  
 
 
Treasurer 
Kara Mills 
City of Boca Raton 
 
Webmaster 
Anne Murray 
Martin County
 
Vice Chair 
Poonam Kalkat 
City of Boynton Beach  
 
 
Past Chair 
Ana Caveda 
Miami-Dade WASD 
             
 
 
Secretary 
James Ferguson 
Miami-Dade WASD 
 
 
 
 
Marta Reczko  
Southeast Florida Utility Council (SEFLUC) Chair  
City of Margate 
Department of Environmental and Engineering Services (DEES) - Utilities  
Assistant Director Utilities 
901 NW 66 Ave, Margate, FL 33063 
Email: MReczko@Margatefl.com 
Phone: (954) 884-3632 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
 
Environmental Protection Agency  
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T, 1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
 
Subject: 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
  
 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper:  
  
 
Improvements (LCRI) 
 
 
 
 
Dear Sir/Madam, 
 
As a representative of the Southeast Florida Utility Council (SEFLUC), a coalition of public water suppliers 
in Southeast Florida, I am pleased to submit our feedback on the Environmental Protection Agency's 
solicitation for comments regarding the proposed improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule (LCRI). 
 
SEFLUC represents drinking water and wastewater utilities serving over 6 million residents and visitors in 
southeast Florida. Our members are  deeply committed to providing  superior-quality drinking water and 
wastewater services all the while protecting public health and the environment.  
 
SEFLUC, in alignment with the American Water Works Association (AWWA) and the EPA, is dedicated to 
the nationwide mission of removing lead from drinking water to protect public health. We actively follow 
the developments of the EPA's Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) and Improvements (LCRI), 
advocating for rules that not only ensure the safety and health of our communities but also allow for their 
practical implementation across the nation. Therefore, SEFLUC proposes additional considerations to 
enhance the effectiveness and feasibility of these regulations. 
 

 
Compliance Date Concerns  
Considering potential delays in LCRI adoption, we ask the EPA to extend the LCRR compliance deadline 
beyond October 16, 2024. This extension would provide clarity on new requirements and ensure water 
systems have adequate time for full compliance. 
 
Clarity in Lead Service Line Replacement Regulations 
We seek the EPA's guidance on defining "under the control" for service line replacements, clarifying when 
private replacements are viable, including funding considerations. We suggest exemptions for private 
replacements if public systems face financial or legal constraints. This request aims to ensure that 
compliance with the SDWA aligns with the practicalities facing public water systems. 
 
Optimizing Tap Sampling Practices and Reporting Timelines  
We recommend addressing tap sampling's practicalities, such as bottle sizes and their availability. 
Allowing a bottleneck size variance of +/- 3 mm would enable the use of commonly available containers. 
Additionally, we propose extending the deadline for reporting tap sample results to customers from three 
days to five days, considering the challenges posed by receiving results just before long weekends, 
holidays, or during staff absences, as well as potential delays from natural disasters or emergencies.  
 
Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances  
We suggest water systems with three exceedances in five years prioritize distributing filters to those with 
lead service lines, marking high-risk areas. For uncertain or non-lead lines, a six-month period for 
clarification is recommended, with customer documentation aiding this process. Additionally, we 
advocate for a process allowing water systems to request extension for distributing filters under justified 
conditions, seeking EPA's guidance on these matters. 
 
Include “Unknown Connector” Option in Baseline Inventory System 
We recommend adding an "Unknown if a connector is present" option to the baseline inventory system's 
dropdown menu for connectors. This missing option, likely to be widely used, would improve accuracy. 
 
 
Adjust Verification Timelines for LCRI Service Line Classifications 
The LCRI requires utilities to verify service line types within 60 days after discrepancies are reported. We 
suggest exempting "unknown" classifications from this timeline to avoid the strain of addressing 
numerous such claims at once. A longer period for verifying "unknown" lines could enhance feasibility 
and accuracy. We recommend prioritizing verification for lines reported to contain lead and allowing a 
six-month period for others, with customer documentation aiding in easing the verification process. 
 
SEFLUC looks forward to working with the EPA on vital improvements, aiming for universally safe and 
clean drinking water. We support the EPA's public health efforts through the LCRI, emphasizing the need 
to align these with public water systems' operational and financial realities for effective implementation. 
We appreciate the opportunity to submit our feedback.  
Should you have any inquiries, feel free to reach out to me at (954) 884-3632 or via email at 
MReczko@margatefl.com. 
 
Marta Reczko 
 
SEFLUC Chair

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1117 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
 
U.S. Environmental ProtecƟon Agency  
EPA Docket Center 
Oﬃce of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
RE:  
City of Spokane Comments on the Lead & Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) 
 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Dear Michael Goldberg, Standards and Risk Management Division, 
The City of Spokane (Spokane), Washington hereby submits the following comments regarding the EPA’s 
proposed Lead & Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) published in the Federal Register on December 6, 
2023, as Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801. 
Spokane’s Water Department delivers up to 180 million gallons of clean, safe drinking water every day to 
more than 250,000 people in our community. Spokane's water system is the third largest in the state of 
Washington, behind Seattle and Tacoma. Spokane’s water system includes more than 1,000 miles of water 
mains and smaller water lines that deliver water from our wells to customer homes and businesses.  
 
As part of Spokane’s commitment to serve all customers, Spokane voluntarily replaced all lead service 
lines within the water system. This work was completed in 2018. All lines on public property were replaced 
as well as any lead lines discovered on private property. Spokane has a long-standing policy to remove all 
lead connectors and similar parts whenever they are encountered. Spokane also routinely removes 
galvanized lines when work is done on services located in the public right-of-way. Additionally, Spokane 
is finalizing work on the inventory which will be required to be submitted in October 2024 pursuant to the 
previous update to the Lead and Copper Rule.  
 
Spokane has a few concerns with the proposed LCRI rule.  First, we have concerns that some new 
requirements placed on water systems are not practical, particularly those that require water systems to 
take responsibility for plumbing components located on private property, inside private homes and 
buildings.  
 
The LCRI proposes changes to the lead and copper tap monitoring sample site selecƟon.  Exhibit 1 in 
SecƟon II notes the proposed rule “revises Tier 3 sites to include sites served by a lead connector as well 
as sites served by a galvanized service line or containing galvanized premise plumbing that are idenƟﬁed 
as ever being down stream of an LSL (lead service line) or lead connector in the past.” 
 
This requires water systems to idenƟfy all plumbing material of each and every residence or property that 
has ever had a lead service line or a lead connector. LocaƟons with some galvanized plumbing would then 
need to be included in the pool of locaƟons to sample.  
PUBLIC WORKS DIVISION 
808 W. SPOKANE FALLS BLVD. 
SPOKANE, WA 99201-3343 
509.625.6700 

 
PracƟcally speaking, it will be very diﬃcult for water systems to determine the composiƟon of premise 
plumbing. As evidenced by the current struggle to idenƟfy service line material, which is limited to a single 
pipe, how are water systems expected to know the composiƟon of plumbing located within private 
structures? AddiƟonally, it is unclear whether the rule requires this acƟon if there is any galvanized premise 
plumbing or only if galvanized premise plumbing goes to ﬁxtures from which water is consumed. 
 
The EPA is underesƟmaƟng the extent of galvanized premise plumbing.  CommuniƟes with large stocks of 
older homes, homes over 50 years old, are more likely to have galvanized plumbing.   
 
Frankly, Spokane is concerned about the ability of the uƟlity to gain access to ciƟzens’ private property, 
which would be needed to idenƟfy the plumbing material of the owner’s service line, let alone access to 
the interior of homes to idenƟfy pipe material located within the structure. Spokane already faces 
considerable challenges with gaining access needed to replace broken meters that are located within the 
homes of customers; we conƟnue to move meters outside of homes as a result.  
 
Spokane believes that new proposed public noƟﬁcaƟon, reporƟng, proacƟve communicaƟon, and free 
tesƟng of water will provide a beƩer way to give customers who previously had a lead service line an 
understanding of their water quality without the onerous idenƟﬁcaƟon of the premise’s plumbing 
materials. 
 
The proposed LCRI already suggests many public noƟce acƟviƟes for water departments to use. These 
include annual updates to the service line inventory; inventory of schools and daycare faciliƟes; outreach 
and sampling of the idenƟﬁed faciliƟes; inventory and reporƟng of lead connectors; noƟﬁcaƟon of the 
need to replace lead service and Galvanized Requiring Replacement (GRR) lines; and annual 
communicaƟon and reporƟng to customers and regulators on these topics. 
 
The proposed rule also requires water departments to oﬀer lead and copper tesƟng free of charge to 
customers with unknown plumbing material, GRR, or lead lines.  This is an excellent pathway for residents 
to know their water quality regardless of how their plumbing is classiﬁed. 
 
As a result of this proposed rule, Spokane would need to replace several hundred GRRs. To do so, Spokane 
would need express consent from the private property owners to remove GRRs from their properƟes. 
Property owners who refuse would be beyond the control of the water department and as a result would 
forego replacement unƟl permission is granted. Spokane, like other water uƟliƟes, believes the number of 
aƩempts to engage the property owner and methods of communicaƟon are best decided by localiƟes who 
know what is most eﬀecƟve when conducƟng outreach with their ciƟzens.  
To reduce confusion and to simplify the process, Spokane recommends a single compliance date for the 
full implementaƟon of all the elements of the LCRI.  The date should be three (3) years aŌer promulgaƟon 
of a ﬁnal rule.  The LCRI is proposing many changes in the rule and requiring many addiƟonal acƟviƟes.  
MulƟple compliance dates will only add to the stress and confusion of implemenƟng the rule 
improvements.  
Finally, Spokane would like to address cost and available funding for water systems. Not all water systems 
are the same. Spokane’s system has hard water and is optimized for corrosion control. Spokane has 
removed all lead service lines and has policies to address lead connectors and galvanized pipes requiring 

replacement. As a result, Spokane likely would not qualify for grant funding for its system, leaving us once 
again only with Drinking Water State Revolving Fund (SRF) loans to support our system. 
 
While the proposed LCRI requirements are important, Spokane asks that the EPA work to ensure that 
federal grant funds will be available for other criƟcal eﬀorts such as improvements to resiliency and 
addressing other forms of contaminaƟon, which otherwise could result in a lower quality of life for 
residents and higher environmental and public health risks than lead services. In Spokane, we are 
concerned about PFOS/PFOA contaminaƟon and supporƟng our neighbor, Airway Heights, as they contend 
with very high concentraƟons of those forever chemicals. We also are commiƩed to protecƟng our sole 
source aquifer, responding to emerging contaminants of concern, and managing infrastructure that’s up 
to 100 years old. 
 
The City of Spokane Water Department conƟnues working to support its role as a regional water purveyor 
for an area much larger than the city limits. As always, we request balance and an understanding that not 
all purveyors face the same challenges equally.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Marlene Feist 
Director of Public Works

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0756 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1/23/2024 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator   
US Environmental Protection Agency   
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
 
 Dear Administrator Regan,  
 The NAACP Florida State Conference submits the following comments regarding the US Environmental Protection 
Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”). 
The NAACP Florida State Conference provides leadership for local branches, youth councils, and college chapters for 
environmental and climate justice needs in Florida. The NAACP and its Center for Environmental and Climate Justice 
have a longstanding interest in ensuring that issues of community engagement and environmental justice center Black 
communities and frontline communities most impacted, including communities in Florida.   
 The NAACP Florida State Conference applauds EPA for proposing stronger regulations to protect communities from lead 
in drinking water. Lead in drinking water has been a historically prevalent issue in Black communities, posing extreme 
risks to the health of young people, mothers, and their families. In Florida estimates suggest that there are as many as 
200,000 lead service lines, (most likely an under estimation) threatening families across our state. These lead service 
lines expose families to a potent and irreversible neurotoxin which even at low levels of exposure is linked to damage to 
the brain and nervous system, learning disabilities, shorter stature, impaired hearing, and harm to blood cells.  In 
Florida, we would derive enormous benefits in public health cost savings from full lead service line replacement.  This 
will save lives in our state and reduce the crisis in the health care system and remove the culprit, lead poisoning that has 
negatively impacted generations of people of color.   
We fully support the revisions made to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations (NPDWR) for lead and copper. 
Access to safe and clean drinking water is a fundamental civil right that should be available to everyone. Unfortunately, 
many residents are under the impression that their water is safe and clean simply because it comes from the 
municipality. Without these federal regulations, municipalities might continue to disregard public safety, particularly for 
people of color by not replacing lead service lines that connect to our homes and schools. Therefore, these regulations 
need immediate implementation to prevent further harm to people of color and to offer solutions to the generations of 
people who have already been affected by lead poisoning and its disastrous health impacts affecting the brain, kidneys, 
heart and blood pressure and may be associated with other life threaten diseases. The documented effects of lead 
poisoning, which are known to cause learning disabilities in African American children, have been identified as a 
contributing factor to the school-to-prison pipeline. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) needs to replace lead 
service lines immediately. Trusted community non-profit groups can assist the EPA in public awareness and outreach 
efforts. Residents require immediate help to reduce the lead in their drinking water. Water filters can be distributed to 
each household as a temporary solution to remove contaminants like lead from the drinking water until the 10 year 
project of service line replacement can be completed and all sources of lead and copper in drinking water can be 
resolved. 
The NAACP Florida State Conference urges for the immediate implementation of EPA revisions for lead and copper 
pipes. The EPA's distribution of water filters will provide relief to low and moderate-income (LMI) families. Additionally, 
the EPA needs to include a safeguard to prevent price gouging of water filters and bottled water in communities that are 
undergoing pipe replacement. 

 
For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong elements of the proposed LCRI such as 
the requirement for the removal of all lead service lines in ten years, the requirements for water systems to sample both 
the first and fifth liter of water passing through lead pipes and a lower action level; but also ensure that those provisions 
do not have loopholes which undermine their goals and ensure that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened.  
 Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule does not leave black communities in 
Florida behind:   
• 
Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it is a fundamental injustice that the 
communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed 40 or more years to fix this issue.  
• 
Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines: Removal can cost thousands of 
dollars, and putting the financial burden on impacted communities will result in mostly wealthy and white 
neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced. Removal and replacement do not make up major proportions 
of utility budgets, and utilities should be expected to maximize the use of available federal water infrastructure 
funds and other non-ratepayer sources of funds to prioritize solving this crisis.  
• 
Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who spend many hours there daily are not at risk 
of exposure: Black children face an increased risk of lead exposure when compared with white children. The 
proposal’s suggested testing program does not differ from past ineffective programs, and EPA should move 
towards incentivizing the installation of filters and protecting children.  
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components would allow for environmental injustice 
to persist. Black communities and frontline communities have long suffered from disinvestment and lack of resources. 
Past NAACP analysis has demonstrated that race, ethnicity, or language spoken had the strongest relationship to slow 
and inadequate enforcement of the SDWA of any sociodemographic characteristic analyzed. The final LCRI is a rare 
opportunity to make significant changes in the lives of millions of people in Florida, and to provide a measure of 
environmental justice which these families are owed, and we encourage this administration to build on the progress 
made in the proposed rule by strengthening the final rule further.   
Sincerely, 
Dr. Adora Obi Nweze,  
President, NAACP Florida State Conference 
Ms. Pam Brown Eyo, 
NAACP Florida State Conference, Environmental and Climate Justice, Chairperson

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0930 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
2/5/2024
Environmental Protection Agency
Proposed Rule Comment 2/5/2024.
As water operators in the State of Michigan, we have been working under the strictest lead and 
copper rule of any state since 2019.  
EPA will be utilizing much of Michigan’s L/C rule to finalize their revised rule.  
The Michigan rule has several flaws, and the state refuses any discussion.  
Now these flaws will be nationwide.
Water providers were not included in developing the Michigan rule.  People that were 
making the decisions did not perform this kind of work for a living.  
It is easy to put something on paper and say do this and create deadlines…however, if you have 
not performed this kind of work or understand cost of pipe material, cement, topsoil, plumbing, 
customer outreach, and the manpower that will be needed, you are creating a financial burden 
that will only be passed on in water rate cost.
Residential Compliance.    Anytime a municipality pointed out that the rule’s actions were not 
lawful, or residents would not cooperate…we were told to shut the water off to the home.  
Regardless if the water bill is paid up to date, we are to force the issue on the resident.  Leaving 
the municipality to deal with the fall-out, not the State.
Public vs Private Property.  There are strict rules/laws regarding municipalities working on 
private property.  Municipalities do not perform upgrades to private property.  
However, the new rule mandates municipalities replace the lead service line all the way to the 
water meter inside the private home.  
The Michigan rule conflicts with Bolt vs. City of Lansing.  The State of Michigan is forcing 
municipalities to perform work on private property.  (Municipalities do not replace leaky roofs 
that cause mold issues, remediate lead paint, fix sewers that back up, correct electrical issues, 
cut private trees, fix private driveways…etc.)
Soon enough, a law firm will bring a class action lawsuit against a municipality that used public
funding on private property, regardless of intentions.   
We have already seen this occur in Michigan with Stormwater Utilities, and it cost municipalities 
millions of dollars.  
City of Hazel Park
Water/Sewer Department
111 E. Nine Mile Rd, Hazel Park, MI  48030
Ph – 248.546.4076    Em – hpwater@hazelpark.org

If the lead service line needs to be replaced, then the homeowner should be provided a grant to 
have private work performed and keep municipalities protected from a lawsuit. 
Municipalities could use there ordinances to oversee the work is performed correctly.
Sampling Method.  The 1st and 5th liter sampling are intended to check the water quality 
throughout the residential water service line.  However, the aerators on faucets utilized to take 
the sample MUST stay in place during the sampling.  
An aerator screen will trap particles and other debris.  This debris can cause false positives on 
water samples.  
Aerators are part of private plumbing that requires regular maintenance and cleaning.  Michigan 
list aerators a health issue for lead exposure because of particulates can be trapped, its in all 
their documentation, yet municipalities are forbidden to remove or clean an aerator before taking 
a 1st or 5th liter sample…we must take the sample with a dirty aerator in place.  Only if the 
sample fails can the aerator be cleaned for resampling.
If we are to be sampling water quality in the service line, the aerator needs to be removed.  
No other type of water sample is taken with an aerator in place, this includes Chlorine Residual, 
Bacteriological, or Disinfection By-Product sampling to name a few.
Funding.  Since 2019, there has been little to no funding to combat the lead service line 
replacements.  Historically, no municipality ever budgeted for lead service line removal and lead 
service lines exist in some of the oldest and the most financially challenged communities.
The recommended EPA revision may cost an additional $ 600,000.00 per year, if a funding 
source is not found.  That could be up to a $ 12.00 increase per unit of water per customer, for 
many customers who already are financially challenged.  (A home that uses an average of 4 
units per month will pay an additional $48.00 monthly.)
Where do municipalities get the funding to meet compliance?
The only offering is “State Revolving Funds (SRF).”  This is a loan that must be paid back with 
interest.  Paying “interest” is another payment made with public funding for private property 
work.
A SRF will be another added expense to already stretched budgets, which will only result in 
water rate hikes nationwide.
Red Tape.  Funding red tape needs to be loosened to allow a greater number of qualified 
contractors to be utilized.  There are only so many contractors that meet the funding standards
to be awarded work.
EPAs New 10-year Timeframe.  EPA needs to reconsider their 10-year replacement rule.
With this nationwide revision, will there be enough contractors available to complete the work in 
EPAs timeframe? This shortened timeframe will cause contractor costs to skyrocket, and any 
funding will not go as far as planned.

Aside from that, there are only so many suppliers that can supply the materials needed to 
properly address water service line replacements. How will the supply chain keep up with 
demand, which will result in municipalities not meeting compliance.  
Since Covid, our general materials and supplies that took only days to receive, are now taking 
months, with high-cost increases.
Is this a Crisis or Not?  The State and Federal agencies allowed “lead” to be an approved 
material for water service lines over seventy years ago.
Current operators are tasked/mandated with remediating the problem without a funding source.
I ask this…If this is such a “Public Health Crisis,” why is proper funding non-existent?
T. Young
Water/Sewer Superintendent
City of Hazel Park

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0903 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
6633 Highway 290 East Suite 303 
Austin, Texas 78723  
(512) 985-9151 | (512) 659-4816 
www.texasstatenaacp.org 
 
Gary L. Bledsoe, President |  Casey Thomas 1st Vice President |  Claude Cummings, 2nd Vice President  
Sherley L. Spears, Secretary | Summer Thompson Assistant Secretary 
TaNeika Driver-Moultrie, Treasurer |  Ora Washington, Assistant Treasurer 
 
February 5th, 2024 
 
Re: Comments regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801,  
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
US Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
The Texas State Conference of NAACP units submits the following comments regarding the US 
Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements” (“LCRI”). The Texas State Conference of 
NAACP units provides leadership for local branches, youth councils, and college chapters for 
environmental and climate justice needs in Texas. The NAACP and its Center for Environmental 
and Climate Justice have a longstanding interest in ensuring that issues of community 
engagement and environmental justice center Black communities and frontline communities 
most impacted, including communities in the state of Texas.  
 
The Texas State Conference of NAACP units applauds EPA for proposing stronger regulations 
to protect communities from lead in drinking water. Lead in drinking water has been a 
historically prevalent issue in Black communities, posing extreme risks to the health of young 
people, mothers, and their families. In Texas, estimates suggest that there are as many as 
647,000 lead service lines that threaten families across our state with exposure to a potent and 
irreversible neurotoxin which even at low levels of exposure is linked to damage to the brain and 
nervous system, learning disabilities, shorter stature, impaired hearing, and harm to blood cells. 
In Texas, we would derive over $14 billion in public health cost savings from full lead service 
line replacement. 
 
Texas cities with the highest number of lead service pipe, include Houston, San Antonio, Dallas, 
Fort Worth, El Paso, Austin (although Austin has made significant progress in replacing lead 
lines.) 
  
A nearly universal consequence, Black families in Texas are disproportionately burdened by 
lead exposure and exposure to other hazardous pollutants, and confront an insidious, complex 
web of historical, systemic, environmental injustices that contribute to major unabated harm. 
Credible studies have shown that Black and Hispanic children in Texas are 2-3 times more likely 
to have elevated blood lead levels compared to white children.  Black communities in Texas are 
often located near industrial facilities, hazardous waste sites, and other sources of air and water 
pollution.  Persistent racially discriminatory housing policies and practices, along with economic 
disinvestment, Black communities experience adverse health consequence, property 
devaluation and mind-boggling participation frustration and safety deprivation due to the lack of 
environmental enforcement. 

For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong elements of the 
proposed LCRI such as the requirement for the removal of all lead service lines in ten years, the 
requirements for water systems to sample both the first and fifth liter of water passing through 
lead pipes and a lower action level; but also ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes 
which undermine their goals and ensure that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened. 
 
Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule does not 
leave black communities in Texas behind: 
 
• 
Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it is a fundamental 
injustice that the communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed 40 or more 
years to fix this issue. 
 
• 
Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines: Removal can 
cost thousands of dollars, and putting the financial burden on impacted communities will result in 
mostly wealthy and white neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced. Removal and 
replacement do not make up major proportions of utility budgets, and utilities should be 
expected to maximize the use of available federal water infrastructure funds and other non-
ratepayer sources of funds to prioritize solving this crisis. 
 
• 
Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who spend many hours there 
daily are not at risk of exposure: Black children face an increased risk of lead exposure when 
compared with white children. The proposal’s suggested testing program does not differ from 
past ineffective programs, and EPA should move towards incentivizing the installation of filters 
and protecting children. 
 
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components would allow for 
environmental injustice to persist. Black communities and frontline communities have long 
suffered from disinvestment and lack of resources. Past NAACP analysis has demonstrated that 
race, ethnicity, or language spoken had the strongest relationship to slow and inadequate 
enforcement of the SDWA of any sociodemographic characteristic analyzed. The final LCRI is a 
rare opportunity to make significant changes in the lives of millions of people in Texas, and to 
provide a measure of environmental justice which these families are owed, and we encourage 
this administration to build on the progress made in the proposed rule by strengthening the final 
rule further. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Gary L. Bledsoe, President 
Texas State Conference of NAACP Units 
 
Gene Collins, Environmental Justice Committee Chairman 
Crystal Bates, Environmental Justice Committee Vice Chairman

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1848 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Mr. Michael Goldberg 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue 
Mail Code 4607M 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re:  National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (Docket 
Number EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg, 
 
The New York Section American Water Works Association (NYSAWWA) represents drinking water 
utilities across New York State, providing safe, dependable, and affordable water to over 15 million 
residents. Our core principle is the protection of public health, and we take pride in New York State's 
leadership role in advancing these initiatives. Our diverse membership consists of leading experts in 
drinking water treatment, engineers responsible for designing and constructing our systems, 
academics at the forefront of innovative research, and pioneers driving the development of 
emerging technologies. Together, we ensure that New York's water supply remains of the highest 
possible quality now and in the future. 
 
We have carefully reviewed the proposed regulations and offer the following comments and 
recommendations: 
 
General Matters 
1. The requirements of the LCRI increase the administrative and technical work requirements for 
all utilities and water suppliers. These additional requirements are disproportionally stressful for 
medium and small systems that do not have their own lab facilities to conduct sampling, do not 
have sufficient resources or personnel to comply with the LCRI. All systems, but especially 
medium and small systems, require effective guidance, templates, and other tools to assist with 
complying with the rule. These tools should be distributed to utilities, along with expanded 
guidance, at least two years prior to the compliance deadline. 
 
Service Line Replacement 
2. NYSAWWA recognizes the funding made available through the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law 
(BIL) will be instrumental in helping water suppliers achieve the removal of lead service lines 
(LSLs) as required by the LCRI. However, we note that this funding is woefully inadequate to 
ensure all water systems can comply with the 10-year timeframe, while also conducting other 
critical infrastructure improvements that ensure reliable and continuous delivery of water. In 
New York State alone, we estimate the total funding for removal of the estimated 360,000 LSLs 
will exceed 3.5 billion dollars. New York’s share of BIL funding will not cover 20% of these costs 
Additional funding from the federal government is needed to complete full LSL replacement 
within the requirements proposed in the rule, however even with funding this requirement will 
likely be infeasible for most systems. Any decrease to the 10-year requirement (six, seven, eight 
years) is also infeasible. 
 
3. The minimum average annual LSL replacement rate is calculated by counting the number of 
replaced service lines divided by the “replacement pool”. However, a Utility that is acting in good 
faith to comply with the rule could identify large quantities of unknown service lines as non-lead, 
which would not contribute towards the calculated compliance percentage. This could result in 
the rolling average for replacements dropping below compliance through no fault of the utility 
and despite progress identifying unknowns. 
 
 

Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
 
4. The LCRI includes several instances where utilities and/or water suppliers are assumed to know 
the premise plumbing material in consumer’s homes. This is included in revisions to sampling 
sites, “EPA is proposing to correct the definition for Tier 1 and Tier 2 sites to include sites with 
premise plumbing made of lead due to the high risk of lead exposure associated with premise 
plumbing made of lead.” Requiring utilities and/or water suppliers to enter consumer’s homes to 
identify pipe material likely extends beyond their authority and would be difficult, or impossible, 
to comply with. This requirement would place an unnecessary burden on water systems and 
divert resources from important public health activities. 
5. Aligned with the previous comment, clarification is required regarding how much effort needs to 
be expended to identify premise plumbing after all lead and galvanized requiring replacement 
(GRR) lines have been removed. The Tier selection protocols must be aligned to ensure water 
suppliers are not forced to spend excessive time gaining access to homes to inspect internal 
plumbing in an effort to find appropriately Tiered sample locations.  
 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
 
6. The definition of lead connectors is troublesome. Including a specific length of connector 
suggests that water suppliers are responsible for locating and measuring connectors to 
determine if they are an LSL. By this interpretation, inventorying would require excavating and 
measuring every lead connector, as well as removing them once uncovered. A better, more 
generic definition should be considered that centers on the intent of lead connectors, a flexible 
pipe that allows connection of a rigid service line. 
 
Lead Action and Trigger Levels 
 
7. The use of a single 0.010 mg/L action level, rather than using an action level and a separate 
trigger level, improves the rule by reducing complexity compared to the LCRR. 
 
Corrosion Control Treatment 
 
8. Systems that have voluntarily optimized their corrosion control treatment and demonstrated 90th 
percentile lead concentrations below 0.005 mg/L should be recognized and given the 
opportunity to have an extended schedule for identifying unknowns and service line 
replacement.  
 
Public Education 
9. The requirements for sample result notification are unreasonable. The three calendar days for 
postmarked notification is technically impossible for most water suppliers who may receive 
sample results at the end of the week. In addition, water suppliers generally provide explanation 
and context to sample results through a letter that accompanies the lab report. EPA must 
consider changing the sample results as follows: 
 
a. Provide alternative means by which to transmit sample results. Most water systems 
communicate with their customers through a variety of ways, phone, text, email, and 
social media. The requirement to use the most outdated means of communication to 
transmit sample results impairs the ability of systems to communicate with their 
customers effectively and proactively. It the LCRI is meant to engage and inform 
customers, EPA must provide flexibility in communicating sample results. 
 
b. Provide a longer timeframe (2 weeks) to communicate results that do NOT exceed the 
action level. This will allow water suppliers to focus more effort on providing information 
and education to customers that have high lead levels. Requiring the same level of 

immediate communication will only be detrimental to the efforts to educate the 
customers that truly need it. 
10. The rule must provide guidance or instruction related to sample delivery other than postal mail. 
Many utilities and water suppliers find mail to be an unreliable method to effectively deliver 
communications and information to their customers and consumers. Sample result delivery 
options such as consumer accounts, email, or text messaging should be allowed, as water 
utilities have found these to be more effective at delivering information and are often preferred 
by consumers. 
 
Reporting and Recordkeeping 
11. The as-drafted rule language to include connectors in the inventory does not align with the past 
inventory requirements. As such, water utilities that have expended significant efforts to 
complete their inventories may not have collected the service line connection data in a manner 
that complies with the proposed regulatory requirement. Furthermore, the distinction between 
“never lead” and “no connector” is unclear, as copper services do not have connectors, and 
thus are both. Significant rework is likely required for those who proactively began their 
inventory. 
 
Cost and Affordability 
 
12. The LCRI intends for water utilities to complete all LSL replacement within 10 years and 
estimates the cost of approximately $90 billion. The LCRI uses the BIL as a means for 
communities to afford service line replacement. However, the BIL only allocates $15 billion to 
fund service line replacement. This indicates current federal funding allocation is insufficient for 
the replacement of lead and GRR service lines. 
13. Many communities with large quantities of LSLs are considered economically disadvantaged 
and have been disproportionally affected by the negative impacts of lead services and lead 
plumbing. Therefore, these communities would be further disadvantaged if their water rates 
were increased to afford the cost for LSL replacement without additional federal grants and 
other funding resources. 
 
We appreciate your attention to these important matters and the opportunity to provide our input. As 
a collection of water suppliers and professionals dedicated to the well-being of our community, we 
strongly encourage regulations to strike a balance between protecting public health and considering 
the practical challenges faced by water suppliers. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. We look forward to continued collaboration and the 
opportunity to contribute to the development of effective and scientifically lead and copper rule 
regulations. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Daniel J. Hamlin, PE 
New York State American Water Works Association

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0738 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Andrea Abergel <aabergel@cmua.org>  
Sent: Friday, December 15, 2023 1:24 PM 
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov> 
Cc: Madeline Voitier <MadelineV@acwa.com> 
Subject: USEPA Lead and Copper Rule Improvements EPA‐HQ‐OW‐2022‐0801 – CMUA/ACWA Request 
for Extension of Public Comment Period 
 
 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water,  
 
The California Municipal Utilities Association (CMUA) and Association of California Water Agencies 
(ACWA) respectfully request a 15‐day extension of the public comment deadline on the Lead and 
Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI) to February 20, 2024. I've attached our formal request letter.  
 
Thank you in advance for your consideration.  
 
Andrea Abergel 
Manager of Water Policy 
California Municipal Utilities Association 
(916) 326‐5800 (main line) | aabergel@cmua.org 
(916) 326‐5806 (direct) | (916) 841‐4060 (cell) 
915 L Street Suite 1210  
Sacramento, CA  95814 
 
 
 
The voice of community‐owned water, wastewater, and power 
 
CMUA is a trusted partner to members and stakeholders, advocating for community‐owned water,  
wastewater, and power. Through our efforts, we seek a better California. 
 
CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: This communication with its contents may contain confidential and/or legally privileged information.  
It is solely for the use of the intended recipient(s). Unauthorized interception, review, use or disclosure is prohibited and may  
violate applicable laws including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act. If you are not the intended recipient, please contact  
the sender and destroy all copies of the communication. 
 
 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0826 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
1 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
Michael Goldberg 
Standards and Risk Management Division 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
 
Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
Proposed Rule: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements (LCRI) 
 
The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) is pleased to provide comment to the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on its proposed improvements to the National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper (Lead and Copper Rule).  These proposed 
improvements were formulated in accordance with the Safe Drinking Water Act. 
 
Background 
 
Founded in 1852, ASCE is the nation’s oldest civil engineering organization.  ASCE represents 
more than 150,000 civil engineers in private practice, government, industry, and academia.  It is 
ASCE’s objective to advance the science and profession of engineering to enhance the welfare of 
humanity.  ASCE members are actively involved in the planning, design, and operation of 
drinking water systems nationwide, and are dedicated to ensuring that systems are able to 
provide a safe and reliable supply of drinking water to homes and businesses. 
 
ASCE recognizes the critical importance of safe drinking water to public health, safety, and 
welfare.  To better ensure this, ASCE Policy Statement 361, “Safe Drinking Water”, 
recommends: 
 
• 
Full appropriation of state and federal authorized funding for safe drinking water supply 
and system programs;  
• 
Congress amend the Safe Drinking Water Act to require states to review and update, as 
required, their contaminant-monitoring programs at least once every three years to ensure 
that all potential contaminants are periodically evaluated commensurate with their risk to 
human health;  
• 
Regulations be promulgated under the 1996 amendments to the Act, to balance the 
concern for drinking water quality with risk-based contaminant limitations that include 
adverse health effects, frequency of occurrence, and treatment technologies to avoid 
undue financial burdens on consumers;  
• 
Utilities are encouraged to conduct revenue forecasting models to determine the 
necessary rate revenues that reflect the true cost of water;  

• 
Congress, through the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), to support state 
programs by providing federal funding, program planning assistance, and technical 
guidance with sufficient flexibility to accommodate state and local issues, including the 
development and funding of affordability programs;  
• 
Continued research on emerging pathogens and pollutants and into improved methods 
governing the disinfection of drinking water to protect public health from any harmful 
byproducts;  
• 
The professional education, research, and development necessary to formulate new 
methods of water quality analysis, water treatment, and related technologies be pursued; 
and  
• 
Specific programs and funding for water quality improvements for removal of lead in 
water systems prioritizing lead line, service line, and/or plumbing removal or 
replacement, targeting systems with the highest concentration exceedances of lead and 
copper be implemented as soon as possible. 
 
Lead Service Line Replacement 
 
The 7th Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs Survey and Assessment (DWINSA) provided an 
inventory of the nation’s lead service lines for the first time in the survey’s history.  EPA 
projected a total of 9,223,745,0000 lead service lines nationwide.  These findings are not 
surprising given that many U.S. cities rely on water supply infrastructure installed more than 100 
years ago, when lead was common in pipes and fixtures.  When health risks associated with lead 
exposure became more widely known in the mid to late 20th century, efforts were made at all 
levels of government to address challenges and threats to public health and safety.  This included 
EPA’s first Lead and Copper Rule, enacted in 1991, which restricted lead levels in drinking water 
supplies.  Drinking water utilities also began to more routinely utilize additives to prevent pipe 
corrosion.   
 
In recent years, a few communities have undertaken initiatives to remove lead service lines.  
These programs, however, are costly and compete for other drinking limited capital investment 
dollars with other drinking water utility needs.  The increased expense to deliver safe drinking 
water, combined with the high cost of addressing lead contamination has often resulted in unsafe 
lead levels in drinking water in many communities.  In the past, the costs of replacing lead 
service lines have been affected by lack of adequate funding to support such efforts.  The lead 
service line removal proposal outlined in the proposed Lead and Copper Rule improvement is 
also likely to prove very costly.   
 
The proposed Lead and Copper Rule improvements include an ambitious plan to remove all lead 
service lines within 10 years.  As previously noted in ASCE Policy Statement 361, ASCE 
supports specific water quality improvement programs which prioritize lead service line 
replacement.  EPA should make every effort to ensure such an undertaking includes rigorous 
community engagement to ensure that service lines which connect private homes and businesses 
to public water systems are addressed without placing excessive burden on utility ratepayers, 
especially those in disadvantaged communities.  This may include providing proper incentives 
such as grants and tax credits to address the costs of service line removal.  Research has shown 
that when customers are relied on to pay for lead pipe replacement, low-income households are 

put at greater risk of lead exposure as they are less likely to be able to take on the cost of 
replacing lead service lines on their property.1  EPA should make every effort to ensure that the 
most vulnerable populations that could potentially benefit the most from such an ambitious 
proposal are not disproportionately affected by the cost of such an endeavor. 
 
In addition, it is also critical for EPA to effectively plan removal efforts based on risk.  While it is 
essential to ensure that the cost of replacement does not fall disproportionately on disadvantaged 
communities, it is also necessary to prioritize removal of service lines that pose the greatest lead 
contamination risk.  This will have the effect of addressing a long-term challenge while 
preventing potential health crises in the short term in areas served by water systems using older 
pipes which are leaching lead at higher levels. 
 
While IIJA made a significant investment in lead service line replacement, the proposed 
undertaking will require significant additional resources at the federal, state, and local level to 
meet the cost of replacing lead service lines and reducing financial burdens on customers.  The 
cost of service line removal has been estimated to be as high as $10,000 per line.2  In 2021, the 
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) provided a historic investment of more than $50 
billion to address water infrastructure challenges.  This included $15 billion through the Drinking 
Water State Revolving Fund (DWSRF) program to address lead service line replacement.  While 
this marks a historic investment in lead service line removal, it is far short of the nearly $93 
billion which will be required to remove all lead service lines inventoried in DWINSA.  In 
addition, annual appropriations for the DWSRF and other infrastructure financing programs have 
remained flat or seen funding reductions, meaning they have not kept up with funding levels in 
IIJA.   
 
To address challenges to drinking water systems nationwide, ASCE recommends that annual 
funding levels for financing programs such as the DWSRF be program be funded at a level at 
least three times greater than is currently in place.  It is also critical to ensure that other financing 
programs like the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act and the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture Rural Development Program are fully funded.3   
 
As noted earlier, the 7th DWINSA which was released by EPA in 2023 provided for the first time 
a projected inventory of lead service lines nationwide.  EPA must continue to ensure that 
DWINSA is delivered on schedule every four years, and that it adequately marks progress in 
reducing the presence of lead service lines.  This will not only inform policy makers of the 
effectiveness of removal efforts, but also direct where federal funds should be best allocated to 
improve the efficiency and speed of removal. 
 
 
1 Lead Pipes and Environmental Justice: A Study of Lead Pipe Replacement in Washington, DC,  Environmental 
Defense Fund; American University School of Public Affairs, March 2020.  
https://www.edf.org/sites/default/files/u4296/LeadPipe_EnvironJustice_AU%20and%20EDF%20Report.pdf 
2 American Water Works Association, Considerations when Costing Lead Service Line Identification and 
Replacement: Final Report, November 2022.  
https://www.awwa.org/Portals/0/AWWA/ETS/Resources/Technical%20Reports/2022%2011%2029%20072%20CD
M%20SL%20Identification%20and%20LSLR%20Costs.pdf 
3 Drinking Water, 2021 ASCE Report Card for America’s Infrastructure, https://infrastructurereportcard.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/01/Drinking-Water-2021.pdf 

 
Strengthening Lead Level Protections 
 
The proposed Lead and Copper Rule improvements includes a proposal to lower the lead action 
level from 15 parts per billion to 10 parts per billion.  Water systems would be required to notify 
the public when their lead sampling exceeds this action level, followed by action to reduce lead 
exposure while replacing lead service lines.  Systems which exceed the new action level multiple 
times would be required to conduct additional outreach and make lead filters available to 
customers.  Robust public engagement of the risks of lead exposure is necessary for protecting 
public health and safety and will be critical to the success of the proposed improvements.  EPA 
must also ensure that adequate technical assistance is available to communities in order to 
support effective testing and monitoring of lead levels to avoid multiple incidents exceeding the 
action level. 
 
Conclusion 
 
ASCE thanks EPA for the opportunity to provide comment on this critical public safety proposal.  
Addressing lead contamination and maintaining safe drinking water systems is a difficult and 
complex challenge.  EPA has put forward an ambitious proposal to address these challenges, 
proper implementation of which will be critical to ensuring its success.  We hope EPA will give 
proper consideration to the views and recommendations put forward by ASCE on this issue. 
 
Should you have any further questions or require any further input, we encourage you to contact 
Matthew McGinn, ASCE Senior Manager for Government Relations at mmcginn@asce.org, or 
at (202) 789-7852.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0860 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 2, 2024 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re:  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and 
Copper: Improvements – Docket ID No. EPA–HQ– OW–2022–0801 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
The Association of California Water Agencies (ACWA) and the California Municipal Utilities Association 
(CMUA) appreciate the opportunity to provide comments on the Environmental Protection Agency’s 
(EPA’s) National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (88 Fed. Reg. 
84,878 (Dec. 6, 2023)). ACWA’s more than 470 public water agency members supply over 90 percent of 
the water delivered to cities, farms, and businesses in California. CMUA’s over 60 public water agency 
members deliver water to over 75 percent of Californians.  
I. 
Introduction  
 
ACWA and CMUA appreciate and value EPA’s efforts to reduce exposure to lead and copper and protect 
public health. Reducing lead in drinking water requires a collaborative effort by federal and state 
regulators, water systems, consumers, and many others. However, as is often the case with a national 
rule, a ‘one-size fits all’ approach seldom addresses the subtle but significant differences that may exist 
among the affected parties. 
 
There is no question that lead contamination in drinking water is a significant threat to public health. 
Exposure to this extremely toxic heavy metal can be harmful even at low levels. Infants and young 
children are at particularly high risk because the harmful effects of lead exposure occur at lower levels in 
children compared to adults.1  
 
California has taken significant actions to reduce exposure to lead.2 California’s requirements to test for 
lead in drinking water at schools, inventory utility-owned service lines and replace lead service lines are 
robust progressive efforts.3 Through these efforts, community water systems (CWS) confirmed the 
limited to no presence of lead service lines (LSL) within their systems.  
 
ACWA and CMUA strongly support the removal of LSLs; however, based on California’s experience, we 
urge EPA to make additional changes to the LCRI to improve CWS’ ability to implement the rule. 
 
1 EPA Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water, Basic Information about Lead in Drinking Water (last updated Jan. 5, 2024), 
click here. 
2 See California Department of Public Health, Statutes and Regulations (last updated Sept. 15, 2023), click here. 
3 See California State Water Resources Control Board, Lead Service Line Inventory Requirement for Public Water Systems (last 
updated Dec. 8, 2023), click here 

 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
II. 
Comments 
 
A. Replacement  
 
ACWA and CMUA agree with EPA that removing LSLs is paramount to protecting public health. Our 
members strongly support voluntary programs and outreach to help and encourage customers to 
replace their lead pipes and fixtures. However, we maintain serious concerns with the proposed LSL 
replacement requirements. In particular, the associated CWS liability with replacing a customer-owned 
LSL. 
 
COMMENT 1 – LIABILITY CONCERNS – ACWA and CMUA are greatly concerned with the liability placed on 
CWS in extending the replacement requirements to the customer-owned portion of the service line. 
 
EPA is proposing mandatory full service line replacement of LSLs and “galvanized requiring replacement” 
(GRR) service lines “under the control of” the water system within 10 years or less, regardless of the 
lead level.4 “Under the control of” the water system would be defined as “wherever a water system 
has adequate access (e.g. legal access, physical access) to conduct full service line replacement.”5 
CWS would have to make a “reasonable attempt” to reach the property owner about service line 
replacement.6 
 
ACWA and CMUA appreciate EPA’s acknowledgement of the legal hurdles and complications regarding 
customer-owned service line replacement and the agency’s goal to find a workable solution to operating 
on the customer-owned side of the service line. However, expanding mandatory replacement programs 
to include the customer side is not possible for CWS in California.  
 
Existing law prevents CWS from accessing or paying for work on private property. CWS cannot be liable 
for replacing, fixing, or maintaining privately owned plumbing. Requesting consent for access to 
thousands of people’s properties would be difficult, present legal hurdles, and would increase CWS 
liability substantially. While a CWS may make reasonable attempts to inform customers of the presence 
of lead service lines on their property, it ultimately should be the responsibility of the customer to hire a 
qualified and properly insured contractor to perform any replacement work on private property. CWS 
would potentially be required to carry additional insurance to complete work on private property. 
Completing work on a customer’s property could leave CWS vulnerable to additional liability related to 
that work. 
 
Customer lines are typically installed before driveways, sidewalks and landscaping. Replacing these lines 
will likely require replacement and repair of the private property damaged in the process. If a water 
district that provides only drinking water is required to disturb the infrastructure owned/maintained by 
another entity, who is responsible for replacing the damaged property?  
 
Most public agencies are focused on contracting related to the infrastructure required for the 
production and transmission of drinking water, not home restoration, and would incur additional costs 
to engage outside contracting services to restore private property to pre-existing conditions. Public 
 
4 88 Fed. Reg. at 84967 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
5 88 Fed. Reg. at 84920 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
6 88 Fed. Reg. at 84921 (Dec. 6, 2023). 

 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
water agencies are local governments, not for-profit entities. As such, placing the financial burden of 
customer LSL replacement on CWS is untenable.  
 
Moreover, the proposed LCRI requirements do not exist in a vacuum. Water systems are currently 
bracing for EPA to finalize both a drinking water standard for several PFAS as well as a rule to regulate 
two PFAS as “hazardous substances.” These requirements, when taken as a whole, will likely further 
exacerbate the water affordability issues already facing water systems and their customers. For the 
reasons stated above, ACWA and CMUA urge EPA to remove the private line replacement requirements 
from the rule. 
 
COMMENT 2 – GRR OFFRAMP – Should the replacement requirements remain in the LCRI, ACWA and 
CMUA urge EPA to consider an offramp for GRRs that are demonstrated to present no significant lead 
exposure.  
 
If the private line requirements remain in the rule, ACWA and CMUA urge EPA to revise the 
requirements to acknowledge that after a certain amount of time, or upon completion of a 
demonstration, some galvanized lines do not present public health concerns and, therefore, are not in 
need of replacement.  
 
Galvanized lines that were downstream of an LSL are, for some time, a public health risk and can impart 
lead into the water. However, after a period of time, those risks diminish. A testing and demonstration 
framework, such as that described in Edwards et al (2022)7 report “Evaluating Key Factors that Affect 
Lead Accumulation and Release of Lead from Galvanized Pipes” should be included in the LCRI. Such 
testing may include a review of historical corrosion control treatment, sequential tap sampling, 
measurement of co-occurring metals, measurement of particulate versus dissolved lead, analysis of 
scale in excavated pipes, or other tools that may become available.  
 
We suggest that EPA create a regulatory mechanism whereby a GRR can come off the 
inventory/replacement lists if a study is performed that demonstrates that the GRR is no longer a source 
for lead. Repeated annual notifications of these GRR-served customers with alarming language about 
lead’s health effects, while water samples indicate that no lead is present, will result in confusion and 
mistrust of the safety of the water.  
 
We encourage EPA, where possible, to promote a collaborative process that recognizes the many 
variables that come into play that affect the feasibility of replacement projects.  
 
COMMENT 3 – PARTIAL LSL REPLACEMENT – ACWA and CMUA support allowing partial LSL replacements 
during planned infrastructure projects or emergency work. 
 
EPA requested feedback on whether stakeholders agree with allowing partial LSL replacements during 
planning infrastructure projects and emergency work.8 Our members agree with allowing partial LSL 
replacements in these cases because the requirement to do full LSL replacement (i.e., customer consent, 
scheduling work, payment aspects) would delay necessary infrastructure work. Delaying planned and 
emergency infrastructure work would impact water agencies’ ability to provide water to customers.  
 
7 Edwards, M, Mohsin, Parks, Masters, Arnold, Roenfeldt. Evaluating Key Factors that Affect Lead Accumulation and Release of 
Lead from Galvanized Pipes, Water Research Foundation, 2022. 
8 88 Fed. Reg. at 85067. 

 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
COMMENT 4 – CUSTOMER OUTREACH – ACWA and CMUA suggest that EPA modify the customer outreach 
requirements for LSL replacement to be more functional for CWS. 
 
While we do not support the proposal to require CWS to offer LSL replacement, ACWA and CMUA 
appreciate EPA’s acknowledgement that some customers will not be receptive to CWS outreach or able 
or willing to replace their LSLs.9 EPA is proposing that “where customer consent is required by State 
or local law or water tariff agreement, the system would be required to make a reasonable effort to 
obtain property owner consent.”10 As proposed, reasonable effort would include at least four 
customer outreach attempts using at least two different communication methods. 
 
Requiring four outreach attempts by CWS would increase the burden without added public health 
benefit. Therefore, ACWA and CMUA suggest the outreach attempt requirement be reduced to 
two, mirroring LCRR requirements. One of those attempts would be written, such as a door hanger, 
email, mail, or text with a copy of the document kept in CWS records, and the second attempt can 
be written or verbal, again documented by the CWS in writing. 
 
Additionally, EPA is soliciting feedback on how to handle lines on properties where the customer has 
objected to their LSL being replaced. Previous stakeholders emphasized the safety concerns for utility 
staff in dealing with this potentially hostile situation.11 If the replacement requirements proceed as 
proposed, we suggest that the lines on properties where customers object to their replacement be 
deemed as not “under the control of” the water system and forego replacement of the lines, to be 
updated on an as-needed basis.  
 
COMMENT 5 – LSL REPLACEMENT FUNDING – EPA’s focus should be on providing sufficient funding directly 
to customers who voluntarily choose to replace LSL replacement without shifting the burden to CWS. 
 
To successfully eliminate exposure to lead in drinking water, the impetus should be on providing the 
necessary funding for voluntary customer LSL replacement programs without putting the added 
financial burden on CWS. This can be achieved through low-income property owner grant programs and 
additional federal funding streams.  
 
EPA estimates that there are between 6.3 and 9.3 million LSLs nationwide and replacing all of these lines 
would cost between $25 billion and $56 billion.12 To support eliminating lead service lines, EPA points to 
funding in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law that included $15 billion for LSL replacement projects as 
well as $11.7 billion in general funding through the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund, which can also 
be utilized for lead removal projects.13  
We are supportive of the unprecedented federal funding that has already been dedicated to replacing 
LSLs. 
 
 
9See 88 Fed. Reg. at 84922 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
10 88 Fed. Reg. at 84923 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
11 88 Fed. Reg. at 84923 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
12 86 Fed. Reg. at 14064 (Mar. 12, 2021).  
13 EPA, Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements Informational Webinar (Dec. 6, 2023), click here. 

 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
COMMENT 6 – STATE FUNDING CONFLICTS – Constitutional provisions in California prohibit CWS from using 
public funds for individual customers.  
 
California constitutional provisions place limits on CWS that would be in conflict with the customer-
owned replacement provisions of the LCRI. Under the California Constitution, the gift of public funds to 
any individual, corporation, or another government agency is prohibited.14 The Constitutional 
exemptions to the restriction are not inclusive of any of the scenarios envisioned by the LCRI. While the 
LCRI does not specify how the costs of replacing customer-owned lines will be covered, the LCRI points 
to available federal funding revenues. The inference is that a CWS would apply for federal funding to 
then utilize for the benefit of several individual customers. Use of federal funding in this manner for 
customer-owned LSL replacements would be in direct violation of the California Constitution.  
 
There are additional complications with the California Constitution. Proposition 218 governs “property-
related” fees or charges. CWS retail water rates are a property-related fee or charge, and Proposition 
218 effectively limits how CWS sets retail water rates. It requires that the rates be set proportionally, be 
no higher than what it costs to provide the service, be for a service immediately available to the 
customer, and not be for any general governmental service. Proposition 218 further complicates 
covering the cost of replacing customer-owned LSLs.  
 
We request that EPA provide additional guidance on how the use of federal funding would not violate 
California Constitutional mandates.  
 
B. Inventory  
 
COMMENT 7 – LSL INVENTORY – ACWA and CMUA urge EPA not to mandate inclusion of lead connectors 
in the LCRI inventory. 
 
The LCRR requires CWS to create a publicly accessible service line inventory that includes the customer-
owned portion of the service line by October 16, 2024.15 All water systems must develop an updated 
initial inventory, known as the “baseline inventory,” by the final LCRI compliance date, which builds on 
the LCRR requirements of the initial inventory.16 Notably, the proposed LCRI inventory must include lead 
connectors (i.e. goosenecks, pigtails) in the baseline inventory by the compliance date and replace them 
whenever encountered.17 Lead connectors are not included under the LCRR inventory requirements.18  
 
In this proposal, EPA acknowledged that it “does not expect those projected improvements from the 
LCRR to be realized if EPA promulgates yet another new regulatory framework for controlling lead 
just as compliance with the LCRR is required.”19 ACWA and CMUA agree with EPA. Mandating 
inclusion of lead connectors, records of which often are extremely limited or non-existent, would 
create an unnecessary additional burden on water systems with limited public health benefits. 
 
 
14 Calif. Const. Art. 16, section 6.  
15 86 Fed. Reg. at 4290-91 (Jan. 15, 2021); see also 86 Fed. Reg. 71574 (Dec. 17, 2021).  
16 88 Fed. Reg. at 84933 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
17 88 Fed. Reg. at 84882 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
18 86 Fed. Reg. at 4213 (Jan. 15, 2021).   
19 88 Fed. Reg. at 84903 (Dec. 6, 2023). 

 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
In reaching its determination that the final LCRR should not require lead connectors to be included 
in the inventory, EPA recognized the issues in dealing with lead connectors. Namely that, “unlike an 
inventory of service lines, whose material can be visually inspected often without excavation from inside 
the home or in the meter box, a complete and accurate inventory of connectors would require 
excavation that disturbs road pavement and repaving post-inspection—an undertaking that EPA expects 
would not be feasible or practical for most systems.”20 Instead, CWS are encouraged to voluntarily 
include information about lead connectors in the inventory if possible and must replace system-owned 
lead connectors as they are encountered by the water system.21  
 
The process of visually inspecting or otherwise identifying lead connectors has not changed from 
the time the LCRR was promulgated until now. The undertaking would still not be feasible or 
practical for most systems. It is unclear why the LCRI proposes these additional inventory 
requirements for the baseline inventory considering these practical challenges.  Including lead 
connectors in the LSL inventory would create unnecessary inconsistencies between the initial LCRR 
inventory already underway and the baseline LCRI inventory.  
 
As a result, we ask that EPA not mandate lead connectors be included in the LCRI baseline inventory. We 
support the existing practice that CWS may voluntarily include information about lead connectors in the 
baseline service line inventory. We also support that CWS replace system-owned connectors as they are 
encountered, except during emergency infrastructure work.  
 
COMMENT 8 – LSL DEFINITION – ACWA and CMUA request that EPA modify the definition of galvanized 
service line that is considered an LSL. 
 
ACWA and CMUA continue to have concerns with the galvanized pipe language in the definition of an 
LSL. Under the LCRR, “a galvanized service line is considered a lead service line if it ever was or is 
currently downstream of any lead service line or service line of unknown material.”22 The inclusion of 
“ever was” is problematic as a CWS may not have specific records for service lines that go back to the 
initial installation due to various reason such as historical annexation of private water systems or 
merging several water systems over the decades. In these cases, utilities may be unable to definitively 
prove or disprove what material may have been upstream of the galvanized line throughout the life of 
the service line. The terminology is overly expansive and needs to be narrowed for CWS to meet 
inventory requirements of the LCRR and LCRI within the established compliance periods.  
 
ACWA and CMUA urge EPA to remove the “ever was” standard from the definition. Instead, we 
recommend that a galvanized service line be considered a lead service line only if it is currently, or is 
known in the past to have been, downstream of a lead service line or service line of currently unknown 
material.  
 
COMMENT 9 – GUIDANCE – ACWA and CMUA appreciate EPA’s responsiveness in issuing guidance for 
developing and maintaining a service line inventory under LCRR requirements.   
 
ACWA and CMUA previously asked EPA to include an ability to make a certification of no LSL on the 
customer-owned portion of the service line without visual inspection in the LCRR inventory guidance. It 
 
20 86 Fed. Reg. at 4213 (Jan. 15, 2021).   
21 86 Fed. Reg. at 4213 (Jan. 15, 2021).   
22 86 Fed. Reg. at 4281 (Jan. 15, 2021).   

 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
is important to note that California has few LSLs statewide.23 Moreover, the best evidence to date shows 
that many, if not most, LCRR-regulated water systems in California have no customer-owned LSLs.24 
Although there were thousands of LSLs installed during the 1940s, these have all been removed.  
 
For an LCRR-regulated water system with no LSLs, using the techniques described in the LCRR would be 
challenging and expensive. Many CWS in California would have to expend significant capital and staff 
hours merely to prove a negative while opening the door for added liability. This is not health-protective 
for customers or a productive use of CWS resources.  
 
EPA recognized this situation and included the section “Requirements and Recommendations for 
Systems with Only Non-Lead Service Lines” in the final LCRR guidance. ACWA and CMUA appreciate the 
inclusion of this provision in the guidance document and look forward to working with EPA on 
implementation of the inventory requirements.  
 
C. Schools and Childcare Facilities  
 
COMMENT 10 – WAIVER – ACWA and CMUA believe that California’s existing program for lead testing in 
schools and childcare facilities should be granted a waiver from duplicative federal requirements.  
 
Through Assembly Bill 746 (2017) and Assembly Bill 2370 (2018), California created separate 
requirements for testing of licensed childcare facilities and K-12 Schools, which differ from the LCRR.25 
AB 746 mandated one-time lead testing of schoolsites of a local education agency26 constructed before 
January 1, 2010.27 The proposed LCRI allows for state waivers for programs that meet the same 
requirements as the LCRI if schools were sampled between January 1, 2021 and three years after the 
effective date of the final rule. The California sampling efforts concluded at the end of 2019. Requiring 
California school sampling of the same facilities mere years after the AB 746 mandate would provide 
little public health benefit.  
 
The testing that CWS completed to comply with the California requirements should be considered 
adequate to comply with the provisions of the LCRI. Additionally, the requirement to inventory system-
owned service lines tasked CWS in California with replacement actions through permits which are 
annually amended. Those permits and the amendments from 2017 include testing requirements for 
schools and childcare facilities. ACWA and CMUA believe that EPA should recognize the importance of 
these efforts in California and not invalidate or duplicate the state’s ongoing programs to address lead in 
schools and childcare facilities.  
 
Given the recent and expansive testing of schools and childcare facilities in California, ACWA and CMUA 
recommend that EPA expand the waiver window to account for prior sampling. Namely, for school 
sampling conducted between 2017 to three years after the effective date of the LCRI. Additional 
sampling would then occur every five years pursuant to the LCRI.  
 
 
23  California State Water Resources Control Board, Lead Service Line Inventory Requirement for Public Water Systems (last 
updated Dec. 8, 2023), click here 
24 See Water Practice and Technology, A study of lead service lines in California (Sept. 2022), click here. 
25 AB 2370 mandated the drinking water sampling of childcare facilities constructed before January 1, 2010 beginning by 
January 1, 2020. This program should qualify for a waiver from LCRI initial sampling requirements for childcare facilities.  
26 Defined as “school district, county office of education, or charter school located in a public facility.” 
27 The lead action level in the bill was 15 parts per billion.  

 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
D. Tap Sampling  
 
COMMENT 11 – TAP SAMPLING TIMELINE – ACWA and CMUA urge EPA to modify the customer notification 
timeline for tap sampling results with no exceedances. 
 
The LCRI tap sampling requirement would require that water systems notify customers no later than 
three calendar days after sampling results are obtained, regardless of whether or not those results show 
exceedances.28 Our members are concerned with this proposed timeline. We recommend that water 
agencies be allowed to provide results to customers within seven calendar days, when no exceedance 
occurs. 
 
E. Compliance Deadline 
 
COMMENT 12 – COMPLIANCE DEADLINE – ACWA and CMUA support the extended LCRI compliance dates. 
 
EPA is proposing that CWS will have three years after the final LCRI is promulgated to comply with its 
requirements. In tandem, EPA plans to extend the compliance deadline for the majority of the 
requirements in the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) past the original compliance date of 
October 16, 2024. Water systems would continue to implement 2021 LCRR requirements and the LCRR 
inventory requirements until the LCRI compliance date.29  
 
Extending the LCRR compliance date past October 16, 2024 would allow additional time for CWS to 
better prepare to implement the numerous requirements of the LCRR and LCRI., ACWA and CMUA 
support EPA’s proposal for a three-year compliance deadline for the LCRI as well as extending the time 
allowed for the majority of LCRR requirements. 
 
III. 
Conclusion  
 
ACWA and CMUA appreciate the opportunity to comment on EPA’s proposed LCRI and urge EPA to 
implement the recommended changes that are necessary to provide clarity and assurances for CWS. If 
you have any questions regarding these comments, please contact Madeline Voitier, ACWA’s Federal 
Relations Representative at madelinev@acwa.com or Andrea Abergel, CMUA’s Manager of Water Policy 
at aabergel@cmua.org.  
 
Sincerely, 
  
 
 
Madeline Voitier  
 
 
 
 
Andrea Abergel 
Federal Relations Representative  
 
 
Manager of Water Policy  
Association of California Water Agencies 
 
California Municipal Utilities Association 
 
28 88 Fed. Reg. at 85071 (Dec. 6, 2023). 
29 88 Fed. Reg. at 84967 (Dec. 6, 2023).

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1125 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Our Vision: To be an efficient provider of superior water and wastewater service and a leader in the water industry. 
 
1500 Marilla, Room 4AN, Dallas Texas 75201 
Telephone (214) 670-3146 • Fax (214) 670-3154 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
 
RE:  National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper Improvements (Docket 
ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
 
Dallas Water Utilities, (DWU) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the National Primary 
Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper Improvements (LCRI).  DWU is a municipally 
owned regional water, wastewater, and stormwater utility that provides treated and untreated 
water services to Dallas and 23 suburban cities, serving a combined population of approximately 
2.6 million people.  DWU utilizes surface water from six connected reservoirs and reuse supplies 
that are treated at three water treatment plants and delivered through a distribution system with 
over 5,000 miles of water mains.  DWU has approximately 340,000 customer accounts (service 
lines) within the City of Dallas. 
 
Although DWU supports the EPA’s efforts and understands the urgency to require water systems 
to replace lead service lines, remove the lead trigger level, reduce the lead action level to 0.010 
mg/L, and strengthen tap sampling procedures, among other changes that would improve public 
health protection and simplify the rule relative to the 2021 Lead and Copper Rule Revisions 
(LCRR), we also have the following suggestions: 
 
 
Allow water systems to validate their inventories using predictive modeling base on existing 
record, field investigations and water quality testing. 
 
Homes within a neighborhood are typically developed within a few years of one another.  
This temporal proximity of construction of homes within a neighborhood lends itself to 
consistent construction practices throughout the neighborhood (i.e., if lead service lines 
were use in one home there is a high likely hood that lead service lines were used in the 
other homes within the neighborhood and if non lead materials are used in one home 
there is a high likely hood that non-lead service lines were used in the other homes.)     
 
Additionally, the Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1986 (Pub L No. 99-339) 
required the use of “lead-free” pipe, solder, and flux in the installation or repair of any 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
February 5, 2024 
RE:  National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and  
Page 2 of 3 
Copper Improvements (Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
 
 
 
public water system or any plumbing in a residential or non-residential facility providing 
water for human consumption.   The Texas Commission of Environmental Quality Lead 
Service Line Inventory identified July 1, 1988, as the Texas state lead ban.   
 
With construction practices and the implementation of the Safe Drinking Water Act 
Amendments of 1986, it would be possible to utilize a predictive model looking at new 
home construction prior to the date the State banned the use of lead.  If the sampling of 
homes with similar construction dates within a neighborhood test negative, the remaining 
homes are predicted to be negative.  Allowing for the predictive modeling will reduce the 
testing cost and will accelerate the overall testing process.  
 
Allow the identification of lines as non-lead based on pipe size and include the actual pipe 
size in the rule. 
 
The diameter of lead service lines are limited in size.  According to the EPA’s Guidance 
for Developing and Maintaining a Service Line Inventory (EPA 816-B-22-001) lead 
service lines “were generally not constructed with an interior diameter over two inches, 
they will typically be connected to single family homes or buildings with a limited 
number of units.” 
 
Based on existing EPA Guidance the LCRI should identify that any service line with an 
interior diameter over two inches can be considered non-lead.  Identifying a maximum 
interior diameter size to inventory would reduce the amount of sampling and associated 
cost to develop the inventory required by the LCRI.   
 
Allow time for the water systems to review and double check all the results before notifying 
a customer, the proposed rule would require customer notification within 3 days, which 
would make verification difficult. 
 
As per the rule (§141.85(d)(2) and (4)) the system would be required to deliver sampling 
results to consumers within three days of learning of the sampling results.  The three-day 
notification time is impactable in providing customers with definitive information about 
their service line.  Alerting a customer to a lead service line prior to verification of the 
initial test results would lead to undo worry, concern and costs for the customer.  For 
example, initial testing of service lines within DWU’s system produced positive results 
for lead.  Upon field verification of the testing results it was found in each case that the 
service lines that tested positive were in fact not lead (i.e., false positives).  The time to 
field verify positive test results typically takes longer than 3 days.  Had the customer been 
informed of the initial test results prior to verification and then several days later told the 
test was a false positive, the customer could lose confidence it the utilities ability to 
identify lead service lines and may subject the customer to unnecessary plumbing and 
medical costs.   
 
 
 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
February 5, 2024 
RE:  National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and  
Page 3 of 3 
Copper Improvements (Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
 
 
 
Obtaining property owner consent  
 
DWU supports EPA’s proposal that a reasonable effort includes four attempts to engage 
the customer using at least two different methods, which is double the outreach as 
compared to the LCRR and incorporates the best practice of using multiple 
communication methods to reach the customer.   However, DWU does not support EPA’s 
proposal to explicitly provide that States may require systems to conduct additional 
attempts and may require specific outreach methods to be used.   
 
Thank you for your consideration of DWU suggestions to the National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulations for Lead and Copper Improvements. 
 
Please contact Regina Stencel, DWU’s Assistant Director for Water Delivery at (214) 671-9184 
or regina.stencel@dallas.gov of you have any questions or need any additional information 
regarding DWU’s comments and suggestions. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
/s/ Sarah Standifer 
 
Sarah Standifer  
Interim Director

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0737 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Curtiss DPW <curtissdpw@gmail.com> 
Date: Wed, Dec 6, 2023 at 1:36 PM 
Subject: Proposed LCRI rule 
To: <press@epa.gov> 
 
Could you provide the primary items/topics that were identified as deficiencies in the current rule which 
initiated and drove the development of this proposal? Thanks! 
 
Respectfully, 
Larry Swarr 
Village of Curtiss Public Works  
55 Circle Drive 
Cell: 715-551-9802 
Office: 715-223-1755 
Email: curtissdpw@gmail.com 
 
May we enjoy every day as a good day knowing that rain or sunshine, it is all a blessing and provision 
from our heavenly Father!  
"That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil 
and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust." - The Good News according to 
Matthew

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0918 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0755 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1113 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan  
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue,  
NW Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
Via electronic submission 
 
Re: Docket ID #: EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801; National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
As the Presidents of the three largest water utilities in Connecticut, we appreciate the opportunity to provide our input on 
the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). Our three utilities – 
Aquarion Water Company, Connecticut Water Company, and South Central Connecticut Regional Water Authority (RWA) 
– serve a combined population of over one million people across Connecticut. Additionally, Aquarion is the public water 
supplier to a population of approximately 45,000 in Massachusetts and New Hampshire, while Connecticut Water serves 
nearly 50,000 people in Maine. 
We fully support the comments on LCRI made by the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies and the American 
Water Works Association. Your agency’s proposed revisions go well beyond simply fixing existing regulations and instead 
completely reshape the framework of the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR). The current timeline and status of the LCRR and 
LCRI also creates ambiguity and confusion for all stakeholders. Additional clarity is needed to ensure water systems are 
adequately prepared.  
Ten-Year Replacement Timeline 
While the goal of eliminating potential lead exposure through the replacement of lead service lines (LSL) is 
commendable, it will require significant time and resources from water systems to fulfill EPA’s proposed rulemaking to 
eliminate 100 percent of LSLs within 10 years, while balancing the imperatives of aging infrastructure and customer 
affordability. Moreover, your agency has introduced numerous additional requirements that could prove impractical once a 
water system has identified and replaced its LSLs and galvanized requiring replacement (GRR) lines. 
As water industry leaders, we fully support your aim to promptly identify, remove and replace LSLs, and we agree that 
their complete removal is critical for safeguarding public health. In fact, we have already taken proactive measures to 
identify and replace lead service lines consistent with the spirit of the proposed rule. 
Water System Access to Private Side 
To accomplish the primary goal of the LCRI, the EPA appears to consider access to private property as synonymous with 
control over the private side of the service line. While we recognize the EPA's acknowledgement of situations where the 
private side may not be accessible to the water system, we caution against placing water systems in an impossible position 
of compelling customers, also known as ratepayers, to replace their side of the line. The feasibility of ultimately replacing 
the private side of the line depends on the requisite level of federal grants or passing on the entirety of the costs to water 
customers through increased rates.  
Competing Priorities & Limited Resources 
It is worth noting that in 2024, two significant regulations under the Safe Drinking Water Act are expected to reach their 
finalization. These regulations include the aforementioned rule and new PFAS regulations. Your agency estimates that the 
implementation of these two rulemakings alone could cost up to $4.8 billion dollars annually.  
In addition to adhering to other regulations, water systems are facing a pressing need to modernize their aging 
infrastructure, protect systems against cyber-attacks, enhance customer experiences, and adapt to the growing threats  
 
 

The Honorable Michael S. Regan  
February 5, 2024 
Page 2 
 
posed by climate change. Ultimately, the burden of complying with these regulatory mandates will be borne by customers 
through higher water rates. 
Investor-owned, private, and publicly owned water systems, as well as not-for-profit quasi-governmental agencies, play a 
crucial role in supplying drinking water, an essential human service. These water systems must strike a balance between 
the costs associated with providing clean water and the rates they charge customers.  
It is crucial to address misunderstandings and acknowledge that disadvantaged communities are likely to bear a 
disproportionate financial burden due to the increased costs. As water systems strive to meet strict regulatory standards 
and ensure the provision of safe and clean drinking water, the economic realities they face highlight the importance of 
exploring sustainable funding mechanisms and seeking support from different levels of government. 
We acknowledge the EPA's recognition that certain water systems may face challenges in meeting the proposed 
requirement of completing LSLs replacement within 10 years. This includes water systems, such as ours, that have a 
significant number of known LSLs, goosenecks, and GRRs and would need to replace more than 10,000 lines annually. 
Additionally, water systems with a high proportion of LSLs and GRR lines relative to the total number of households 
served would also be affected. 
To meet the schedule for replacing lines, it would be necessary to deploy multiple crews daily, especially in regions like 
the northeast with challenging weather conditions that may reduce working days. Consequently, approximately 60 lines 
would need to replaced daily, assuming optimal conditions and dedicated focus on LSL replacement. However, the actual 
daily replacement needs would be significantly higher than these estimates. 
Furthermore, water systems would need to effectively coordinate the efforts of these work crews, ensure all necessary 
permissions and preparations are in place, and allocate significant financial and time resources to this task. Lowering the 
threshold and extending the timeline would ease the rate impact, allowing water systems to make measured progress in 
LSL replacement and manage limited resources more effectively alongside other public health responsibilities. 
Enormous Cost of Compliance & Financial Impacts on Customers 
The federal tax code presents additional challenges that may cause delays in the complete replacement of LSLs. If a water 
system decides to use tax-exempt bonds to finance the replacement of both the public and private portions of a lead 
service line, they must go through the IRS' "private business use test" to ensure that much of the bond issuance does not 
benefit a private, home-based business. This process adds significant time and expense to the project. It is important to 
consider these difficulties when developing the final LCRI rule. 
Given the financial struggles faced by individuals across the country, the EPA should carefully consider the significant 
financial impact this rulemaking could have on the public, especially on vulnerable communities. In Connecticut, towns 
and cities such as Ansonia, Bridgeport, Clinton, Derby, East Haven, Hartford, New Haven, and West Haven are 
particularly affected. 
We are deeply focused on the overall cost increases associated with transitioning from the LCRR to the more intricate 
LCRI framework. It is important to note that if the federal government does not provide additional funding, the burden of 
the rule's costs and the removal of all LSLs will primarily fall on our customers. Given that our systems consist of three of 
the largest water utilities in Connecticut, which are likely to have the highest number of LSLs among all utility population 
size categories in the state, we anticipate incurring the highest overall costs. While some individuals outside the water 
sector community argue that water utilities should bear the expense of LSL replacement, they fail to recognize that 
without additional grant funding, these costs will ultimately be incorporated into the rates that support the operations of a 
water system. 
As you know, over the course of 35 years, your agency estimates that this rulemaking will cost between $73.5 billion and 
$126 billion. This far exceeds the $15 billion allocated for LSL replacement in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) of 
2021, which is primarily comprised of loans funded by customers.  
 
 

The Honorable Michael S. Regan  
February 5, 2024 
Page 3 
 
Moreover, the rise in operating expenses caused by inflation and higher interest rates associated with periods of inflation 
will not only affect customer bills, but also pose challenges for community water systems. These systems face difficulties 
in increasing rates, whether through public boards or public utility commissions, and in providing assistance to low-
income customers who are most impacted by rate increases.  
Water systems are constantly striving to meet strict regulatory standards and ensure the delivery of safe, clean drinking 
water. However, the economic realities they face emphasize the need to explore sustainable funding mechanisms and seek 
support from different levels of government.  
Partnering with EPA to Continue Protecting Public Health 
In closing, we appreciate the opportunity to provide feedback on the proposed revisions to the LCRI. As water industry 
leaders serving Connecticut and beyond, we prioritize the protection of our customers and are committed to focusing on 
public health within the communities we serve.  
Thank you for considering our feedback and recommendations to collaboratively formulate an implementable rule that is 
protective of public health and ensures the continued delivery of safe and reliable drinking water. If you have any 
additional questions, please contact any of the undersigned. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Larry Bingaman 
 
 
 
 
President & CEO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Water Authority 
lbingaman@rwater.com 
 
 
 
 
Donald Morrissey 
 
 
 
President 
 
 
 
 
Aquarion Water Company 
DMorrissey@aquarionwater.com 
 
 
Craig Patla 
President & CEO 
Connecticut Water Company 
craig.patla@ctwater.com 
 
 
 

The Honorable Michael S. Regan  
February 5, 2024 
Page 4 
 
 
Cc: 
Governor Lamont 
Senate President Martin M. Looney 
Senate Majority Leader Bob Duff 
Speaker of the House Matt Ritter 
House Majority Leader Jason Rojas 
U.S. Senator Richard Blumenthal 
U.S. Senator Chris Murphy  
U.S. Representative Rosa DeLauro 
U.S. Representative John Larson 
U.S. Representative Jahana Hayes 
U.S. Representative Joe Courtney 
U.S. Representative Jim Himes 
CT Public Health Committee House Co-Chair Representative Jonathan Steinberg 
CT Public Health Committee Senate Co-Chair Senator Catherine Osten 
CT Department of Public Health Commissioner Manisha Juthani MD 
Environmental Health & Drinking Water Branch Chief of Public Health Lori Mathieu 
CT Public Utilities Regulatory Authority Chair Marissa Paslick Gillett 
CT Public Utilities Regulatory Authority Vice-Chair Jack Betkoski

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-1136 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
DATE: 
February 5, 2024 
 
The Honorable Michael Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Submitted via electronic submission:  
https://www.regulations.gov/commenton/EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036 
 
 
RE: Comments on Proposed Rule "National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and   
 
Copper: Improvements", 88 FR 84878 December 6, 2023 
 
Docket ID# EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
 
The City of Tulsa respectfully submits comments relating to the proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI). The City of Tulsa supports improvement of the Lead and Copper Rule and Lead 
and Copper Rule Revisions through the development of the LCRI, and hopes that the information 
within will be considered when finalizing the Rule. 
 
The City of Tulsa appreciates the EPA’s consideration of the information submitted within this 
document. If the EPA requires any other information in regard to this comment, please contact Cathey 
Gillingham at cgillingham@cityoftulsa.org or (918) 591-4114. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Eric Lee, Director 
City of Tulsa Water and Sewer Department 
 
 
EL/cjg 
 
 
CC: Jeff Dunn - TMUA Chair 
 
Shellie Chard - Oklahoma DEQ 
 
 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
 
FORMAL COMMENTS ON THE PROPOSED RULE -  
NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATIONS FOR LEAD AND COPPER: IMPROVEMENTS  
88 Federal Register 84878, December 6, 2023 
Docket Id#: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
General Comments: 
1. Obtaining congressional appropriations will be necessary to support the regulatory requirements of 
the LCRI, and at best, such funding is uncertain. Achieving the service line replacement objective of 
the proposed LCRI, removing all LSLs and GRRSLs within a decade will easily cost $12,000 - 
$15,000 per replaced service line, with much of that cost resulting from the replacement of 
privately-owned service lines. The Infrastructure Investments and Jobs Act (IIJA) is touted in the 
LCRI as a significant funding source, but only provides funds through 2027. The projected LCRI 
compliance date won’t start until at least 2027, with the projected 10-year LSL replacement plans 
continuing long after the IIJA funds stop. Removing all lead service lines fully is a goal the water 
sector shares with the administration, but if that goal is to be achieved it will require substantial 
additional federal funding than is available at present and continuing those funding opportunities. 
Moreover, if more federal funds are made available those funds cannot be directed only to 
disadvantaged communities, as this ties the hands of CWS that are in need of funding for essential 
infrastructure investments, but may not meet the criteria of disadvantaged community.  
2. Because all CWSs will be on the same compliance timeline for LCRR, and now LCRI, they will be 
competing for SRF and other funding dollars, and not all water systems will obtain funding. The 
cost impacts of the Proposed LCRI are substantial and at present could fall directly on CWS 
households, either in the form of direct charges or through water rates increases. The cost of 
drinking water infrastructure is borne almost entirely by rate revenue from CWS customers. Most 
federal and state infrastructure funding comes in the form of loans. Also, with few exceptions (e.g., 
preparation of service line inventories) federal funding is not available to subsidize operational 
expenses.  
3. Proposed LCRI is one of several concurrent regulatory burdens – There are multiple environmental 
regulations that will require infrastructure investments and increase operating costs. The proposed 
LCRI comes at a time when water systems are also facing possible significant regulatory costs as a 
result of EPA rulemakings that are in the process of:  
a. Finalizing a national drinking water standard for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances – EPA’s 
proposed primary drinking water standard for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) is 
anticipated to entail more than $3 billion in annual expenses just for installation and operation 
of required drinking water treatment facilities (88 FR at 18638). 
b. Finalizing a rulemaking that will place water systems at risk of liability for PFAS in wastes they 
have previously released to the environment – the cost implications of designating 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) as Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) Hazardous Substances. 
EPA did not estimate the cost of CERCLA liability for water systems.  
c. Preparing to propose a regulation that will require PWSs relying on surface water to achieve 
greater levels of total organic carbon removal – The soon to be proposed Stage 3 Microbial and 
Disinfection Byproducts rulemakings will also be significant (NDWAC, Letter to the 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
Administrator on Potential Revisions to Microbial and Disinfection Byproducts Rules. December 
14, 2023).  
EPA has a duty to ensure that the entirety of its regulatory program is sustainable for regulated 
entities like CWSs. EPA cannot impose a cumulative regulatory burden on communities that is not 
economically sustainable or that leads to inadequate resources for other key public health 
protections. 
4. Proposed §141.80(c)(3)(ii) addresses how to calculate whether a system has exceeded the lead 
action level. This provision reads,  
“For water systems with lead service lines with sites identified as Tier 1 or 2 under §141.86(a) 
with enough Tier 1 or 2 sites to meet the minimum number of sites listed in §141.86(c) or (d) as 
applicable: … Lead or copper sample results from Tier 3, 4, or 5 sites cannot be included in this 
calculation.”  
EPA must clarify that it does not intend to preclude water systems from including Tier 3, 4, or 5 
sample sites in compliance datasets when systems have otherwise exhausted necessary efforts to 
otherwise achieve sampling at Tier 1 and 2 sample sites shown in the monitoring plans submitted 
to the state prior to compliance monitoring per §141.90(a)(i). Where systems have attempted but 
were unable to successfully engage Tier 1 and 2 customers to participate in compliance 
monitoring, Tier 3 – 5 sample sites should be acceptable in the compliance dataset, even if the 
service line inventory continues to reflect unsampled homes with lead services. This clarification 
will be increasingly important over time as CWSs successfully reduce the number of LSLs in their 
service area, and the remaining occupants with LSLs are either difficult to reach or uncooperative 
and where the remaining LSLs are associated with vacant properties. The report required in 
§141.90(a)(i)(B) provides an opportunity to report the system’s best efforts to comply. 
 
RESPONSE TO EPA’S SPECIFIC REQUESTS FOR COMMENTS  
The following questions are found in the LCRI preamble Section IX, found at 88 FR 85035 – 85038. 
The City of Tulsa’s responses are listed under the same category headings and question numbers as 
delineated in the referenced section. The specific questions are copied here for clarity. 
 
General Matters 
1) “Whether the proposed revisions to the LCRR treatment technique are effective to prevent known or 
anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible in accordance with the SDWA.” 
Proving Technical Feasibility – EPA has not described with any rigor in the Proposed Rule Federal 
Register notice or provided analysis in the associated docket that demonstrates that the proposed 
treatment technique’s optimized corrosion control treatment element is technically feasible. As a 
result, the proposed requirements, if finalized in their current form, would violate both the SDWA and 
the Administrative Procedures Act (APA).  
The treatment technique as proposed in the LCRI includes: a lower lead action level, a new sampling 
protocol for homes with lead service lines, a revised sample pool that includes homes with galvanized 
piping in the home, and retains high-dose orthophosphate addition as the anticipated optimal 
corrosion treatment.  
1. Prior experience under the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) does not provide EPA with data to 
demonstrate that the systems with water characteristics targeted by the Proposed Rule (e.g., those 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
that were reliably compliant under a lead action level of 15 μg/L but not reliably below a lead action 
level of 10 μg/L can indeed make that transition within the constraints described in the Proposal.  
2. The LCR with its action level and sampling construct primarily required controlling soluble lead which 
is the emphasis of CCT methods outlined in the LCR and now proposed LCRI. Lowering the action level 
while incorporating lead observations from a 5th liter sample in compliance tap samples makes 
control of particulate lead control more critical. EPA has not provided analysis demonstrating that 
known CCT methods including orthophosphate can control particulate lead sufficiently for CWSs to 
reliably achieve required lead concentrations.  
3. Prior to this rulemaking EPA has focused the LCR on controlling the solubility of lead and copper. The 
LCRI rulemaking, for the first time, adds control of iron release to the regulatory corrosion control 
paradigm, as the stability of iron scales will underpin compliance for those systems sampling from 
Tier 3 structures.  
The proposal also requires many water systems to apply limited local funds, borrowing capacity, field 
personnel time, and community good will to fulfill the construction and administrative burdens of the 
proposed LCRI. Actions that will require re-allocation of resources from other needed investments in 
infrastructure renewal, assuring an adequate water supply, and improvements to reliably comply with 
other state and federal regulatory requirements. The Administrator has a duty to take cost into account 
when establishing a treatment technique. The Proposed Rule does not adequately consider the cost of 
the proposed treatment technique requirements. For example, the Proposed Rule requires CWSs to  
1. Replace lead service lines (LSLs) and galvanized requiring replacement service lines (GRRSLs) at a rate 
substantially higher than the nominal 10% per year. (See additional request for comment responses in 
Section 3.4 in these comments for additional explanation.)  
2. Accomplish required service line characterization and replacement in 10-years in the midst of price 
escalation and logistical difficulties that will result from the nationwide mandate to replace all LSLs 
and GRRSLs with a 10-year timeframe, such that all water systems across the United States will be 
competing for the same construction resources (e.g., personnel, equipment, materials, etc.). EPA has 
not created a record to demonstrate such resources are available and affordable to water systems.  
3. Bear the increased cost of main repair and replacement that the rapid pace of service line replacement 
will require as service line replacement disturbs very old cast iron mains. EPA must account for these 
increased costs in assessing the feasibility of the Proposed Rule.  
Exemplars Do Not Represent Typical Systems – EPA provided several examples of systems that undertook 
lead service line replacements on timelines that it asserts demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed 
timeline in the LCRI. However, these examples do not demonstrate the feasibility of its proposal for 
several reasons. First, the examples of systems achieving expedited lead service line replacement did 
so, only with the advantage of significant external financial subsidies that will not be available to all 
CWSs, likely few CWSs. Examples exceeded the lead action level or were in the midst of much larger 
crises. As such, these systems had access to state and federal resources that will not be available to 
CWSs seeking to comply with the Proposed LCRI.  
With few exceptions EPA also cited examples of CWSs that had taken steps prior to the 10-year 
construction window for replacing all lead services that facilitated faster replacement programs. At 
least one cited example likely exceeded its authority to enter private property under state law, but was 
not challenged legally. Also, the cited programs did not have to comply with the administrative burden 
and associated rigidity of the proposed LCRI framework, where the proposal would establish extensive 
administrative requirements that are subject to state oversight and enforcement. As a result, EPA has 
not met its burden to create a record to demonstrate that the Proposed Rule is feasible. 
 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
2) “Whether there are additional ways EPA could reduce the complexity of the regulatory approach used to 
address lead in drinking water consistent with the statutory standard for a treatment technique rule in section 
1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA. Specifically, EPA requests comment on ways that the proposed LCRI could be 
simplified and ways that burden, including paperwork burden, could be reduced without affecting the ability 
of the rule to prevent known or anticipated adverse health effects.” 
1. A requirement to communicate all required monitoring sample results to occupants of buildings 
where samples were taken by mail that is postmarked within three calendar days after learning 
of results is not feasible for CWSs. Timely delivery could be assured, and paperwork burden 
reduced, with the following changes: 
a.  
Lengthening the period post-receipt to seven (7) calendar days  
b. 
Limiting the duty to deliver sample results via this expedited schedule to observations 
above the lead action level (10 μg/L)  
c.  
Allowing delivery via electronic means (i.e., email, text, data portal access) where the 
timing of communication with the customer can be logged for subsequent audit.  
2. Revise Proposed Rule §141.92(h)(5) to remove requirement that alternative state approved 
monitoring in schools and child care facilities must occur after January 1, 2021. Some states and 
systems have moved forward more expeditiously than EPA to conduct awareness-building lead 
monitoring at these facilities before, and subsequent to, the proposal of the LCRR (§141.92(d)). 
EPA should recognize these more proactive programmatic efforts subject to the other aspects of 
conformity with the required monitoring program under Proposed Rule §141.92. 
 
3) “Whether the proposed requirements of the rule are enforceable and promote compliance without the need 
for State or Federal enforcement action. EPA also solicits comment on ways the rule could be modified to 
better promote compliance.” 
1. The proposed LCRI corrosion control treatment requirements encourage states to require large 
systems (> 50,000 persons served), those with corrosion control treatment and those without, 
and detectable (i.e., greater than practical quantitation limit) lead levels that are below the lead 
action level (10 μg/L) to re-evaluate optimized corrosion control. Given the revised lead action 
level and the mandatory replacement of LSLs and GRRSLs this provision no longer serves a clear 
purpose in the proposed LCRI. The provision should be deleted, unless EPA can articulate 
specific criteria under which the federal regulation should lead to water systems being 
instructed to outperform the treatment technique that EPA has deemed feasible. States will 
retain the authority to seek additional action by water systems under state law regardless of 
EPA’s inclusion of the provision in the final LCRI.  
2. The current annual replacement rate metric is not a fair or just enforcement metric. This 
performance metric must be removed from the final LCRI entirely or replaced with a fair 
approach.  
3. The proposed rule is structured in a way that forces systems that have a high number of 
unknowns and a very low probability of lead service lines or galvanized requiring replacement 
service lines to needlessly expend resources to address the risk of lead exposure. Instead, the 
rule should include a path to compliance that focuses on having a protocol in place for the rare 
instance a lead or galvanized requiring replacement service line is discovered and validation to 
assure the initial characterization of the system’s inventory is correct. 
 
 
 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
Service Line Replacement §141.84 
2) “Whether a reasonable effort to obtain property owner consent should be more than four times (e.g., five, 
six, or seven times).” 
Four attempts will already place a significant burden on current staff and should be sufficient to meet 
due diligence expectations. There is no legal requirement for property owners to respond to a utility’s 
request, and further attempts take valuable time and resources away from staff that will be working to 
meet other important requirements within the regulation.  
 
3) “Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets “control” for the purposes of the mandatory 
replacement provision (i.e., require systems to conduct full service line replacement in situations where the 
system has access to conduct the full replacement).”  
AND 
14) “The extent to which property owner consent, if required by State or local law or water tariff agreement, 
might complicate full service line replacement and whether there are additional measures EPA can take to 
facilitate access through the LCRI.” 
“Control” does not mean the same as “access.” Equating the two definitions is flawed, and not in 
keeping with the intended meaning of “control” in SDWA. In systems where ownership of the service 
line is shared, access can be denied due to specific State and Local legal barriers. Private property is not 
under the control of water systems, and the Safe Drinking Water Act does not grant authority to EPA to 
regulate private property. Requiring public water systems to inventory and conduct LSL replacement 
on private property is beyond the scope of EPA’s authority and will be challenging for community 
water systems to meet any requirements on private property with no legal standing to support actions. 
 
4a) “The proposed minimum replacement rate and replacement deadlines. EPA is seeking comment on 
whether it is feasible for systems across the nation to complete service line replacement in a shorter 
timeframe than ten years, such as in six, seven, or eight years.”  
A 10-year replacement period is not feasible, and a shorter timeframe would certainly not be feasible, 
particularly considering the other expansive requirements in the Proposed Rule. The final LCRI should 
provide mechanisms for water systems to undertake lead service line replacement on a longer time 
frame than 10 years. The current 10-year timeframe will delay needed infrastructure improvements, 
negatively impact the borrowing capacity of CWSs, and in some communities result in significant 
disruption of neighborhoods. EPA has not offered a clear rationale for the proposed 10-year 
replacement window other than there were several specific examples where systems undertook LSL 
replacement programs similar to what EPA is contemplating in the proposed LCRI within 10 years. 
None of the programs cited in the Proposed Rule preamble complied with the LCRI provisions as 
described in the proposal. None of the programs cited accomplished the replacement program in 10 
years (or anticipated achieving program goals in 10 years) without substantial outside subsidy when 
the system had an appreciable number of service lines requiring replacement. EPA also has not 
considered the fact that there is likely to be a shortage of skilled labor to perform these replacements 
when all systems are mandated to replace them on the same timeline. A few examples of systems able 
to complete the work within a 10-year timeframe when they did not have to similarly compete for such 
labor does not provide a record supporting the feasibility of this timeframe.  
 
 
 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
4b) “EPA is seeking comment on the rate construct approach, including how to calculate compliance with a 
given service line replacement deadline and average annual rate calculated across a rolling 3-year period.”  
The City of Tulsa strongly recommends that EPA remove the proposed rolling, 3-year average 
replacement rate of 10% from the final rule. The current calculation is fundamentally unfair and must 
be revised to avoid creating a rule that is arbitrary and capricious. The proposed LCRI description of the 
service lines that warrant evaluation is artificially inflated through the definition of GRRSLs, the 
inclusion of LSUSLs, and the criteria for determining a service line is non-lead. The replacement rate 
calculation includes in the numerator: known LSLs, known GRRSLs, and all LSLUSLs. Subsequent 
calculation of the replacement rate is not an accurate reflection of program progress as it only credits 
the system for full replacements of LSLs and GRRSLs. The calculation should take into account 
progress in reducing the number of LSLs and GRRSLs, progress reducing LSUSLs, and service lines for 
which the system has completed its good faith effort to engage the property owner in replacement. 
Lastly, while EPA’s use of a three-year rolling average was an attempt to recognize the year-to-year 
variability in replacement rates over the program timeframe, unfortunately, that variability cannot be 
adequately managed by the proposed metric without, in some scenarios, the water system having to 
replace substantially higher percentages than the average rate with which EPA characterizes the 
proposed rule. 
If the final LCRI were to include an annual replacement rate calculation, then EPA should use a 
different approach that is both fair and easily calculated. One such option is the following:  
1. An approach based on two parallel metrics, (1) a cumulative percentage of LSLs and GRRSLs 
replaced and (2) a cumulative percentage of LSUSLs that are characterized. 
2. The numerator in the cumulative percentage of LSLs and GRRSLs replaced would be the total 
number of lines replaced and the denominator would be the sum of LSLs and GRRSLs in the 
initial inventory plus those discovered in prior years. 
 
11) “The requirement for systems to install a dielectric coupling when conducting a partial replacement of an 
LSL or GRR to separate the remaining LSL or GRR service line and the replaced service line unless the replaced 
service line is made of plastic and other recommended risk mitigation activities.”  
While the use of a dielectric coupling as described in the Proposed Rule is good practice and is 
consistent with established field practice, per ANSI/AWWA C810 - Replacement and Flushing of Lead 
Service Lines. EPA should ensure the use of dielectric coupling through reference rather than through 
specific inclusion in the Proposed Rule. SDWA regulations do not specify specific design and 
construction standards because identifying specific technologies forecloses improvements in 
technology.  
EPA should be wary of taking the step of incorporating specific design and construction standards into 
federal drinking water standards given the rigidity of SDWA’s regulatory framework and the infrequent 
nature of individual rule revision. EPA is for example unlikely to revise a rule for a minor technical 
change due to the expense of the rulemaking for the agency itself. EPA could and should instead as per 
the National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act, cite and encourage service line replacement 
in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C810. 
 
12a) “The proposed requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line replacement unless it is conducted in 
accordance with emergency or planned infrastructure work (excluding planned infrastructure work solely for 
the purposes of replacing lead and GRR service lines as part of a service line replacement program).”  

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
The City of Tulsa is concerned that there is a lack of clarity in how the Proposed Rule is currently 
drafted, which could lead systems and states to believe that EPA is prohibiting the systems from 
making any replacement when they have been denied access to the private portion of a line. And for the 
reasons explained elsewhere in this comment letter, even when a system is granted “access” to a 
private portion of a line, the City of Tulsa maintains that EPA lacks the legal authority under the SDWA 
to require a water system to remove the private portion of the line or to otherwise count the private 
portion of the line as part of its LSL or GRRSL replacement obligation.  
EPA should not finalize a requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line replacement unless it is 
conducted in accordance with emergency or planned infrastructure work. The City of Tulsa supports 
EPA’s goal in each instance is to achieve a complete replacement. Full replacement requires successful 
collaboration with property owners, which is not always possible. The LCRI proposal provides 
important latitude to CWSs and allows necessary water main infrastructure renewal and rehabilitation 
to occur even when there are property owners that are unable or unwilling to participate in a full lead 
service line replacement. Inclusion of this flexibility to proceed with partial replacement is essential for 
ongoing water system infrastructure maintenance and should be retained in the final LCRI. 
The decision to ban partial replacements in the instance of LSL/GRRSL replacement programs more 
broadly should be revisited. Banning partial replacements as a part of replacement programs impedes a 
CWS’s ability to make incremental improvement by reducing at least the portion of the service line to 
which it has access. Not allowing CWSs the opportunity to replace the portion of the service line in its 
control will have the following negative consequences:  
1. Forcing CWSs to disturb an LSL/GRRSL and thus potentially release lead to the occupants 
without any associated benefit.  
2. Resulting in CWSs engaging in replacement activity multiple times in the same street leading to 
greater community disruption, loss of efficiency in the construction program, and additional 
cost inflation due to repeated road cuts and associated re-paving.  
3. Leaving the length of lead pipe in the CWS’s control in contact with water the occupants 
consume  
4. Increasing the potential for a subsequent disturbance of the service line to occur as remaining 
GRRSLs are often fragile, and the initial construction could lead to the need for additional 
construction to repair the line after it is first disturbed.  
 
12b) “EPA is seeking comment on whether partial service line replacement should be prohibited during 
“planned infrastructure work” or with certain types of planned infrastructure work.”  
As noted above, while our goal in each instance is to achieve a complete replacement, full replacement 
requires successful collaboration with property owners, which does not always occur. EPA should not 
reduce the scope of the exceptions to partial service line replacement, rather it should expand the 
scope of those partial replacements as described in the above response to EPA’s prior request for 
comment. Where possible, the final rule should allow for as much flexibility and efficiency in project 
planning as possible, given that the burdens of the replacement timeline will already make it infeasible 
for most, if not all, water systems. 
 
 
 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
13) “The ability of the market to correct for potential shortages in workers and materials to conduct service 
line replacement, as well to provide sufficient quantities of filters to comply with the service line replacement 
and other relevant provisions in the proposal.”  
CWS must meet construction goals within federal, state, and local government limits on staffing and 
contracting – Complying with the Proposed LCRI will require systems to (1) revise current 
infrastructure maintenance and investment priorities and (2) entail aligning personnel and equipment 
to meet rule timelines within federal, state, and local government requirements. Balancing compliance 
with all required regulations and policies imposed on water systems makes aligning resources to meet 
EPA’s proposed timelines unlikely at best. 
Limitations on rate increases – Water systems can only respond to increases in project costs within the 
limits of their ability to fund those projects (e.g., pay-go, municipal bonds, private equity, revolving 
loan funds, etc.). Such funding relies on rates and charges for either operating funds or repayment of 
debt. Rate increases must be undertaken with care. Such increases are subject to oversight. Most readily 
illustrated is the case of investor-owned water systems that are subject to state corporation 
commission oversight. While these commissions recognize the need to comply with regulatory 
mandates, they can and do constrain tariffs (rates and charges) regulated water systems may charge. 
In doing so, they constrain the pace of investment to meet rule requirements by regulated water 
systems. Similar constraints exist within local government budgeting processes. 
Implications for LCRI Rulemaking – Stakeholders are ill-equipped to predict the state of the future work 
force when authoritative organizations differ on the likely state of the nation’s economy over the next 
twelve months. Given this uncertainty, EPA cannot finalize a regulation that does not have off-ramps 
in instances when the underpinning assumptions for its projection of the rule’s feasibility prove to be 
unsound. Moreover, there has been ample discussion within the sector and infrastructure finance 
community that workforce scarcity / maxed out organizational capacity is already leading to (1) 
significant increases in bids on infrastructure project cost, and (2) delays in construction schedules. 
There is little reason to believe that a regulatory requirement that drives all CWSs to (1) characterize 
service line materials and (2) replace service lines, and do so within a very compressed timeframe, that 
also parallels other construction required by federal standards will not have an inflationary effect on 
the cost of what workforce and organizational capacity exists. 
Water Filter Market – Currently, the State of Oklahoma has a purchasing contract for water filters for 
LCRR and LCRI requirements, however filters have been regularly backordered and difficult to obtain 
through the statewide contract. The ability of the market to correct for shortages to comply with filter 
distribution for service line material replacement, major disturbances and other filter requirements 
within the regulation is concerning. 
 
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper §141.86 
1) “Comment on the sites included in Tier 3 and whether all of the proposed sites should be included in Tier 3, 
if additional sites should be included, or if some should be included in a different, lower priority tier, such as 
Tier 4. Specifically, comment on whether sites served by galvanized service lines or containing galvanized 
premise plumbing that are identified as ever being downstream of an LSL or lead connector should be 
included in the same tier as other sites with a current lead connector (e.g., copper service line downstream of a 
lead connector).” 
Addition of Galvanized Piping to Tiers – The addition of galvanized piping to the tiering of the LCR 
sample pool is a new and significant change in the LCR construct. While lead may be released from 
galvanized pipe scales, the associated mechanism of release is fundamentally based in iron corrosion 
scale stability. The associated factors affecting lead release and consequently corrosion control are 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
different from managing soluble lead from lead pipe and lead solder in contact with water, which 
constitute EPA’s prior theoretical framework for the LCR and basis for determining that the treatment 
technique is feasible with the inclusion of a lead action level of 10 μg/L. 
While data in hand from LCR compliance monitoring is reassuring with mean population-weighted 
lead concentrations in low single parts per billion, the revised sampling protocol, revised sample tiers 
and compliance metric (90th percentile) focuses on the most extreme upper bound concentrations 
water systems observe. The proposed Tier 3, galvanized plumbing, further exaggerates observed lead 
by targeting a pipe scale that in some circumstances has been seen as prone to particulate release due 
to factors other than active corrosion control management practice described by the LCR (including 
LCRR and LCRI) (e.g., oxidation reduction potential).  
EPA should revisit whether it can demonstrate the feasibility of the new compliance paradigm and 
whether adding a sample tier where iron corrosion is the dominant mechanism of action is consistent 
with the balance of the LCRI construct. 
Ever Downstream of Lead Service Line – EPA has included the criteria of “ever downstream of an LSL” in 
the definition of GRRSLs as a precautionary approach with respect to service line replacement. There is 
not a strong technical basis for this requirement, nor is there a credible technical basis articulated in 
either the LCRR or LCRI dockets. To extend this criterion to the tap sample tiers used to inform 
corrosion control decision-making would have perverse, unintended effects. EPA can credibly assume 
that the majority of GRRSLs across the United States are not in fact known lead service pipe followed by 
known galvanized pipe. Rather, the majority will be galvanized service lines for which records are 
inadequate to demonstrate a lead service never existed prior to the galvanized service line. 
Consequently, a sample tier that emphasizes the use of GRRSLs would focus sampling on perhaps the 
most troubled and inconsistently characterized group of service lines in the inventory.  
Downstream of a Lead Connector – The addition of lead connectors to the sample pool tiers would add 
even greater variability to certainty of proper material characterization than a focus on GRRSLs as 
previously discussed. Moreover, given EPA’s focus on fully documenting compliance sample sites, EPA 
cannot direct systems to sample from a particular type of service line that it cannot verify. In the 
instance of lead connectors, verification would require excavating the lead connector (often involving 
excavating in a street with associated paving repairs and traffic management considerations) and 
presumably disturbing the connector. Then leaving that lead connector in place without replacing it. 
 
4) “Comment on the proposed updated definition of wide-mouth bottles that is “bottles that are one liter in 
volume with a mouth, whose outer diameter measures at least 55 mm wide,” and specifically on the 
availability of qualifying bottles.” 
A search of online catalogs of common suppliers of environmental sample bottles showed that most of 
the product listings for 1-L (or 1000 mL) “wide-mouth” plastic bottles (HDPE, LDPE, or PP) do NOT 
include the diameter (I.D. or O.D.) of the bottle mouth. However, in many of the product listings, the 
size of the closure (i.e., cap, or lid) IS included, and is listed as either “63” or “63 mm”. Holding water 
systems to a requirement of a sample bottle mouth dimension of 55 mm O.D. will prove difficult if that 
dimension is not available in catalog or bottle specification listings. Using the dimension and common 
nomenclature of the closure size of the “wide-mouth” bottle would make compliance easier. 
 
Service Line Inventory§141.84(a) and (b), and Service Line Replacement Plan §141.84(c) 
2) “In the LCRI, EPA is proposing a requirement for systems to validate the accuracy of non-lead service lines 
in their inventory that were categorized using methods other than records review or visual inspection of at 
least two points along the line. EPA is requesting comment on the number of validations required, the 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
proposed 95 percent confidence level approach used to develop the number of validations required, the 
criteria for which methods used to categorize non-lead service lines should be included in the validation pool 
(including whether non-lead lines categorized based on records should be subject to validation), and the 
seven-year timeline for systems on a 10-year replacement deadline to complete the validation 
requirements.” 
The validation requirements are a necessary addition to the Rule. The EPA should allow systems that 
have a high number of unknowns (due to no evidence-based record for each address) but have a very 
low probability of finding lead service lines or galvanized requiring replacement lines to categorize 
lines as non-lead based on confidence intervals found through validation methods.  
 
Lead and Copper Trigger Levels §141.80(c) 
1) “EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of 0.010 mg/L, as well as comment and 
supporting data on alternative action levels, such as 0.005 mg/L, with regards to generally effective corrosion 
control treatment and identifying systems most at risk of elevated levels of lead in drinking water.” 
Proposed Lead Action Level – EPA has not demonstrated in the preamble or in included analysis in the 
LCRI proposal docket, that CWSs that have compliance sample pool datasets composed solely of Tier 1 
(lead service line/lead plumbing), Tier 2 (multi-family lead service line/lead plumbing), and Tier 3 
sites, can keep their 90th percentile lead levels below the action level of 10 μg/L, as required by the 
proposed LCRI. While data in hand from LCR compliance monitoring is reassuring with mean 
population-weighted lead concentrations in low single parts per billion, the revised sampling protocol, 
revised sample tiers and compliance metric (90th percentile) focuses on the most extreme upper 
bound concentrations that water systems may observe. The proposed Tier 3 sampling sites, that 
includes galvanized plumbing, further exaggerates observed lead by targeting a pipe scale that in some 
circumstances has been seen as prone to particulate release as a result of factors other than active 
corrosion control management practice described by the LCR (as well as LCRR and LCRI) (e.g., 
oxidation reduction potential). 
The treatment technique that EPA establishes in the final LCRI must be achievable, not just in some 
systems, but by all water systems in the U.S., considering that each system contends with their own 
distinctive water quality conditions. EPA has not demonstrated that this is possible for an action level 
of 10 μg/L. By extension, there is not a convincing weight-of-evidence that a lower action level of 5 
μg/L would be reliably achievable while simultaneously assuring compliance with the Stage 1 
Disinfection Byproducts Rule (e.g., disinfection byproduct formation), Surface Water Treatment Rule 
(e.g., maintenance of a secondary disinfectant residual), and/or Revised Total Coliform Rule (e.g., 
incidence of coliform bacteria with loss of secondary residual), simultaneously managing water system 
infrastructure longevity against corrosion, and management of secondary drinking water standards in 
the water reaching customer’s taps (e.g., iron, etc.). These concerns regarding managing multiple 
facets of water quality are important not only under final equilibrium conditions once a system revises 
corrosion control, but also during the transition from one corrosion control equilibrium to another. 
EPA is aware from instances like in Flint, Michigan where once water quality becomes unbalanced, 
correcting the situation can be technically challenging and difficult for the community that the CWS 
serves. 
Identifying Systems Most at Risk of Elevated Lead Levels – The lead action level is one component of a 
treatment technique. Its purpose is not to identify the systems most at risk of elevated levels of lead. 
Rather, its role in the treatment technique is to (1) discern when corrosion control where absent can be 
introduced and thus moderate lead levels and (2) identify when existing corrosion control should be 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
re-evaluated. The action level is based on a level of control that is “feasible” to reliably achieve in 
practice. 
 
Public Education §141.85 
1) “The proposed determination that the public education treatment technique is feasible and prevents known 
or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible.” 
The request for comment frames public education as a standalone treatment technique when it is in 
fact one component of the broader LCR treatment technique. To assess whether the “treatment 
technique is feasible and prevents known or anticipated adverse health effects to the extent feasible” 
the entirety of the treatment technique must be considered, not just the public education provisions in 
isolation. Assuming that EPA is requesting comment on the feasibility of the proposed public education 
requirements of LCRI, the City of Tulsa asserts that the public education provisions of the LCRI 
proposal contains elements that are not technically feasible as the Proposed Rule is currently drafted. 
The Proposed Rule requires systems to contact individuals in timeframes that are unachievable in 
today’s property ownership, electronic communications-oriented economy due to restrictions 
imposed by the rule and practical constraints. 
 
2) “Comment and supporting data on the capacity of water systems to conduct some or all of the required 
public education activities in 30 days, or another period of time that is less than 30 or 60 days, after the end of 
the tap sampling period in which a systemwide lead action level exceedance occurs.” 
The LCRI adds to an already challenging task, in that public education requirements must be met in 
addition to a Tier 1 Public Notice, the trigger being the state’s decision that an exceedance has 
occurred, not the water system’s. This decision and notification of the system could occur weeks after 
the end of the tap sampling period. For many medium and large CWSs, the Tier 1 Public Notice will 
already involve a community-wide notice via press release. In addition, the LCRI requirements must 
provide the state adequate time to review and potentially modify educational materials prior to 
distribution to any of the targeted entities. This review includes developing any required translated 
materials to the satisfaction of the state.  
The creation of additional arbitrary deadlines for facets of a public education campaign are 
unwarranted and unproductive. Internal CWS milestones for public education are already compressed 
and additional regulatory milestones would further complicate reporting to the state and tracking of 
compliance by the state. 
 
3) “Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed determination that water systems are capable of 
providing consumer notices of individual tap sampling results within three calendar days of obtaining those 
results, regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or copper action level, or if a longer time frame is 
needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 calendar days).” 
AND 
4) “EPA is also requesting comment on the requirement for water systems to deliver consumer-initiated test 
results within three days of obtaining those results.” 
Three calendar days is not feasible. The City of Tulsa recommends that seven (7) calendar days for 
result notification is much more achievable for individual tap sampling results that do not exceed the 
lead or copper action level. For results that do exceed the lead and copper action level, immediate 
notification attempt should be made to the customer via phone/email, with follow up letter sent within 
seven (7) calendar days. Other recommendations are listed earlier in these comments in our response 
to “General Matters” Question #2. 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
 
6) “Whether EPA should require systems to annually notify consumers if they are served by a lead connector, 
in addition to notifications for sites with lead, GRR, or lead status unknown service lines.”  
Lead connectors do not warrant annual customer notification. EPA was correct proposing the LCRI 
without including lead connectors in the definition of an LSL. To require notification of customers 
about the presence (or potential presence) of lead connectors would similarly misdirect limited CWS 
resources and draw customer’s attention away from actionable risk reduction measures (Also see 
responses to Requests for Comment in Section 3.13). Moreover, the combination of a responsibility to 
notify customers with lead connectors and customers with LSLs, GRRSLs, and LSUSLs would further 
complicate and potentially lead to duplicative notifications of the same customers. 
 
9) “EPA is seeking information and data on when a system provides translated materials to consumers with 
limited English proficiency, what resources are used to translate materials (e.g., State resources, community 
organizations), and what barriers water systems may face in providing accurate translated materials.” 
AND 
10) “Whether the Agency should require States, as a condition of primacy, to provide translation support to 
water systems that are unable to do so for public education materials to consumers with limited English 
proficiency.” 
There doesn’t appear to be a clear guideline or requirement for when translations are necessary, or 
what constitutes an acceptable translation. Automated translation has inherent errors, which could be 
compounded by the technical information to be translated, and professional translation for the 
number of public education materials required by LCRI will require increased funds from the water 
systems. In reference to LCRI Preamble at 88 FR 84953, and specifically proposed rule language at 
§141.85(b)(1), there is no definition of what constitutes “large proportion of consumers with limited 
English proficiency,” and leaves the determination of this definition to the states. The Oklahoma 
Department of Environmental Quality (ODEQ), in their comments submitted to the LCRI docket (EPA-
HQ-OW-2022-0801-0784), asks for a definition of this phrase. ODEQ also writes that making the 
States responsible for translation support to water systems will take a “…substantial investment in 
manpower and financial resources that must be supported by Federal funding,” and further suggests 
that “EPA should develop translated templates and provide the necessary tools and resources in order 
to aid public water systems with implementing this provision.” 
 
11) "EPA is also requesting comment on additional ways to streamline public education and associated 
certification requirements (e.g., combine deadlines for systems to conduct public education or submit 
information to the State)." 
The certification requirements in the proposed regulation are confusing and cumbersome. The City of 
Tulsa suggests that timing for all certifications could be streamlined by requiring certification once per 
year instead of multiple times a year for different requirements as it is currently written. 
 
Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances  
1) “Whether water systems should be required to take additional actions when the system exceeds the lead 
action level multiple times and if so, what actions are appropriate and feasible, and when these additional 
actions should be required under the LCRI.”  
Focus Should be on CCT – The LCRI should not require additional actions based on multiple action level 
exceedances. Most water systems are reliably maintaining lead levels below the current lead action 
level of 15 µg/L. However, it is projected that water systems with LSLs will exceed the lowered lead 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
action level, given the proposed sampling protocol, sample pool, and exceedance calculation. These 
systems will be required by the Proposed Rule to adhere to the routine monitoring schedule (i.e., new 
opportunities to exceed the action level every six months). The systems that find themselves in a single 
exceedance will also face the increased potential for sample values from supplemental monitoring data 
being introduced into their exceedance calculation. This supplemental data is likely to be lower quality 
data, yet systems will be required to use the portion of this data the state believes is appropriate 
regardless of data quality concerns. These systems cannot exit routine monitoring for at least two 
consecutive monitoring periods below the action level. Systems that are allowed to move to reduced 
monitoring are then on annual monitoring with samples being drawn during June, July, or August, 
which are prone to higher lead levels. In this monitoring regime, the number of systems that find 
themselves with multiple exceedances will be significant.  
The process of adjusting corrosion control can for multiple reasons be protracted, including (1) 
analysis to discern how to revise corrosion control, (2) testing one or more options in pipe rigs for an 
adequate period of time, (3) making adjustments in system operations to slowly transition to the new 
corrosion control strategy, (4) conducting preparatory steps like additional flushing of the distribution 
system, (5) implementing and verifying the revised CCT, and (6) when existing facilities are 
inadequate, obtaining necessary financing and undertaking required construction. EPA has not 
demonstrated that systems with challenging waters can reliably avoid exceedances at an action level of 
10 μg/L, we should assume that many systems that exceed the action level and state regulators will be 
taking a careful approach to revising corrosion control electing to have an ongoing exceedance over 
multiple monitoring cycles rather than making an inappropriate change. CWSs that are focused on 
assuring appropriate corrosion control and a smooth transition to that corrosion control strategy 
should not be penalized by the final LCRI framework.  
Requiring additional actions would distract from the Proposed Rule’s focus on optimizing corrosion 
control treatment. As the purpose of the lower action level and related monitoring changes is to 
improve corrosion control rather than demonstrate compliance with a health-based concentration, 
there is not health basis for requirements that distract from the intended role of the action level 
trigger, including making filters available to consumers. 
 
3) “The proposed public education activities after a system exceeds the lead action level multiple times. EPA is 
specifically seeking any information, data, or analysis on whether the proposed public education activities 
support preventing adverse health effects in this situation.”  
As EPA has described in the preamble to the LCRI, the 10 μg/L lead action level is not a health-based 
value, it is a trigger for greater focus on corrosion control practice. The LCR and now the LCRI contain 
public education measures that inform the public regularly about additional risk reduction steps they 
as individuals can take. Because EPA is choosing to lower the action level, multiple exceedances, 
particularly in the initial implementation period, simply reflect the sensitivity of the new trigger for 
that additional focus, not a health concern. Recall that even using 1st liter, stagnant water compliance 
sample observations to represent occurrence, population-weighted lead levels under the current LCR 
are in the low single digit microgram per liter concentration range. Additional public education 
measures are an administrative burden that neither (1) affords additional health risk reduction or (2) 
accelerates improving corrosion control practice. 
 
4) “Whether EPA should require water systems to make filters certified to reduce lead and replacement 
cartridges, along with instructions for use, available to all consumers within 60 days of a system having 
multiple action level exceedances and whether there are any supporting or contrary data on whether the 
proposed filter requirement would be protective of public health.”  

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
AND 
5) “The proposed requirements for systems to develop a filter plan and submit to the State after the system 
has multiple action level exceedances for the first time, and whether EPA should require systems to take 
additional actions to facilitate filter distribution.” 
AND 
6) “Alternative requirements for systems with multiple action level exceedances to provide filters to their 
consumers, such as requiring water systems to provide filters and replacement cartridges to consumers served 
by an LSL, GRR service line, or unknown service line or to all consumers, or to require systems to consult with 
the State upon meeting the criteria for multiple action level exceedances, after which the State determines the 
appropriate action to reduce lead exposure.” 
EPA should not require water systems that exceed the lead action level multiple times to make filters 
available to all consumers. Nor should EPA require within the treatment technique the provision to 
consumers either filters or bottled water in (1) the event of an LCRI lead action level exceedance or (2) 
prophylactic until such time as LSLs or GRRSLs can be replaced. There may be instances where 
conditions are such that one of these protective measures are warranted, but that decision should be 
made based on site-specific facts by the primacy agency in collaboration with the PWS. The costs of 
such a program are substantial, expending resources that could be better applied to control measures 
emphasized in the rule (e.g., service line replacement and corrosion control). 
EPA stated clearly in the LCRI preamble that the lead action level is not a health-based value, exceeding 
that value functions solely as a trigger for action by the water system and state to establish or improve 
optimized corrosion control. Provision of filters to an entire community does not contribute toward 
achieving the goal of the treatment technique. This proposed requirement would be an additional 
prophylactic measure, which in most instances will not provide actual health risk reduction benefits, 
because typically few homes within CWSs have sources of lead as severe as the targeted compliance 
sample pool.  
In addition, this presents a practical implementation hurdle for very large CWSs, or even CWSs of more 
moderate size: obtaining a supply of filters to make them available to consumers within the required 
timeframe. Water systems would face the practical hurdle of inadequate supply and the administrative 
and financial hurdles of obtaining the supply while also complying with local, state, and potentially 
federal procurement policies. The City of Tulsa has experienced difficulty obtaining pitcher filters in 
the current market. This will be exacerbated once all CWSs across the country are required to comply 
with the proposed LCRI at the same time: while performing LSL Inventory with its various 
“disturbances,” eventual LSL replacement programs, and this requirement for multiple action level 
exceedances. There is no guarantee that the market for these filters will keep up with this level of 
demand. 
 
Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities §141.92 
1) “Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or to sample more frequently in schools 
and child care facilities.”  
EPA should not require increased sampling or frequency at schools and child care facilities. Retention 
of the LCRR §141.92 provisions with clarifications is sufficient to draw attention to managing lead in 
these facilities where it has not already occurred. Imposing additional burden for this task on CWS 
distracts from the primary purpose of the LCRI and the role of the CWS in the communities they serve. 
 
2) “The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community water systems from the 
requirement for lead sampling in schools and child care facilities during the five-year period after the LCRI 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021, but prior to the LCRI compliance 
date and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver requirements of § 141.92(h).” 
The City of Tulsa supports waivers for school and childcare sampling, but §141.92(h)(5) should be 
revised to remove the constraint that alternative state approved monitoring in schools and child care 
facilities must occur after January 1, 2021. Some states and water systems have moved forward more 
expeditiously than EPA to conduct awareness-building lead monitoring in these facilities before, and 
subsequent to, the proposal of the LCRR (§141.92(d)). If the monitoring was completed within the last 
10 years, the utility can provide evidence the samples were collected in accordance with the EPA 3Ts 
guidance, proper notification was provided to the school and parents/guardians of children, and 
remedial actions were taken by the school system to remove sources of lead, then there is no reason to 
limit the sampling to after January 1, 2021. EPA should recognize these more proactive programmatic 
efforts subject to the other aspects of conformity with the required monitoring program under §141.92. 
 
5) “Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and child care facility sampling results publicly 
available, and if so, how frequently and in what manner.”  
The City of Tulsa disagrees that this requirement should be added as a proposal in the LCRI. EPA states 
multiple times within preamble (88 FR at 84956, 84957, and 84958) that it has no authority under 
SDWA or NPDWRs to require schools and child care facilities to do anything if they aren’t a PWS. If 
CWSs make school and child care facility sampling data publicly available, it appears as if the data, and 
the responsibility of action and /or remediation related to it, would fall to the CWS, which is not the 
case. The Proposed Rule, like the prior LCRR, requires the CWS to obtain the cooperation of school 
district staff and leadership, school facility staff, and child-care owner/operators and their staff. EPA 
should not place CWSs in the position of having to disclose observed results publicly. Rather the 
entities responsible for the care of the children in those facilities should have the opportunity to 
communicate the results to parents and staff. Putting the CWSs in the role of communicator for this 
data further stretches the legal credibility of §141.92 and importantly creates additional unproductive 
friction with these facilities, which will lead to lower participation rates in sampling by school and day 
care facilities. EPA already recognizes that requiring CWSs to publish school data would take additional 
CWS time and resources, and wisely is not requiring this action. 
 
Reporting and Recordkeeping  
1) “EPA is requesting comment on the expansion of the inventory reporting to include lead connectors and 
non-lead service lines.”  
EPA should not require the addition of lead connectors to the inventory. As described in the following 
the associated potential health benefit is limited and the associated challenges shift resources from 
complying with provisions that afford additional risk reduction. Moreover, CWSs will have just 
completed the inventories required under the LCRR and this requirement would necessitate a new 
round of records review and field investigations. 
Including Lead Connectors in Inventory – The tracking of lead connectors should be an element of the 
system’s materials evaluation (i.e., §141.42(d) as referenced in LCRI at §141.86(a)(i)) rather than an 
element of the inventory as described in the Proposed Rule at §141.84. Lead connectors should not be 
included in the inventory at all, but if included, need not be categorized in the extraordinary detail 
included in §141.84(a)(2)(ii). 
Where lead connectors were not already being replaced in the course of ongoing CWS infrastructure 
work, the LCRI will require CWSs to replace them when encountered (§ 141.84(e)) 

 
175 E. 2nd St., Ste. 1300, Tulsa, OK 74103  |  (918) 596-7274  |   
The premise for identifying and proactively targeting these two-foot long or less lengths of lead pipe is 
weaker still in that these short lengths of pipe will tend to be located at a distance from the building 
such that drawing water into the building is unlikely to result in a discernable increase in lead 
concentration. EPA even states within the LCRI preamble (88 FR 84919) that it expects “that 
galvanized lines downstream of lead connectors may contribute less lead into drinking water than 
those that were downstream of much longer LSLs.” 
 
Compliance Dates – official language §141.80, but also in various sections throughout rule. 
1) “EPA is seeking comment on whether it is practicable for water systems to implement notification and risk 
mitigation provisions after full and partial service line replacement (§ 141.84(h)), notification of a service line 
disturbance (§ 141.85(g)), and associated reporting requirements (§ 141.90(e)(6) and (f)(6)) upon the 
effective date of the LCRI.” 
Notification of disturbance – Section 141.85(g) is not feasible as written. This provision requires systems 
to:  
“… provide customers and the persons served by the water system at the service connection with 
information” including “Public education materials that meet the content requirements in 
paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) through (iv) of this section” and do so “before any service line that has been 
shut off or bypassed is returned to service.”  
Setting aside that the reference to §141.85(a) is to a section regarding the content of “written 
materials.” Systems will not be able to deliver the required notification to “customers” that do not 
inhabit the structure in time to return the structure to service in a timely fashion that meets the needs 
of the structure’s occupants. To the degree to which EPA assumes service lines impacted by this 
provision are rentals and that a significant portion of those rentals will be inhabited by disadvantaged 
households, this provision advertently harms the households EPA is most interested in protecting 
through this rulemaking. It is worth emphasizing that this requirement to provide written notice prior 
to returning water service also applies to planned and emergency partial and full replacement of 
service lines. 
 
Other Proposed Revisions to 40 CFR Part 141 
1. Consumer Confidence Report 
a.) “EPA is requesting comment on the proposed requirement for systems to provide an informational 
statement in the CCR about the school sampling requirements with the information that consumers can 
contact the school or child care facility about any potential sampling results.”  
The consumer confidence report (CCR) is already a complicated document containing information that 
is difficult to convey within the confines of the CCR rule. To add an additional component regarding in-
school lead sampling would be a further and substantial complication. The CCR must already capture 
and characterize compliance monitoring which reflects parameters from both finished water and 
distribution system monitoring. That data includes monitoring from LCR compliance monitoring. 
Within the service area there may be multiple school systems and likely multiple child care centers, 
some of which will be engaged in monitoring in each of years one through five of the LCRI school and 
child care monitoring program. There could also be requested monitoring, and there may be additional 
monitoring required by state law. Introducing this complexity into the CCR only serves to create 
confusion in the community the water system serves rather than a clear targeted communication of 
relevant information.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2119 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Christopher S. Crockett, Ph.D., P.E. 
 
Essential Utilities, Inc. 
 
762 W. Lancaster Avenue 
 
Bryn Mawr, PA  19010 
 
February 5, 2024 
 
The Honorable Michael Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
TRANSMITTED ELECTRONICALLY 
 
RE: 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: 
Improvements (Docket Id#: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801) 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
Aqua, an Essential Utilities Company, appreciates the opportunity to comment on the 
Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI).  Aqua owns and operates 
approximately 1,500 water systems covering 8 states and 3 million people.  Aqua commends 
EPA’s efforts to improve the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) providing for the 
removal of all lead service lines and galvanized requiring replacement within a prescribed 
timeframe.  The following sections provide specific comments on the proposed LCRI Rule 
Revisions. 
 
Regulatory Uncertainty - Challenges in Meeting Both LCRR And LCRI 
Aqua strongly encourages that EPA act immediately (prior to the intended promulgation 
of the final LCRI) to extend the compliance dates for the provisions of the LCRR that 
EPA does not intend to continue under the LCRI. Currently, systems are expending 
resources to prepare to comply with the LCRR as it is the codified regulation requiring 
compliance by October of this year, while EPA is proposing to dramatically change both 
the content and deadlines for all but three of the LCRR requirements. Water systems 
have a duty to comply with applicable regulations and have no assurance that EPA will 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
2 
meet its promulgation timeline, nor that enforcement discretion will occur should EPA 
not publish the final rule prior to the LCRR compliance dates. 
 
Primary Focus for Inventory Should Be on Systems Known to Have LSLs and GRRSLs 
Aqua encourages EPA to further develop the LCRI to recognize in the rule structure that there 
are two categories of community water systems (CWSs) following the LCRR inventory process. 
Category 1 includes systems with known LSLs and/or GRRSLs, and Category 2 includes 
systems with low probability that LSLs and/or GRRSLs exist. 
 
The rule should not require the latter category to expend resources needlessly. Rather than 
requiring Category 2 systems to proceed through the LCRI service line replacement 
requirements as though they actually have many LSLs and GRRSLs, this group of systems 
should have a second path to compliance that focuses primarily on (1) having a protocol for 
the rare instance when a LSL or GRRSL is discovered and (2) the validation study to assure 
the initial characterization of the system’s inventory is correct. 
 
This approach incentivizes CWSs to take steps prior to the beginning of the final LCRI 
compliance window to transition to Category 2 if they are currently a Category 1 system (e.g., 
accelerate service line characterization and validation studies. 
 
REQUEST FOR COMMENTS 
 
Service Line Replacement 
Request for Comment 1: “EPA is requesting comment on whether the Agency 
should include lead connectors or galvanized service lines that are or were 
downstream of a lead connector as part of mandatory replacement.” 
 
Aqua believes that EPA should not include lead connectors or galvanized service lines 
that are or were downstream of a lead connector as part of mandatory replacement. 
EPA has not demonstrated that removing GRRSLs as currently defined present a 
meaningful opportunity to reduce lead exposure. To expand the scope of the final LCRI 
to include all galvanized service lines with a definition akin to GRRSLs that includes lead 
connectors would further expand the scope of the replacement task with a less certain 
demonstrable benefit.  
 
Request for Comment 3: “Whether the proposed LCRI appropriately interprets 
“control” for the purposes of the mandatory replacement provision (i.e., require 
systems to conduct full service line replacement in situations where the system has 
access to conduct the full replacement).” 
 
EPA cannot define “control” as “access.” Such a definition of control is flawed, and not 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
3 
in keeping with the intended meaning of “control” in SDWA.  
 
Request for Comment 4: “EPA also seeks comment on the complexity of the rate 
construct.” 
 
Aqua believes that EPA should revise the proposed rolling, 3-year average replacement 
rate of 10%. The replacement rate calculation includes in the denominator: known LSLs, 
known GRRSLs, and all lead status unknown service lines (LSLUSLs). Subsequent 
calculation of the replacement rate is not an accurate reflection of program progress as 
it only credits the system for full replacements of LSLs and GRRSLs. The calculation 
should take into account progress in reducing the number of LSLs and GRRSLs, 
progress reducing LSUSLs, and service lines for which the system has completed its 
good faith effort to engage the property owner in replacement.  Otherwise, in many 
instances, utilities would be forced to fully complete its replacement program within a 
few years. 
 
If the final LCRI were to include an annual replacement rate calculation, then EPA should use a 
different approach that is both fair and easily calculated. One such option is the following: 
1. An approach based on two parallel metrics, (1) a cumulative 
percentage of LSLs and GRRSLs replaced and (2) a cumulative 
percentage of LSUSLs that are characterized. 
2. The numerator in the cumulative percentage of LSLs and GRRSLs 
replaced would be the total number of lines replaced and the 
denominator would be the sum of LSLs and GRRSLs in the initial inventory 
plus those discovered in prior years. 
 
Request for Comment 6: “The overall approach and basis to offer deferred service line 
replacement to systems with a high proportion of LSLs and GRR service lines in their 
distribution system relative to their total number of households served. EPA is 
requesting comment on its proposed threshold of 0.039 average annual number of 
replacements per household served, which is used to calculate the number of years 
that systems can defer.” 
 
It is appropriate to include a mechanism for water systems to seek an extended lead 
service line replacement program. Many systems will find replacing all LSLs and 
GRRSLs within 10 years infeasible. 
 
Request for Comment 12: “The proposed requirement to ban partial lead and GRR 
service line replacement unless it is conducted in accordance with emergency or 
planned infrastructure work (excluding planned infrastructure work solely for the 
purposes of replacing lead and GRR service lines as part of a service line replacement 
program).” 
 
EPA should not finalize a requirement to ban partial lead and GRR service line 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
4 
replacement unless it is conducted in accordance with emergency or planned 
infrastructure work. Aqua supports EPA’s goal to achieve a complete replacement. 
However, full replacement requires successful collaboration with property owners, 
which is not always possible. The LCRI proposal provides important latitude to CWSs 
and allows necessary water main infrastructure renewal and rehabilitation to occur even 
with property owners that are unable or unwilling to participate in a full lead service line 
replacement. Inclusion of this flexibility to proceed with partial replacement is essential 
for ongoing water system infrastructure maintenance and should be retained in the final 
LCRI. 
 
The decision to ban partial replacements in the instance of LSL/GRRSL replacement 
programs should be revisited more broadly in the proposed regulation. Banning partial 
replacements as a part of replacement programs impedes a CWS’s ability to make 
incremental improvement by at least reducing the portion of the service line to which it 
has access. 
 
Tap Sampling for Lead and Copper 
Request for Comment 3: “Comment on the applicability of alternate sampling protocols to  
assess CCT performance, increase customer participation, and other relevant factors.” 
 
The LCRI proposal changes multiple variables contributing to the likelihood of a lead 
action level exceedance, and the cumulative effect is not well understood. That 
combination includes: (1) drawing a 5th liter sample from a LSL sample site as well as a 1st 
liter sample, (2) using the higher of the observed lead values from the 1st and 5th liter 
samples, (3) directing compliance monitoring to structures where lead is most likely to 
be high, (4) limiting calculation of the compliance metric to the highest observed lead 
values when there is a mix of sampling tiers, and (5) retaining a compliance metric 
based on the upper-tail of the occurrence distribution (i.e., 90th percentile). So, while 
EPA rightly assumes that 90th percentiles based on the higher value from a 1st or 5th 
sample from a LSL will shift the distribution of observed 90th percentiles upward when 
such sample sites exist, the agency has not described how the proposed metric is 
better at “assessing corrosion control.” Given the long-standing practice around the 1st 
draw, stagnant water sample used in the U.S. and the difficulties encountered in the U.S. 
obtaining sufficient in-home samples, the LCR 1st draw, stagnant water sample provides 
stable point-of-departure for triggering corrosion control review in the U.S. 
 
In regard to customer participation, CWSs have worked with customers to obtain tap 
samples for purposes of LCR compliance monitoring for decades. EPA is aware that 
over the duration of the LCR’s implementation, locating occupants willing to draw 
samples as specified in the LCR has been an ongoing challenge, as has obtaining 
compliant samples. This implementation challenge will be much more severe under the 
proposed LCRI: 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
5 
1. Many CWSs currently on triennial monitoring will return to standard 
monitoring necessitating twice as many samples being acquired each 
monitoring cycle and six times more sampling cycles. For a system 
serving a population of 10,001, the Proposed Rule increases the 
minimum number of compliance samples over three years from 30 to 
360. 
2. CWSs regularly report that participation by customers under the current 
LCR requires financial renumeration of the household taking a single 
one liter first-draw, stagnant sample. CWSs routinely provide credits 
toward customer water bills, gift coupons, and cash payments to 
encourage participation in the sampling program. The amount offered 
varies with urban examples reaching $100 per sample event. Even when 
renumeration is offered, follow-through by households that agree to 
take samples and receive sample kits is typically no more than 80%. EPA 
has not sufficiently considered these costs and the associated burdens 
of running such monitoring programs when assessing the feasibility of 
the Proposed Rule. 
3. EPA proposes to expand the Tier 1 and 2 sample pools by including 
actual lead plumbing and creating Tier 3, which includes galvanized 
plumbing as well as galvanized services.  Including lead plumbing and 
galvanized plumbing in the tiering structure will substantively expand 
the pool of documentable homes for LCRI compliance monitoring. Lead 
and galvanized piping within structures has been replaced over time 
both due to failure, inadequate flow, and other changes associated with 
renovating older buildings. Finished home interiors conceal pipe 
materials behind walls and in ceilings, such that a paper record review is 
not adequate to meet EPA’s current expectations for demonstration of 
adherence to sample pool Tiers. The portions of plumbing that are most 
accessible (e.g., piping under kitchen faucet or in bathrooms) are also 
components of household plumbing most likely to have been subject to 
renovation and changes in plumbing materials. 
 
Additionally, obtaining reliably 1st and 5th liter data is challenging because: 
1. Systems currently have limited latitude under the LCR and the proposed 
LCRI to invalidate samples due to sampler error, but experience with 
obtaining 1st liter samples illustrates that further complication of a 1st and 
5th liter sample will be problematic. 
a. Current CWS quality control challenges of LCR compliance 
samples collected by customers include incomplete sample 
collection / sample loss due to inadequate sample sealing in 
transit, collection of samples from taps that are not kitchen 
faucets (or designated alternative sample taps), samples being 
drawn after prolonged stagnation especially when a monetary 
reward is provided for sampling, and inadvertent use of water 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
6 
during stagnation period. 
b. Systems that currently collect 1st and 5th liter samples find that they 
must take additional steps beyond the protocol described in 
§141.86(b)(1)(ii) to facilitate successful customer sampling. Steps 
include using sample bottles that are clearly different in size, 
shape and / or color from the 1st and 5th liter samples for collecting 
the 2nd through 4th liter samples. 
2. The current Tier 2 sample sites are favored most when Tier 1 sample sites 
are not available. The sampling protocol requires a sample from a 
building where (1) the sample represents a period of six hours or more of 
stagnation and (2) a 5th liter sample that is intended to be representative 
of the service line to the building. Obtaining samples that meet either of 
the required conditions and /or meet the intent of the 5th liter sample in an 
occupied multi- family structure is challenging. And, from a CWS’s 
compliance perspective, it is very difficult to demonstrate this to the 
satisfaction of the state. 
 
Request for Comment 4: “Comment on the proposed updated definition of wide-mouth 
bottles that is “bottles that are one liter in volume with a mouth, whose outer diameter 
measures at least 55 mm wide,” and specifically on the availability of qualifying bottles.” 
 
The reworded criteria remain difficult to source from available laboratory supply 
vendors, and thus not resolving the infeasibility of the requirement. Given the purpose 
of the requirement is to prevent the use of “small mouthed” bottles that are so narrow 
as to force the sampler to throttle the flow of water from the faucet during sample 
collection, a suggested definition is: 
“Wide-mouth bottles, for the purpose of subpart I of this part only, means bottles 
one liter in volume that have a mouth with an inside outer diameter that 
measures at least 4055 mm wide.” 
 
Service Line Inventory and Service Line Replacement Plan 
Request for Comment 3: “Comment on establishing a deadline for systems to identify 
all unknown service lines prior to their service line replacement deadlines.” 
 
EPA should not establish another compliance requirement within the treatment 
technique. A one-size-fits-all solution is not appropriate here. While each system will 
have to address service lines with inadequately characterized materials, the solution 
will be system-specific. For some systems characterizing LSUSLs will be the most 
important aspect of meeting the LCRI requirements (e.g., systems that do not have LSLs 
or GRRSLs but cannot meet LCRR documentation requirements). Other systems may 
have sufficient records available for a LSLs and GRRSLs replacement program to 
capture the remaining LSUSLs as an incidental aspect of the replacement program. 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
7 
Consequently, there is not a particular point in this proposed requirement where 
complete elimination of all LSUSLs is needed. 
 
EPA does not need to add a requirement that further constrains CWS’s approach to 
inventory and replacement program design. To the degree that states are uncertain 
whether CWSs are making adequate progress addressing service line characterization, 
there are already multiple touch points in the Proposed Rule, including (1) initial 
inventory per LCRI and subsequent inventory per LCRR, (2) LCRI service line 
replacement plan, (3) nonlead characterization validation study, (4) annual updates on 
progress of the service line replacement program, and (5) annual updates of the service 
line inventories. As the LCRR/LCRI rulemaking proceeds, implementation will occur 
during a period when there will be at least five sanitary survey cycles for CWSs subject 
to the LCR.  
 
Lead Action and Trigger Levels 
Request for Comment 1: “EPA is seeking comment on the proposed lead action level of 
0.010 mg/L, as well as comment and supporting data on alternative action levels, such 
as 0.005 mg/L, with regards to generally effective corrosion control treatment and 
identifying systems most at risk of elevated levels of lead in drinking water.” 
 
The treatment technique that EPA establishes in the final LCRI must be achievable, not 
just in some systems, but reliably across the range of likely water qualities that exist in 
the United States. EPA has not demonstrated that this is possible for an action level of 
10 µg/L and therefore there is not a convincing weight-of-evidence that a lower action 
level of 5 µg/L would be reliably achievable while simultaneously assuring compliance 
with the Stage 1 Disinfection Byproducts Rule (e.g., disinfection byproduct formation), 
Surface Water Treatment Rule (e.g., maintenance of a secondary disinfectant residual), 
or Revised Total Coliform Rule (e.g., incidence of coliform bacteria with loss of 
secondary residual), or, simultaneously managing water system infrastructure longevity 
against corrosion.  
 
Corrosion Control 
Request for Comment 3: “The proposed option for a water system to delay OCCT until 
after the system has replaced all of its LSLs and GRR service lines, while the system 
achieves at least 20 percent removal per year and must have no LSLs, GRR service 
lines, or lead status unknown service lines remaining at the end of the five-year period.” 
 
Recognizing that CWSs should not be attempting to optimize or re-optimize CCT in the 
midst of a significant transition in the materials of construction at issue, is an important 
improvement in the rule. Providing CWSs with the opportunity to remove LSLs and 
GRRSLs prior to optimization and re- optimization should be included in the final LCRI. 
As a practical matter, the standard for receiving this relief as drafted (§ 141.81(f)(1)(ii)) will 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
8 
be too challenging for systems with any appreciable number of LSLs or GRRSLs to 
achieve, in that: 
1. All LSLs and GRRSLs must be fully replaced 
2. All LSUSLs must be characterized (and replaced if LSLs or GRRSLs) 
3. Every year of the five-year period the CWS must maintain a replacement 
rate of at least 20% 
The feasibility of the provision would also be enhanced by: 
1. Removing the annual replacement target 
2. Extending the identification and replacement window to 7 years in 
keeping with the schedule for a validation study under Proposed 
Rule §141.84(b)(5)(i) 
 
Request for Comment 4: “The treatment recommendation and CCT study process can 
take multiple years to complete. For systems with existing corrosion control, the 
system may be able to alter the existing treatment (e.g., increase pH and/or 
orthophosphate dose) without a new CCT study on a much faster timeframe rather than 
waiting for study results that may recommend that same change. EPA is requesting 
comment on whether there are situations and/or conditions where existing treatment 
modifications may achieve similar lead reductions rather than delaying new treatment 
for two-and-a- half years while a study is underway.” 
 
EPA is correct, there are instances when corrosion control can, and should, be modified 
without the delay associated with a pipe rig study. That is not to say that there is a 
simple list of situations where there is a single no-regrets corrosion control solution, 
and high dose orthophosphate addition is not a panacea. Rather corrosion control 
should be assessed through a thoughtful analysis that documents current conditions 
and evaluates corrosion control options, taking into account other likely changes 
underway. In some instances, this analysis can be accomplished in days or weeks, and 
in others it will require supplemental data collection and perhaps laboratory studies 
that require weeks or months to accomplish. In the LCRI proposal §141.82(c) describes 
corrosion control studies broadly. It is possible to triage analysis and data collection 
more efficiently than is reflected in the Proposed Rule text. Ideally corrosion control 
modifications do not involve major changes in corrosion control strategy which 
necessitate more extensive implementation timeframes. 
 
Public Education 
Request for Comment 3: “Data, analyses, and comments on the proposed 
determination that water systems are capable of providing consumer notices of 
individual tap sampling results within three calendar days of obtaining those results, 
regardless of whether the results exceed the lead or copper action level, or if a longer 
time frame is needed (e.g., three business days, seven calendar days, 14 calendar 
days).” 
 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
9 
Reliably meeting the requirement for a postmarked envelope within three days of 
receipt of sample results is not feasible for a multitude of reasons, including: 
1. The U.S. postal service is both closing post offices and curtailing office 
hours, making it infeasible for water systems to obtain the required 
postmarked envelope. In addition to being closed on Sundays and 
having limited hours on Saturdays, the postal service is closed on all 11 
Federal holidays. 
2. The CWS has a number of tasks for which appropriate staff must be 
present, including: 
a. Reviewing the laboratory’s work (quality assurance / quality control) 
b. Matching the sample result with the relevant occupant(s) contact information 
c. Putting the observed values into the template approved by 
the state for distribution with the education information 
required by the Proposed Rule 
d. Quality review of materials prior to distribution 
e. Transporting the result to the post office 
f. 
Documentation for required state tracking and reporting 
 
A longer time frame is recommended, such as provision of all written results within 30 
calendar days after receiving the results and provision of verbal results within 3 
business days for results greater than 10 ug/L.   
 
Request for Comment 4: “EPA is also requesting comment on the requirement for water 
systems to deliver consumer-initiated test results within three days of obtaining those 
results.” 
 
See Request for Comment 3 above. 
 
Request for Comment 6: “Whether EPA should require systems to annually notify 
consumers if they are served by a lead connector, in addition to notifications for sites 
with lead, GRR, or lead status unknown service lines.” 
 
Lead connectors do not warrant annual customer notification. EPA was correct 
proposing the LCRI without including lead connectors in the definition of a LSL. To 
require notification of customers about the presence (or potential presence) of lead 
connectors would similarly misdirect limited CWS resources and draw customer’s 
attention away from actionable risk reduction measures. 
 
Request for Comment 8: “Whether EPA should require additional public education 
requirements to further encourage swift service line replacement faster than the 10-
year replacement deadline. For example, should water systems that have LSLs, GRR 
service lines, or unknown service lines five years after the compliance date for the LCRI 
be required to increase the frequency of the notification of service line materials from 
annual to once every six months?” 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
10 
 
Additional regulatory requirements for specific public education measures later in the 
service line replacement program would be detrimental to replacement program 
implementation. First, where systems have significant numbers of service lines to 
characterize and or remove, program ramp up will take several years, and it is likely that 
there will be a significant number of LSLs and / or GRRSLs yet to be replaced. Systems 
facing this challenge will need to maintain an organized and targeted communications 
effort. The introduction of generic messaging like that described by §141.85 would 
distract from messaging being used to advance local programs working within local 
constraints that are specific to local programmatic objectives. In addition, the resources 
used to meet the distribution requirements of the public education provisions and to 
document that effort per the regulation will be resources that are not otherwise 
available for needed community communication efforts and other replacement program 
needs. 
 
Request for Comment 11: “EPA is also requesting comment on additional ways to 
streamline public education and associated certification requirements (e.g., combine 
deadlines for systems to conduct public education or submit information to the 
State).” 
 
In revising §141.85(b)(4), EPA provided the opportunity for NTNCWSs to communicate 
public education materials electronically, but §141.85(b)(2) does not afford CWSs the 
same latitude. Electronic delivery, when possible, facilitates greater integration of on-
line resources into distributed materials. Instructions to CWSs regarding delivery in 
§141.85(b)(2) align distribution of public education with distribution of bills. As customer 
billing is increasingly electronic, it is important that the public education requirements 
recognize this transition and allow CWSs to leverage the opportunities it creates. 
 
Additional Requirements for Systems with Multiple Lead Action Level Exceedances  
Request for Comment 1: “Whether water systems should be required to take 
additional actions when the system exceeds the lead action level multiple times and 
if so, what actions are appropriate and feasible, and when these additional actions 
should be required under the LCRI.” 
 
The LCRI should not require additional actions based on multiple action level 
exceedances. CWSs that are focused on assuring appropriate corrosion control and a 
smooth transition to that corrosion control strategy should not be penalized by the final 
LCRI framework. Requiring additional actions would distract from the Proposed Rule’s 
focus on optimizing corrosion control treatment. Since the purpose of the lower action 
level and related monitoring changes is to improve corrosion control, rather than 
demonstrate compliance with a health-based concentration, there is no health basis for 
requirements that distract from the intended role of the action level trigger, including 
making filters available to consumers. 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
11 
 
Request for Comment 2: “Whether EPA should use three action level exceedances in a 
five-year period for identifying systems with multiple action level exceedances where 
additional action is warranted and, whether additional actions should be required 
sooner, or later, than the five-year period, or whether EPA should use a modified metric 
(number of consecutive action level exceedances in a set time period) or a different 
metric entirely (i.e., based on one or more factors other than the number of action level 
exceedances in a set time period).” 
 
EPA should not require additional actions or pursue an alternative metric to trigger 
additional action by systems that experience multiple exceedances. See response to 
the prior Request for Comment 1 for the basis for this comment. 
 
Request for Comment 3: “The proposed public education activities after a system 
exceeds the lead action level multiple times. EPA is specifically seeking any 
information, data, or analysis on whether the proposed public education activities 
support preventing adverse health effects in this situation.” 
 
The LCR and now the LCRI contain public education measures that inform the public 
regularly about additional risk reduction steps they as individuals can take. Additional 
public education measures are an administrative burden that neither (1) affords 
additional health risk reduction or (2) accelerates improving corrosion control practice. 
 
Request for comment 4: “Whether EPA should require water systems to make filters 
certified to reduce lead and replacement cartridges, along with instructions for use, 
available to all consumers within 60 days of a system having multiple action level 
exceedances and whether there are any supporting or contrary data on whether the 
proposed filter requirement would be protective of public health.” 
 
EPA should not require water systems that exceed the lead action level multiple times 
to make filters available to all consumers, nor should EPA require within the treatment 
technique the provision to consumers either filters or bottled water (1) in the event of an 
LCRI lead action level exceedance or (2) prophylactically until such time as LSLs or 
GRRSLs can be replaced. There may be instances where conditions are such that one of 
these protective measures are warranted, but that decision should be made based on 
site-specific facts by the primacy agency in collaboration with the PWS.  
 
Request for Comment 5: “The proposed requirements for systems to develop a filter 
plan and submit to the State after the system has multiple action level exceedances for 
the first time, and whether EPA should require systems to take additional actions to 
facilitate filter distribution.” 
 
EPA should not require water systems that exceed the lead action level multiple times 
to make filters available to all consumers. If EPA finalizes the rule including such a 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
12 
requirement, it should make every effort to minimize the burden the requirement places 
on water systems. 
 
Request for Comment 6: “Alternative requirements for systems with multiple action 
level exceedances to provide filters to their consumers, such as requiring water 
systems to provide filters and replacement cartridges to consumers served by an LSL, 
GRR service line, or unknown service line or to all consumers, or to require systems to 
consult with the State upon meeting the criteria for multiple action level exceedances, 
after which the State determines the appropriate action to reduce lead exposure.” 
 
EPA should not require water systems that exceed the lead action level multiple times 
to make filters available to all consumers. If EPA finalizes the rule including such a 
requirement, it should make every effort to minimize the burden the multiple action 
level exceedances requirement places on water systems. For example, most systems in 
this situation will be exceeding the action level based on a dataset drawn from a subset 
of buildings with service line / plumbing material characteristics that are not typical of 
the bulk of buildings in a CWS’s service area. Consequently, if filters were to be made 
available, there should be a focus on that subset of households rather than “all 
consumers.”  
 
Request for Comment 7: “An additional provision providing discretion to States to allow 
systems with multiple action level exceedances to discontinue the proposed required 
actions sooner if the system takes actions (e.g., installs optimized or re-optimized CCT, 
completes mandatory service line replacement) and is at or below the lead action level 
for two consecutive monitoring periods.” 
 
If this provision (§141.85(j) and associated requirements) is retained in the final LCRI, 
EPA must specify clear criteria a state must use to “tailor” requirements. If the authority 
is going be explicitly included in the federal rule, it must have a clear basis that can be 
consistently applied. The wiser alternative is to eliminate the multiple action level 
exceedances provision from the final federal rule. 
 
Lead Sampling in Schools and Child Care Facilities 
Request for Comment 1: “Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples 
and/or to sample more frequently in schools and child care facilities.” 
 
EPA should not require CWSs to (1) collect more water samples for lead analysis from 
individual schools or child care facilities in any one round of monitoring, (2) collect 
samples from a broader group of schools or child care facilities, (3) collect the required 
samples in schools more quickly, or (4) participate in additional cycles of monitoring for 
lead in schools. The current requirements are beyond the intended scope of SDWA. 
 
Request for Comment 5: “Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and child 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
13 
care facility sampling results publicly available, and if so, how frequently and in what 
manner.” 
 
The Proposed Rule, like the prior LCRR, requires the CWS to obtain the cooperation of 
school district staff and leadership, school facility staff, and child-care owner/operators 
and their staff. EPA should not place CWSs in the position of having to disclose 
observed results publicly. Rather the entities responsible for the care of the children in 
those facilities should have the opportunity to communicate the results to parents and 
staff. 
 
Reporting and Recordkeeping 
Request for Comment 1: “EPA is requesting comment on the expansion of the inventory 
reporting to include lead connectors and non-lead service lines.” 
 
EPA should not require the addition of lead connectors to the inventory. As described in 
the following, the associated potential health benefit is limited and the associated 
challenges shift resources from complying with provisions that afford additional risk 
reduction. Moreover, CWSs will have just completed the inventories required under the 
LCRR and this requirement would necessitate a new round of records review and field 
investigations.  The tracking of lead connectors should be an element of the system’s 
materials evaluation (i.e., §141.42(d) as referenced in LCRI at §141.86(a)(i)) rather than an 
element of the inventory as described in the Proposed Rule at §141.84.  
 
Sections 141.90 (e)(1), (2), and (4) as proposed limit the system’s duty to report the LSLs, 
GRRSLs, and LSUSLs. This is consistent with the currently codified LCRR regulatory 
text. Because the current proposal requirements for reporting the inventory are so 
burdensome (i.e., §141.90(e)(4)), EPA should not require reporting of nonlead service 
lines,  reducing the reporting to those service lines of interest in the rule.  Also, the 
need to report should be distinguished from how a CWS may provide the inventory to 
the public. As individual property owners and occupants are accessing information 
about their service line(s), the information provided from the water system will also 
convey nonlead status in some manner. 
 
Request for Comment 2: “EPA has heard concern over the ability of States to review all 
required site sample plans and provide approvals in time for the first tap monitoring 
period and is requesting comment on whether EPA should consider a phased approach 
or alternate approach to reduce the burden on States following the rule compliance 
date.” 
 
EPA should revise the LCRI such that the transition to the revised monitoring pool and 
sampling protocol is phased in over time. Staged implementation will allow the 
development of increased laboratory capacity to meet the need for additional sample 
analysis.  

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
14 
Compliance Dates 
Request for Comment 2: “Whether earlier alternative compliance dates for LCRI are 
practicable such that water systems transition directly from LCR to LCRI in less than 
three years (i.e., one or two years) based on the assumption that water systems would 
comply with the LCR until the LCRI compliance date.” 
 
It is unreasonable for the Administrator to accelerate LCRI implementation when the 
agency is not yet prepared to provide the support that communities have repeatedly 
sought over the course of this and prior rulemakings, including: 
1. Collaboration in the timely preparation of guidance to support aspects 
of the rulemaking, like corrosion control treatment, that could already 
be in preparation. 
2. Development in the foreseeable future of a data system adequate to 
support states receiving all of the information transfers anticipated 
by the LCRI. 
3. Providing translation services support that has been requested by states 
and water systems to facilitate required outreach to individuals for whom 
English is not their primary household language. 
4. Providing funding for full-lead service line replacement adequate to 
meaningfully support the replacement of service lines on private 
property at the scale required by the LCRI. 
5. Providing useful risk communication support that fairly communicates 
the risk posed by environmental exposures to lead (e.g., model lead 
exceedance brochures required by Proposed Rule §141.85(a)(1)) 
 
Request for Comment 3: “Whether there are other LCRR provisions besides the initial 
inventory and notifications of service line material for which the October 16, 2024, 
compliance date should be retained.” 
 
EPA must act immediately (prior to the intended promulgation of the LCRI) to extend 
the compliance dates for the provisions of the LCRR that EPA does not intend to 
continue under the LCRI. Currently, systems are expending resources to comply with 
the LCRR as it is the codified regulation, while EPA is proposing to dramatically change 
both the substance and deadlines for all but three of the LCRR requirements. Water 
systems have a duty to comply and have no assurance EPA will meet it promulgation 
timeline nor that enforcement discretion will occur should EPA not publish the final 
rule prior to the LCRR compliance dates. 
 
 
 

 
762 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA  19010  •  877.987.2782  •  AquaAmerica.com 
 
15 
Aqua appreciates the opportunity to provide comments regarding the proposed changes to 
the LCRI. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Christopher S. Crockett, Ph.D., P.E. 
Vice President Chief Environmental, Safety and Sustainability Officer

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0933 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
 
Michael Goldberg,  
Standards and Risk Management Division,  
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.  
Washington, DC 20460   
 
RE: EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0801 
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg, 
 
On behalf of the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (the IAPMO 
Group) and Plumbing Manufacturers International (PMI), we applaud the EPA’s continued efforts 
to reduce the public’s exposure to lead through drinking water and support the advancement the 
proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements will bring towards improvement of public health 
and safety. 
 
The IAPMO Group was founded in 1926 to protect public health and safety by developing the 
world's most progressive and technically advanced plumbing, mechanical, and water efficiency 
codes and standards. A central focus of IAPMO's work is the testing and certification of products 
relied upon by our industry. Our research and testing labs are capable of testing products to more 
than 400 standards, and we provide testing to new plumbing products that enter the market 
every year. These include faucets, water filters, showerheads, piping, and many other products. 
Our rigorous testing and certification processes are recognized by ANAB (the ANSI National 
Accreditation Board) in accordance with the criteria of the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO). In the US, IAPMO works to ensure products comply with the legal 
requirements of local plumbing codes as well as federal requirements, including those relating to 
lead in drinking water.  
 
PMI is the U.S.-based trade association representing manufacturers that provide 90 percent of 
the plumbing products sold in the United States.  Our members are industry leaders in producing 
safe, reliable, and innovative water efficient plumbing technologies. Our highly engineered 
plumbing products, sold and distributed in all 50 states, include kitchen and bathroom faucets, 
showerheads, toilets, bathtubs, urinals, sinks, drinking fountains, bottle filling stations, water 
filtration systems, pot fillers, emergency eye wash stations and showers, as well as hundreds of 
types of components, valves, and piping, all of which are key to our nation’s indoor plumbing 
systems.  PMI supports the current system of third-party certifying as required by the major 
plumbing codes adopted throughout the U.S., which requires third-party certifier marks on 

 
 
 
plumbing products and/or packaging. 
 
As such, IAPMO and PMI appreciate the opportunity to offer the following comments in response 
to the EPA’s Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI): 
 
Third-Party Certification Requirements for Products 
• Certification of products by an accredited third-party is a critical element in informing 
and providing the utmost confidence to regulators, inspectors, manufacturers, 
distributors, installers, engineers and the public that products have been tested and 
certified to the applicable standards.  The proposed LCRI language currently states that 
water filtration devices must be “certified by an American National Standards Institute 
accredited certifier.” While we applaud including the requirement of certified products, 
we recommend replacing this language with the correct technical reference to 
“American National Standards Institute (ANSI) National Accreditation Board (ANAB) 
accredited certifier” which is the accreditation body within ANSI. 
 
• Strengthening requirements for third-party certified products should continue to be a 
focus of the EPA within the LCRI and other rulemakings to reduce the public’s potential 
lead exposure from consumer products. An increasing trend of non-compliant and 
fraudulent products being sold into the market continues, particularly through e-
commerce channels, and more needs to be done so that products sold online are held 
to the same standards as brick-and-mortar retailers are. Many of these non-compliant 
products can impact consumer's health and safety, including consumer exposure from 
lead found in plumbing materials used in public water systems or residential or 
nonresidential facilities providing water for human consumption.  
 
• The EPA Office of Pesticide, under FIFRA, has treated water filtration systems that 
inhibit bacteria, viruses, and other microorganisms in drinking water as pesticides and 
pesticidal devices. IAPMO and PMI encourage EPA to modernize the enforcement of 
FIFRA as it pertains to water filtration systems and accept alternative compliance 
pathways, including acceptance of third-party testing and certification of products to 
national standards associated with performance claims.  Additionally, third-party 
certification can also help address public education efforts by providing recognizable 
certification marks on products, bringing confidence to those who are purchasing and 
installing water filtration systems, such as when used in a filter program.  
Lead in Schools and Childcare Facilities 
• While IAPMO and PMI applaud EPA in addressing lead in schools and childcare facilities, 
continued improvement is warranted.  IAPMO and PMI support protections to reduce 
lead exposure and, where lead exceedances exist, recommends any replacement or 
alternative products be third-party tested and certified by an ANAB accredited certifier 
to ensure the health and safety of the public. 
Public Education and Outreach 
• IAPMO is a nonprofit organization, committed to championing solutions that lead to 
lasting quality water and sanitation services.  IAPMO is also a leading expert in testing 
and certification for the plumbing industry. IAPMO supports providing education and 

 
 
 
public outreach, including how and where to find certified products. IAPMO houses a 
publicly available product listing database at https://pld.iapmo.org, where consumers 
can find third-party certifications for water filtration and other plumbing products 
tested to industry standards.   
• IAPMO and PMI support the continued efforts to reduce the public’s exposure to lead 
through drinking water and therefore encourage EPA to reference IAPMO’s and other 
accredited third-party provider databases within the education tool kit to ensure that, 
where a replacement product is needed, the product has been tested and certified 
accordingly.  EPA should have utilities share the EPA’s consumer tool for POU filters, 
which already contains the relevant certification bodies (e.g. WQA, IAPMO, NSF, etc.) 
and associated certification marks. Additionally, the EPA should consider including 
information on where to locate and find products. 
The EPA has made great strides towards improving the health and safety of the public to reduce 
the public’s exposure to lead through drinking water. As a leading expert in product testing and 
certification for plumbing products supplying water for human consumption, IAPMO and PMI 
support the EPA’s efforts, and we look forward to working with the EPA on the proposed LCRI. 
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you require additional information by phone at (202) 445-
7514 or via email at Dain.Hansen@IAPMO.org. 
 
Kind regards, 
 
Dain Hansen 
Executive Vice President 
Government Relations 
The IAPMO Group 
 
Stephanie Salmon 
Washington Representative 
Plumbing Manufacturers International

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0766 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
National Association For The Advancement of 
Colored People – South Dade Branch 
 
 
 
W h e n  W e  F i g h t ,  W e  W i n ! ! !  
Contributions of gifts to this NAACP Unit are not tax deductible for Federal Income Tax Purposes. 
Officers 
Harold Ford 
President 
 
Tanika Bennett 
1st Vice President 
 
Carole Jackson 
2nd Vice President 
 
Cardelle Hayes 
3rd Vice President 
 
Merline Malcolm 
Secretary 
 
Dr. Bradford Brown 
Assistant Secretary 
 
Rubiett Jenkins 
Treasurer 
 
Allison McMillon 
Assistant Treasurer 
 
Dr. Adora Obi Nweze 
Miami-Dade President Emeritus 
 
Contact Info: 
(305) 209 – 0195 
info@southdadenaacp.org 
P.O. Box 971515 
Miami, Florida 33197 
Website: 
SouthDadeNAACP.org 
Social Media: 
Facebook @ SouthDadeNAACP 
Instagram @ SouthDadeNAACP 
January 29, 2024 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator   
US Environmental Protection Agency   
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
 
Dear Administrator Regan,  
The NAACP SOUTH DADE BRANCH has public comments on the US Environmental Protection 
Agency (“EPA”) proposed “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements” (“LCRI”). The NAACP South Dade Branch advocates for the residents of Miami 
Dade County and the state of Florida on these issues.  The NAACP and its Center for 
Environmental and Climate Justice have a longstanding interest in ensuring that issues of 
community engagement and environmental justice center Black communities and frontline 
communities most impacted, including communities in Florida.  We stand with our National 
NAACP and our NAACP Florida State Conference on this issue.  
The NAACP South Dade Branch supports an EPA decision proposing stronger regulations to 
protect communities from lead in drinking water. The link to illness caused by lead is well 
documented and it has significantly and historically troubled and harmed the Black communities. 
These extreme health risks that affect our young people, our mothers, and our fathers are higher 
due to discrimination.  These negative health impacts have caused harm that spans generations 
within the community and to the Black family.  
 In Florida estimates suggest that there are as many as 200,000 lead service lines, (most likely an 
underestimation) threatening families across our state. These lead service lines expose families to 
a potent and irreversible neurotoxin which even at low levels of exposure is linked to damage to 
the brain and nervous system, learning disabilities, shorter stature, impaired hearing, mental 
impairment and harm to blood cells.    
Floridians will gain enormous benefits in public health cost savings from the full lead service line 
replacement.  This will save lives in our state and reduce the crisis in the healthcare system and 
remove the culprit, lead poisoning that has negatively impacted generations of Black women, 
children and men.   
We fully support the revisions made to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations (NPDWR) 
for lead and copper. Access to safe and clean drinking water is a fundamental civil right that 
should be available to everyone. Unfortunately, many residents are under the impression that 
their water is safe and clean simply because it comes from the municipality. Without these federal 
regulations, municipalities might continue to disregard public safety, particularly for people of 
color by not replacing lead service lines that connect to our homes and schools. Therefore, these 
regulations need immediate implementation to prevent further harm to people of color and to 
offer solutions to the generations of people who have already been affected by lead poisoning 
and its disastrous health impacts affecting the brain, kidneys, heart and blood pressure and may 
be associated with other life-threatening diseases. 

 
 
National Association For The Advancement of 
Colored People – South Dade Branch 
 
 
 
W h e n  W e  F i g h t ,  W e  W i n ! ! !  
Contributions of gifts to this NAACP Unit are not tax deductible for Federal Income Tax Purposes. 
Officers 
Harold Ford 
President 
 
Tanika Bennett 
1st Vice President 
 
Carole Jackson 
2nd Vice President 
 
Cardelle Hayes 
3rd Vice President 
 
Merline Malcolm 
Secretary 
 
Dr. Bradford Brown 
Assistant Secretary 
 
Rubiett Jenkins 
Treasurer 
 
Allison McMillon 
Assistant Treasurer 
 
Dr. Adora Obi Nweze 
Miami-Dade President Emeritus 
 
Contact Info: 
(305) 209 – 0195 
info@southdadenaacp.org 
P.O. Box 971515 
Miami, Florida 33197 
Website: 
SouthDadeNAACP.org 
Social Media: 
Facebook @ SouthDadeNAACP 
Instagram @ SouthDadeNAACP 
The documented effects of lead poisoning, which are known to cause learning disabilities in 
African American children, have been identified as a contributing factor to the school-to-prison 
pipeline. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) needs to replace lead service lines 
immediately. Trusted community non-profit groups can assist the EPA in public awareness and 
outreach efforts. Residents require immediate help to reduce the lead in their drinking water. 
Water filters can be distributed to each household as a temporary solution to remove 
contaminants like lead from the drinking water until the 10-year project of service line 
replacement can be completed and all sources of lead and copper in drinking water can be 
resolved.  We also urge oversight and penalties to ensure that FAKE water filters are not sold to 
us.  
The NAACP South Dade Branch urges for the immediate implementation of EPA revisions for lead 
and copper pipes. The EPA's distribution of water filters will provide relief to low and moderate-
income (LMI) families. Additionally, the EPA needs to include a safeguard to prevent price gouging 
of water filters and bottled water in communities that are undergoing pipe replacement. 
For these reasons, our community members urge EPA to not only retain strong elements of the 
proposed LCRI such as the requirement for the removal of all lead service lines in ten years, the 
requirements for water systems to sample both the first and fifth liter of water passing through 
lead pipes and a lower action level; but also ensure that those provisions do not have loopholes 
which undermine their goals and ensure that weaker parts of the rule are strengthened.  
 Specifically, we urge EPA to consider the following changes to ensure the final rule does not leave 
black communities in Florida behind:   
• Removing the exceptions to the 10-year lead pipe removal mandate: it is a fundamental 
injustice that the communities with the most lead service lines would be allowed 40 or more 
years to fix this issue.  
• Mandate that water systems fully pay for the removal of lead service lines: Removal can cost 
thousands of dollars, and putting the financial burden on impacted communities will result in 
mostly wealthy and white neighborhoods having lead service lines replaced. Removal and 
replacement do not make up major proportions of utility budgets, and utilities should be expected 
to maximize the use of available federal water infrastructure funds and other non-ratepayer 
sources of funds to prioritize solving this crisis.  
• Incentivize schools to install filters and ensure that children who spend many hours there 
daily are not at risk of exposure: Black children face an increased risk of lead exposure when 
compared with white children. The proposal’s suggested testing program does not differ from 
past ineffective programs, and EPA should move towards incentivizing the installation of filters 
and protecting children.  
• Safeguard true effective lead water filters from the ensuing fake profiteers that prey on the 
elderly, women and children.   
• Continuing to work with community organizations, we live here.   

 
 
National Association For The Advancement of 
Colored People – South Dade Branch 
 
 
 
W h e n  W e  F i g h t ,  W e  W i n ! ! !  
Contributions of gifts to this NAACP Unit are not tax deductible for Federal Income Tax Purposes. 
Officers 
Harold Ford 
President 
 
Tanika Bennett 
1st Vice President 
 
Carole Jackson 
2nd Vice President 
 
Cardelle Hayes 
3rd Vice President 
 
Merline Malcolm 
Secretary 
 
Dr. Bradford Brown 
Assistant Secretary 
 
Rubiett Jenkins 
Treasurer 
 
Allison McMillon 
Assistant Treasurer 
 
Dr. Adora Obi Nweze 
Miami-Dade President Emeritus 
 
Contact Info: 
(305) 209 – 0195 
info@southdadenaacp.org 
P.O. Box 971515 
Miami, Florida 33197 
Website: 
SouthDadeNAACP.org 
Social Media: 
Facebook @ SouthDadeNAACP 
Instagram @ SouthDadeNAACP 
Despite meaningful steps forward in this rule, not addressing these components would allow for 
environmental injustice to persist. Black communities and frontline communities have long 
suffered from disinvestment and lack of resources. Past NAACP analysis has demonstrated that 
race, ethnicity, or language spoken had the strongest relationship to slow and inadequate 
enforcement of the SDWA of any sociodemographic characteristic analyzed. The final LCRI is a 
rare opportunity to make significant changes in the lives of millions of people in Florida, and to 
provide a measure of environmental justice which these families are owed, and we encourage this 
administration to build on the progress made in the proposed rule by strengthening the final rule 
further.   
Sincerely, 
South Florida Civil Rights Activists: 
Mr. Harold Ford, 5th Vice President, NAACP Florida State Conference, and President, NAACP 
South Dade Branch  
Ms. Pam Brown Eyo, NAACP Florida State Conference, Environmental and Climate Justice, 
Chairperson 
Dr. Martha Bertin, NAACP South Dade Branch Chairwoman Health Committee 
Ms Yolanda Ambrose, NAACP South Dade Branch Chairwoman Women In the NAACP Committee  
Dr. Cheryl Joseph, NAACP South Dade Branch Chairwoman ACT-SO and Youth Council 
Committees

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0777 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
Re: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and
Copper: Improvements
To Whom It May Concern,
We are the Health and Environmental Justice Committee of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) Flint Branch. Our committee includes public health
and medical professionals that work to address health and environmental concerns and
inequities in the Flint and Genesee County community. Lead exposure during the Flint Water
Crisis has negatively impacted our community so we believe in the importance of strong lead
regulations that focus on prevention and mitigation via equitable approaches and policies.
We would like to provide feedback on the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead
and Copper: Improvements, Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801. In November 2023, the US
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) released improvements to the Lead and Copper Rule
(LCR) that provide a critical step to reduce lead in drinking water over the next ten years. We
have recommendations that would strengthen these protections to prevent further exposure to
lead in environmental justice communities.
Weak lead exposure regulations fail to protect the most vulnerable populations in our
community. In Flint, the vulnerable populations include the Black and Brown community, low
income households, youth and seniors. Flint is home to approximately 80,000 residents and the
median household income is $35,000. There is a large Black and Brown community in Flint, with
56% identifying as African American. Because of sensitive periods of neurodevelopment, it is
imperative that kids are protected from the irreversible harms of lead exposure. Here in Flint,
24% of the population is under 18 years and 6.7% of the population is under 5 years. Lead
exposure is also particularly harmful for seniors age 65 and up, who make up 13% of the
population in Flint. (Census, 2023)
The EPA’s proposal for lead service line replacement is valid but we encourage more robust
systems for tracking and stringent regulation of the process across the country. There should be
consequences for water systems that do not replace the lead service lines within 10 years.
Additionally, it is recommended that lead service line replacement be an opt out procedure in
order to be inclusive and equitable in communities where communication is challenging and
households residents are not the homeowner. The replacement of lead service lines should be
completed and implemented in the most efficient, effective, and equitable way to eliminate
exposure to lead and protect public health. There should also be financial prioritization of lead
service line replacement in environmental justice communities.

The EPA’s proposal for reducing complexity and improving public health protection was fair, but
we encourage this rule to go even further to protect public health. Given that there is no safe
level of lead in drinking water, NAACP Flint Branch demands that the federal action level be
lowered from 15 ppb, not only to 10 ppb as proposed here, but to 1 ppb to provide the strongest
protection possible.
Transparency and communication are vital to maintain and build public trust which is essential
for safeguarding public health and eliminating health disparities, especially in environmental
justice communities. The EPA should have a public notification process that has diverse
communication options including digital (website, social media, radio) and in person (flyers,
church announcements, etc) to effectively educate and inform communities. Equitable
communication strategies would assist residents in lead exposure notification and alert them to
when water-related work is occurring in a timely manner.
Finally, the proposal includes a cost-benefit analysis for making improvements to the Lead and
Copper rule. As residents of Flint, we can assure you that there is no dollar amount that could
compare to the cost of human life or the irreversible harm caused by lead exposure. In
environmental justice communities all across the country, there are people who depend on the
government to put forward rules that truly protect our health and well-being no matter the cost.
In closing we appreciate you taking the time to read our comments. Please consider
incorporating stricter regulations and stronger protections for drinking water to protect the health
of the most vulnerable among us.
Sincerely,
NAACP Flint Branch #3136
Health and Environmental Justice Committee
REFERENCE
2023 Census - https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/flintcitymichigan/PST045223

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0833 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
By Electronic Submission: Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC  20460 
 
Dear Mr. Michael Goldberg: 
 
The North Carolina Water Quality Association (NCWQA) appreciates the opportunity to comment 
on USEPA’s proposed revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) for 
lead and copper. On December 6, 2023, EPA issued for public comment further proposed 
revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR), found in 40 C.F.R. § 141.80.91), known as the 
Lead and Copper Rule Improvements (LCRI). Although the NCWQA supports a robust Lead and 
Copper Rule, we have significant concerns, summarized below, about several of the proposed 
changes.  
 
The NCWQA comprises public water and sewer statewide. Our members are dedicated to 
protecting public health and the environment – this includes reducing the amount of lead and 
copper present in our finished drinking water. We never seek to avoid necessary and appropriate 
requirements. Instead, we embrace such requirements and work to prioritize them and obtain the 
funding necessary to comply from the public that we serve. That said, as public utilities we must 
provide public water service in an affordable and cost-effective manner.  
 
With that perspective, we are compelled to submit these comments because the proposed LCRI 
requirements create a massive regulatory and economic obligation for both public water systems 
and their ratepayers. Adding these distribution system obligations is especially burdensome on 
top of the PFAS-related treatment obligations anticipated with EPA’s pending MCLs. Lead Service 
Line (LSL) removal is particularly challenging given the need for significant public outreach and 
interaction in relation to private laterals. US EPA estimates that there are around 9.2 million LSLs 
in the United States, which the AWWA estimates could cost over $90 billion to replace. Below we 
explain why we believe that the inventory obligation and removal of any LSLs that are found may 
be a major challenge both administratively and financially and will lead to significant conflict 
between EPA, the States, and water utilities as they struggle to define the universe of LSLs and 
complete the mandated replacements. 

NCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 2  
 
 
2 
 
I. 
Achieving 100% Lead Pipe Replacement Within 10 Years is Both Financially and 
Practically Impossible.  A Phased-In Deadline Based Upon System Lead Levels is 
Both Necessary and Appropriate 
 
The 10-Year Timeline 
 
The proposed LCRI would require water utilities to complete 100% lead service line replacement 
(LSLR) within 10 years. 88 Fed. Reg. 84878, 84882 (Dec. 6, 2023).  While there are alternative 
timelines for (1) systems with a high proportion of lead and GRR service lines in their distribution 
system relative to their total number of households served and (2) systems that would otherwise 
be required to replace greater than 10,000 service lines per year under the proposed 10-year 
replacement requirement, Id. at 84913, the ten-year timeframe is woefully inadequate.   
 
Anytime we talk in terms of “all” in relation to 50,000 water systems spread across the country, 
we should pause for a reality check.  We should especially pause when a significant number of 
the LSLs to be replaced have not even been identified.  We should further pause when faced with 
a potential price tag of upwards of $100 billion dollars. 
 
EPA estimates that there are more than 50,000 water systems nationwide.  It is simply impractical 
for such a large number of systems to make significant distribution system changes in a ten-year 
period.  This is especially the case given the (1) fact that many/most of the LSLs have not been 
identified, (2) cost of such replacements, (3) need for public outreach around utility-owned LSL 
replacement, and (4) need for outreach and coordination with homeowners across the country 
regarding replacement of their customer-owned LSLs.  Such an historic and unprecedented effort 
would come during the worst period in modern history for trying to plan, finance, bid, and deliver 
projects.  There is simply not enough engineering or construction talent available to do the work 
- even if we could fund it. 
 
Many of our water systems are struggling right now with basic water availability, especially during 
the winter months.  Cold weather each of the last several winters has taken a major toll on water 
systems leading to numerous water main breaks and boil water advisories.  These have been 
especially prevalent across the southern United States and into the mid-Atlantic.  For example, 
much of the District of Columbia had a boil water notice in January of 2024 due to cold weather-
related line breaks. 
 
US EPA has for several decades made a priority of imposing incredibly expensive (and in many 
ways, counter-productive) sewer system improvement mandates on local governments 
nationwide.  As a result of this sewer-first enforcement approach, local resources have been 
forced to the sewer side, often at the expense of water utilities’ ability to raise revenue.  Those 
deferred investments are now coming home to roost for water systems.  On top of general system 
needs, thousands of water systems face historically expensive PFAS-related capital upgrades 
and incredible annual operation and maintenance costs for those facilities.  Adding a LSL 
replacement obligation over the next 10 years on top of these historic financial challenges is a 
bridge too far financially and from a project delivery perspective. 
 
A one-size-fits-all LSL removal period will have water systems with low lead levels vying for the 
same funding and engineering/contracting resources as water systems with much higher lead 
levels.  This makes no sense whatsoever. 
 

NCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 3  
 
 
3 
 
A more logical approach to LSL replacement is for USEPA to adopt a phased approach where 
utilities with higher P90 lead levels have earlier deadlines to replace their LSLs while utilities with 
lower P90 numbers defer their replacements.  Such an approach will allow EPA, the States, and 
utilities to prioritize available federal and State grant/loan resources as well as engineering and 
construction resources to water systems with higher lead levels.    
 
We specifically recommend that the final rule authorize the states to establish phased-in deadlines 
for their water systems.  Any water system above the 10 ppb lead action level must remove their 
LSLs within 10 years of the effective date of the rule.  Utilities with P90 values below the 10 ppt 
would be prioritized based upon their levels for LSL removal, generally not to exceed a 20-year 
compliance period.   We believe that 20 years is a more realistic (albeit, still very challenging) 
compliance period.  Significantly, such an implementation period will allow water utilities to 
coordinate LSL removal with other system upgrades both getting and giving economies of scale 
to water system projects.  This will reduce the financial burden and system planning disruption 
that will otherwise result from a crude, 10-year LSL removal deadline. 
 
This phased approach, coupled with a one-third reduction in the lead action level, will ensure 
additional protection going forward for all Americans who receive public drinking water, from day 
one of the Rule’s effective date. 
 
II. 
Lead Service Line Replacement Must Only Include Public Lead Service Lines. 
 
The concept of LSL replacement must be revised to include replacement of only utility-owned 
LSLs. EPA lacks the authority to require public water utilities to replace privately-owned water 
infrastructure located on private property.  There are significant legal questions about whether 
public entities can even spend public funds for this private purpose.   
 
EPA cannot withhold credit for a public side lead service line replacement unless water systems 
undertake illegally impermissible action on private property.  EPA needs to address the legality of 
requiring public water systems to replace private lead service lines before imposing such a 
requirement in the LCRI. 
 
Rather than illegally seeking to force public water systems to make improvements to private 
indoor plumbing, EPA should give water utilities a benefit for each full LSL replacement that is 
performed.  For example, a utility could be given more time to complete LSL removals (within our 
suggested 20 year from the rule effective date compliance period) if they meet certain private side 
LSL removal goals (such as 30 or 40 percent associated with public LSL removal). 
 
We also question whether EPA’s assumed cost to implement the proposed rule has included 
private side LSL replacement costs.  If “yes,” we would like to know what EPA estimates those 
private costs to be and the basis for those estimates.   
 
Revise the Definition of “Under the Control of the Water System” to Exclude Customer-Owned 
LSLs 
 
Relatedly, we disagree with the proposed LCRI rule requirement that full LSL replacement is 
required when lines are “under the control” of the water system. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84882. The term 
“under the control” of the water system is defined as wherever a water system has adequate 
access (e.g., legal access, physical access) to conduct full-service line replacement or 
replacement of the lead connector. Id. at 84920.  

NCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 4  
 
 
4 
 
This definition is impermissibly overbroad.  The definition must clarify that water utilities are not 
obligated to replace customer-owned LSLs as EPA cannot legally require public utilities to make 
changes to private property. The key aspect should be ownership. The present proposed 
incentives are written for a complete replacement (with customer agreement) so that water 
systems do not get credit for LSL replacement if it doesn’t include the customer’s side. We believe 
this is an illegal provision and although we support full replacements, our members cannot be 
required to go on private property and replace indoor plumbing. Those private side replacements 
should instead be driven by federal funding efforts and partial replacements should be given the 
credit they are due, considering they take great effort and expense to identify and accomplish.  
Instead, and as noted above, water utilities should be given a benefit if they achieve a certain 
goal for customer-owned LSL replacement as part of LSL replacement of publicly-owned water 
distribution lines. 
 
Lining and Coating Service Lines Should Qualify for Extended Removal Deadlines 
 
As noted above, removing “all” LSLs in the country in ten years is a shocking financial and 
practical proposition.  Rather than requiring removal, we believe EPA should allow a range of 
effective lead reduction approaches, such as lining or coating technologies to count equally as 
LSL replacements.  At a minimum, lined or coated service lines should qualify for deferred removal 
schedules.  
 
Lined or coated service lines immediately control lead from entering drinking water. EPA’s 
inventory and full service line replacement requirements in the LCRI will impose substantial costs 
on water systems that must simultaneously investigate unknown lead status service lines and 
connectors, finance capital projects associated with replacing known or discovered lead and GRR 
service lines and lead connectors and assemble the resources and personnel to replace all the 
service lines requiring replacement. 
 
Granting water systems an additional period to complete the replacements of coated or lined 
service lines, e.g. for the service life of the coating or lining product, will lower the personnel and 
financial burdens of the LCRI on water systems while immediately reducing lead from drinking 
water as water systems will dedicate resources to those services lines most likely posing a risk of 
lead exposure. 
 
III. 
Galvanized Replacement Service Lines. 
 
Definition of “Galvanized Requiring Replacements” 
 
Under the proposed LCRI, galvanized service lines that have ever been downstream of LSL 
require replacement (GRR). 88 Fed. Reg. at 84882. The EPA defines galvanized requiring 
replacement service lines as a “galvanized service line that currently is or ever was downstream 
of a lead service line or is currently downstream in the direction of flow of a lead status unknown 
service line.” Id. 85054 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.2). If the water system cannot demonstrate the 
galvanized service line was never downstream of a lead line, the line is a galvanized requiring 
replacement service line. Id. 
 
The EPA’s proposed definition of GRRs is unreasonable and counterproductive.  The definition 
will likely result in water systems having to replace all galvanized service lines within the same 

NCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 5  
 
 
5 
 
10-year period they must replace LSLs.  We think the presumption that a galvanized line requires 
replacement is too strong.  Rather than requiring the water system to know that there was never 
a LSL above the galvanized line, a water utility should be able to conclude, based upon available 
information, that there is no information that there was ever a LSL above the galvanized line.  In 
those cases, the water system should be able to prioritize the lining/coating/removal of galvanized  
lines over a longer compliance period – say 20 years.  Again, the longer period is absolutely 
critical if water systems are to see economies of scale with other water distribution system work 
in conjunction with LSL and galvanized line removal.  This is especially the case for water utilities 
with P90 numbers that are well below the proposed 10 ppb action level.  We continue to believe 
that the states should be given the authority to prioritize LSL (and GRR) removal. 
 
The Lead Connector Threshold Should be 36 Inches and Unknown Connectors Assumed to Be 
36 Inches or Smaller. 
 
We disagree that lead connectors greater than two feet in length should be considered service 
lines. See 88 id. at 84919, 85083. Connectors greater than 24 inches have been sold to utilities 
and the EPA does not present evidence suggesting significantly higher lead concentrations 
resulting from a lead connector that is 36 inches as opposed to 24 inches in length. If EPA is 
going to impose an arbitrary connector length, it should be at least 36 inches.  Moreover, there 
should be a presumption that connectors of unknown size and composition are less than three 
feet in length. 
 
IV. 
Locating Legacy Lead Pipes Remains a Monumental Task for Utilities. 
 
It might be one thing for EPA to impose a 10-year LSL removal requirement if we already 
understood how many LSLs there were and where they are located.  That would allow us to better 
estimate the cost of removal and time needed.  Instead, EPA is shooting blind in that they don’t 
even have the benefit of the existing LSL inventories that won’t come due until October 16, 2024.  
Almost all of those inventories will be derived using predictive tools with only a small percentage 
of LSLs actually having been ground-truthed. 
 
The fact remains that it is a spring for most water systems to meet October 16, 2024 initial 
inventory deadline.  We suspect that hundreds, if not thousands of water systems will miss the 
deadline.  It will take many years following the development of the initial deadlines to ground truth 
where LSLs actually are in each water system.   
 
Accordingly, we request that EPA clarify what, if any, inventory update requirements are 
contemplated between the initial inventory under the LCRI and baseline inventories in the 
proposed LCRI. We suggest the EPA suspend inventory updates between the two deadlines to 
allow water systems an opportunity to develop a complete and accurate baseline inventory in light 
of the substantial difficulty most water systems will have categorizing the material composition 
and location of their service lines and connectors. Alternatively, the EPA should consider 
eliminating the initial inventory requirement and allow water systems to dedicate all of their 
resources into developing complete and accurate baseline inventories available to the public by 
2027. 
 
Baseline Inventory Requirements 
 

NCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 6  
 
 
6 
 
We request the EPA to reconsider requiring water systems to investigate connector locations and 
composition in its baseline inventory. The proposed rule would require water systems to remove 
lead connectors upon discovery. 88 Fed. Reg. at 85066 (Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 141.84(e)). The 
EPA’s justification for not requiring water systems to find and replace all lead connectors as part 
of the full-service line replacement requirement is that “regular progress towards lead connector 
replacement is made in coordination with other activities, such as planned infrastructure work, 
while resources are prioritized for replacement of all LSLs and GRR service lines as quickly as 
feasible.” Id. at 84919.  
 
EPA noted that most lead connectors will be replaced under the proposed rule because “all lead 
connectors that are attached to a lead or GRR service line would be replaced by the end of the 
mandatory service line replacement program.” Id. In addition, EPA “also expects that many lead 
connectors may be connected to aging water mains and likely to undergo replacement with 
routine main replacement activities in coming years,” especially because EPA estimates that any 
given lead connector “is expected to be a minimum of 41 years old by the LCRI compliance date 
in 2027” and the “average service life of cast iron, ductile iron, and asbestos-cement pipe is 40 
years.” Id. EPA thus acknowledged that water systems will encounter and replace the vast majority 
of lead connectors during routine maintenance as a result of aging infrastructure or as a result of 
its mandatory service line replacement requirements. 
 
At the same time, EPA acknowledges that short lead connectors pose a lower lead exposure risk 
than LSL and GRR service lines that are significantly longer. Id. at 84919 (“EPA expects that 
galvanized lines downstream of lead connectors may contribute less lead into drinking water than 
those that were downstream of much longer LSLs”). EPA therefore prioritized service line 
replacement. Because EPA accepts that its requirement for water systems to replace lead 
connectors upon discovery will address the vast majority of lead connectors in a water system 
and acknowledges that lead connectors pose less of a health risk than lead service lines, we 
request EPA to reconsider its decision to include connectors in the baseline inventory. 
 
Removing the investigation of connectors from the baseline inventory removes expensive and 
laborious investigations into the location and composition of connectors when those resources 
are best spent identifying, locating, and removing lead and GRR service lines. Water systems 
reporting the composition and location of encountered connectors and the number of replaced 
lead connectors will still provide valuable information to the water system and the public about 
the location and composition of connectors in a water system and the probability that lead 
connectors are present. 
 
Validation Pool Requirements 
 
The proposed regulation instructs water systems to develop a “validation pool” consisting of all 
lines categorized as non-lead minus the non-lead lines that already replaced LSL or GRR lines, 
non-lead lines already visually inspected at two points along the line, or non-lead lines with 
documentation demonstrating their composition. 88 Fed. Reg. at 84935, 85063 (proposed 40 
C.F.R. § 141.84(b)(5)). The rule would require water systems to randomly and visually inspect as 
many service lines in the validation pool as necessary to ensure a “95% confidence level” that the 
observed proportion of non-lead lines validated is representative of the larger validation pool 

NCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 7  
 
 
7 
 
within ten years of the rule’s publication and seven years of submitting baseline inventories. Id.; 
Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, EPA 815-
R-23-003 at 24-25 (Nov. 2023). 
 
The timing of this LSL/GRR inventory requirement reinforces the impracticality of the ten-year 
LSL/GRR removal requirement. 
 
EPA is currently calculating the number of visual inspections of lines necessary to ensure that 
lines categorized as non-lead are in fact non-lead by assuming a standard normal distribution and 
an “expected sample proportion” of 0.5. EPA assumed the expected sample proportion “to be 50 
percent, meaning that 50 percent of the non-lead service lines investigated are expected to be 
confirmed as non-lead.” Technical Support Document for the Proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements, EPA 815-R-23-003 at 25 (Nov. 2023). EPA acknowledged “this proportion will most 
likely be much higher since most non-lead lines will end up being confirmed as nonlead.” Id. EPA 
nonetheless maintained the proportion at 0.5 because, “an assumption of 0.50 provides the most 
conservative (or largest) sample size…meaning that any system validating this number of lines 
will be guaranteed to have met or exceeded the minimum number for statistical significance 
regardless of the true sample proportion.” Id. 
 
We question why EPA does not simply stick with the 95% confidence and allow each water utility’s 
consultant to develop a testing program that will achieve that level of confidence for the utility’s 
list.  Why does EPA pick a very aggressive 95th percent confidence level and then structure the 
rule to force an even higher level of confidence? 
 
The method for determining the number of visual inspections necessary is also not particularly 
well explained. At a minimum, EPA should clarify its validation calculations, e.g. what data it used, 
if any, to determine the expected sample proportion, what the relevant comparison EPA is making 
between the validated lines and the validation pool and what that significance of that comparison 
is, and where EPA derived its formulas for determining the appropriate sample size and provide 
citations. 
 
EPA should also assume in its sample proportion that water systems will correctly assess line 
status more than 50% of the time given its concurrent requirements to investigate lead status 
unknown lines. As EPA has explained the sample proportion, EPA is essentially assuming water 
systems will be no better at determining service line composition than flipping a coin. In light of 
the other significant investigation costs imposed by the rule, EPA should reconsider this 
assumption because it should significantly lower the number of validations water systems must 
make.  
 
We support EPA’s decision to exclude service lines which water systems have confirmed as non-
lead through records investigations from the validation pool. Id. at 84935, 85063.  
 
We also request the EPA to consider delaying the date the inventory validation must be submitted 
to better align with the categorization of lead status unknown service lines. Water systems must 
identify the material of all lead status unknown service lines within ten years from the compliance 
date. Id. at 85063. Conversely, the validation study must be submitted no later than ten years 

NCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 8  
 
 
8 
 
from the rule’s publication date or seven years from the compliance date. Id. at 85063. If water 
systems submit inventory validations before all unknown lines are categorized, then the validation 
pool will not include some lines categorized as “non-lead.” Allowing the validation to occur at least 
after all lead status unknown lines have been categorized will create a validation pool 
representative of all of the non-lead categorized service lines and provide water systems three 
more years to validate their inventories. 
 
Public Disclosure of LSL Addresses In Service Line Inventory 
 
The LCRI, like the LCRR, continues to require that a water system’s annual inventory updates be 
publicly accessible. Although the LCRR includes location identifiers (street, intersection, 
landmark, etc.) served by each LSL, the LCRI states utilities must include a street address with 
each service line and connector. Id. at 84936. We continue to disagree with the need to publicly 
publish a list of homes served by LSLs. Each home will get an annual reminder of this fact. Any 
home that tests for lead will receive its results – there is no need or clear authority for the EPA to 
mandate that this specific information must be made publicly available.  We especially think it is 
irresponsible to include unknown LSL in these lists. 
 
V. 
Lowering the Lead Action Level will be significant in many states. 
 
EPA is proposing to lower the lead action level from 15 µg/L to 10 µg/L. 88 Fed. Reg. 84880 while 
eliminating the lead trigger level that was introduced under the 2021 LCRR. If the AL is exceeded, 
the system must inform the public (Tier 1 public notification within 24 hrs of learning of 
exceedance) and reduce lead exposure while concurrently working to replace all lead pipes (for 
example, installing/adjusting corrosion control treatment). Id. 
 
Lowering the Action Level from 15 ug/L to 10 ug/L will be a big deal in some states with some 
states asserting that the number of systems exceeding the new action level could double.  This 
is likely to be the case for a number of smaller systems.   
 
We take no position on the reduction in the action level.  However, we do believe that P90 
numbers should be a basis for phasing in LSL/GRR removal requirements and that the states are 
in the best position to prioritize LSL/GRR removal.  States are also in the best position to work 
with water systems to mitigate lead levels pending LSL removal.   
 
VI. 
We Disagree With the Requirement to Make Point-of-Use Filters/Pitchers Available 
to All Households After Three Action Level Exceedances.    
 
Under the LCRI, water systems with three lead action level exceedances would be required to 
conduct additional outreach to consumers and make pitcher filters or point-of-use devices certified 
to reduce lead available to all consumers. See id. at 84954.  
 
Providing such filters/pitchers will be overkill in that it will scare many residents not served by 
LSL/GRRs into thinking their tap water is not safe.  That loss of confidence can be difficult, if not 
impossible, to overcome to the long-term detriment of the residents and the utility.   
 
Moreover, distributing filters/pitchers will be a massive administrative and financial task.  The 
filters/pitchers would have to be provided to each residential and non-residential location served 
by the public water supply.   

NCWQA Comments – Proposed LCRI 
February 5, 2024 
Page 9  
 
 
9 
 
We are also very concerned that residents would not properly replace the filters and could end up 
concentrating lead and copper beyond what would otherwise be present in their drinking water. 
 
VII. 
Utilities Must Be Allowed to Invalidate a Homeowner Sample That Does not Follow 
Proper Collection Procedures. 
 
Under the proposed rule, a water utility could not invalidate a homeowner’s sample even if the 
sample was not taken in accordance with LCRI requirements.  This is unacceptable.  All data 
must meet applicable QA/QC/Sampling requirements.  At a minimum, the rule should give the 
water utility the discretion to use a non-conforming sample but should not mandate the use of 
such samples. 
 
VIII. 
Water Systems Must Be Able to Select Homes From Lower Tiers Where Not Enough 
Tier 1 Homeowners Are Willing to Participate. 
 
The LCRI must clarify that water systems which, despite best, good faith efforts, cannot attract 
enough Tier 1 homeowners to participate in sampling, can use lower tier homes. 
 
Otherwise, the water system will be in non-compliance due to causes (lack of homeowner 
willingness to participate) which are beyond its control. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Our member utilities work tirelessly to provide high quality finished drinking water for our 
customers in an affordable and cost-effective manner.  We appreciate EPA’s consideration of our 
concerns about the practicality and affordability of the requirements we object to above.  We also 
appreciate EPA’s consideration of our suggested improvements to the proposed rule.  In 
particular, we strongly believe that a final rule needs to provide additional time for LSL/GRR 
removal and that a state-directed phased approach over twenty years from the rule’s effective 
date, is warranted. 
 
Sincerely, 
       
 
F. Paul Calamita  
General Counsel 
  
  
C: NCWQA Members

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0910 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 2, 2024 
 
Mr. Michael Goldberg 
Office of Ground and Drinking Water 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Mail Code 28221T, 
200 Pennsylvania Ave, NW,  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801, RIN 2040-AG16, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead 
and Copper: Improvements (LCRI)  
 
Dear Mr. Goldberg: 
 
On behalf of AASA, The School Superintendents Association, representing more than 10,000 public 
school superintendents across the nation, I write to offer comments on the Environmental Protection 
Agency’s proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements 
(LCRI).  
 
AASA recognizes that a child’s exposure to lead and copper can cause serious health effects and lower 
cognitive functioning, increase behavioral difficulties, and generally impact learning and their ability to 
be college and career ready. Children are in school roughly 7 hours a day, 180 days a year and therefore 
are at risk of being exposed to water containing lead particles as well as other environmental toxins that 
may be unknowingly present in the school building. We appreciate EPA’s efforts to eliminate lead and 
copper exposure in schools and other facilities while ensuring that the regulations are achievable and 
financially viable for school districts.   
 
Specifically, we appreciate EPA’s clarification that the requirements in § 141.92 do not apply to schools 
and childcare facilities that are regulated as NTNCWSs. As we stated in our previous comments, our 
greatest concern was the impact of new regulations on districts who operate their own system. It would 
have placed a disproportionate fiscal and administrative burden on America’s highest-poverty small and 
rural districts.  
 
That being said, NTNCWSs should still be provided the opportunity to ensure the children served by 
their systems are safe and not exposed to lead. We continue to believe that EPA should require States 
that have received Drinking Water State Revolving Fund (DWSRF) to set-aside funding specifically for 
districts that are NTNCWS and may need to engage in significant remediation efforts. These districts 
already face significant economic hardships and competing priorities for addressing problems with their 
aging facilities. Given the amount of money states have received under the Infrastructure Investment 
and Jobs Act (IIJA) and the unique requirements that may be placed on these districts because of this 
updated regulation, it is critical that they receive targeted technical assistance from the State and are 
reimbursed for any compliance option that enables them to reach the target level.  
 

For the schools and districts being served by CWSs, EPA should require CWSs to do more to minimize 
exposure to lead. We encourage CWSs to communicate to districts that beyond the 3 Ts guidance, they 
can assist with remediation efforts that districts undertake, especially filter-first prevention efforts, as 
well as other, more complicated remediation strategies. 
 
Below are our responses to the questions EPA sought feedback on regarding lead sampling in schools 
and childcare facilities.  
 
1. Whether CWSs should be required to collect more samples and/or sample more frequently in 
schools and childcare facilities.  
 
We support the proposed cadence of sampling, requiring all Community Water Systems to offer 
to test for lead in elementary schools once every five years and in secondary schools only if the 
school district requests the sampling. As new school buildings are opened every year it is 
important that districts can continue to request sampling from CWSs to ensure that these new 
taps are lead and copper free. Additional requirements should be left to the discretion of State 
and local governments who are better suited to determine the needs of communities and, more 
importantly, capable of providing the resources necessary for compliance.  
 
 
2. The proposed provision to allow States to issue waivers to community water systems from the 
requirement for lead sampling in schools and childcare facilities during the five-year period 
after the LCRI compliance date if the facility was sampled for lead after January 1, 2021 but 
prior to the LCRI compliance date and the sampling otherwise meets the waiver requirements 
of § 141.92(h).  
3. Whether or not to allow States to waive the requirements of § 141.92 for CWSs in schools and 
childcare facilities that use and maintain filters certified to reduce lead, and if so, whether the 
waiver should only be allowed where schools and child care facilities are required by State or 
local law to install POU devices and maintain them.  
4. The minimum requirements for States to provide a waiver (e.g., should the waiver be limited 
to locations where the filter use is required by State or local law; should the waiver be limited 
to locations where State or local law requires periodic sampling or testing to ensure proper 
filter use). 
 
When it comes to the question of State waivers (questions 2, 3 and 4), we are of the opinion 
that State and local discretion should take precedence on these issues. States are likely better 
positioned than EPA to administer lead testing and remediation programs because States 
can establish regulations for schools and childcare facilities that would provide for greater 
consistency of education, testing, remediation activities, and public communication across all 
schools and childcare facilities throughout a State. Additionally, States can directly apply for 
and have access to funding to support schools and childcare facilities that may not be 
available to CWSs. Therefore, States are best equipped to determine what entities can and 
cannot be exempted from testing requirements and should be entrusted with the ability to 
provide waivers to the EPA’s requirements. However, district and school administrators should 
always be provided the opportunity to have their facilities tested for lead. Any policy that allows 
a State to issue waivers to community water systems should require the consent or approval of 
the relevant district or school administration.  
 

5. Whether EPA should require CWSs to make school and childcare facility sampling results 
publicly available, and if so, how frequently and in what manner. 
 
Transparency is critical to maintaining trust between communities and their public schools. In 
this case, transparency is crucial to ensure that families know that the facilities they send their 
students to are free of any harmful toxins. School administrators are best equipped to 
determine the time and manner for communicating sampling results to the students, families, 
and communities that they serve. EPA should refrain from requiring CWSs to make sampling 
results publicly available and instead, provide resources to schools and childcare facilities 
including best practices for how to simplify and communicate results to families and 
communities.   
 
We thank you for the opportunity to provide comment on this proposed rule and look forward to 
continuing to communicate and engage with EPA over the coming months around this important issue. 
 
Sincerely, 
Sasha Pudelski 
Director of Advocacy  
AASA, The School Superintendents Association

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0874 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
February 5, 2024 
 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
US Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, Docket ID 
Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
The Campaign for Lead Free Water is a network of affected individuals, community groups, and local, 
state, and national organizations working to protect consumers from lead in US drinking water. We are 
grateful for the opportunity to comment on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed 
revisions to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) for lead and copper under the 
authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA). 
 
We applaud EPA for numerous cornerstone provisions in the proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (LCRI) that promise to strengthen the rule’s ability to achieve its stated goal: “to provide 
maximum human health protection by reducing the lead and copper levels at consumers’ taps to as close 
to the MCLG [Maximum Contaminant Level Goal] as is feasible.”1 These provisions include, a) requiring all 
water systems to develop and update annually a lead service line inventory that identifies lead, galvanized 
requiring replacement (GRR), unknown, and non-lead service lines; b) requiring most water systems to 
replace lead service lines within ten years independent of their lead action level compliance status; c) 
reducing the lead action level from 0.015 mg/L to 0.010 mg/L; d) requiring first- and fifth-liter sampling 
for lead-in-water monitoring at sites with lead service lines, while using the higher of the two readings to 
calculate 90th percentile values; and e) expanding public notification requirements to consumers served 
by lead, GRR, and unknown service lines.  
 
Our comments center on two of the LCRI’s three “main focus areas,” which assign responsibilities directly 
to consumers—namely, the public education and the service line replacement treatment techniques.2 As 
we discuss below, and as we address in detail in our November 20, 2023 community and environmental 
justice organization letter to EPA (also attached), we believe that both treatment techniques necessitate 
crucial improvements to a) provide the human health protection that the LCR is intended to provide, and 
b) prevent additional layers of environmental injustice on consumers who, for 30+ years, have been left 
falsely assured about the safety of their drinking water and insufficiently protected from routine lead-in-
water exposures, without their knowledge or consent. Finally, we close with a strong call for the adoption 
 
1 1991 Lead and Copper Rule, p26478. 
2 The proposed LCRI’s third “main focus area” is “Reducing Complexity for Public Health Protection” (p84879).  

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
2
in the LCRI of a statewide and a community advisory council requirement, as it exists in Michigan’s state-
specific LCR, for the successful, scientifically sound, health-protective, equitable, and just implementation 
of the rule. 
 
In summary, we urge EPA to: 
 
1. Align the LCRI’s public education treatment technique with the statutory requirement for 
treatment techniques—namely, that they prevent “known or anticipated adverse effects on the 
health of persons to the extent feasible.”3 
 
The troubling chain of lead-in-water crises in cities like Washington, DC; Flint, MI; Newark, NJ; 
Benton Harbor, MI; Jackson, MS and in schools and daycares across the country has awoken 
consumers across the US to the reality that lead in water is ubiquitous and can cause childhood 
lead poisoning—among other grave health harms—even when their water system meet LCR 
requirements and declare their water “safe.”4 This long chain of crises has also exposed that the 
LCR’s public education treatment technique has been insufficient at achieving its intended 
purpose. That is, protecting consumers through delivery of “information on ways to reduce their 
exposure to lead in their drinking water” and to “prevent adverse health effects associated with 
exposure to lead in drinking water.”5  
 
The proposed LCRI acknowledges that taps can and do dispense lead, even when: 
 
• water systems meet LCR requirements,6 
• lead service lines are not present,7 and 
• standard tap sampling does not detect contamination.8 
 
This is where the rule’s public education treatment technique comes in. EPA “introduced the 
public education requirements in 1991 stating that while water system actions including CCT 
[corrosion control treatment] and LSLR [lead service line replacement] are expected to reduce lead 
drinking water levels, ‘there are situations where elevated lead levels will persist at consumers’ 
taps during or even after these efforts’ (56 FR 26500, USEPA, 1991).”9  
 
Against this backdrop, we are concerned that the proposed public education improvements, which 
center on a) standard tap sampling results, b) lead, GRR, and unknown service lines, and c) lead 
action level exceedances, are insufficient and will continue to mislead most consumers into 
 
3 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84901. 
4 See, for example, Fedinick 2021, “Millions Served by Water Systems Detecting Lead”; 2021 Campaign for Lead Free 
Water, “The EPA Lead and Copper Rule is an Optical Illusion”; McCormick et al. 2022, “Revealed: the ‘shocking’ 
levels of toxic lead in Chicago tap water.” See, also, the proposed LCRI’s acknowledgement that, “Examples of 
isolated cases of lead poisoning in children have been documented and attributed to drinking water in communities 
whose systemwide lead levels remained below the action level of 0.015 mg/L (Triantafyllidou et al., 2007; 
Triantafyllidou & Edwards, 2012)” (p84911). 
5 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84946. 
6 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84911. 
7 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, pp84879, 84955. 
8 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84911. 
9 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84952. 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
3
believing that their water is safe, when in actuality it may not be. This will continue to needlessly 
prolong, if not exacerbate, consumer exposures. 
 
It is urgent for EPA to align the LCRI’s public education treatment technique with the statutory 
requirement for treatment techniques. This would enable public education to achieve the 
outcome EPA designed it for—namely, to “[empower] people to make informed decisions about 
taking actions to reduce their exposure to lead in drinking water and thereby reduce their risk of 
adverse health effects.”10 In other words, a public education requirement that functions as a 
treatment technique would instill in consumers appreciation for the benefits of precautionary 
measures at all times that can dramatically reduce, if not prevent, exposures. And it would support 
them to reliably and consistently keep lead-in-water levels at, or as close as possible to, the LCR’s 
MCLG of 0 parts per billion (ppb), whether their water system meets the lead action level or not; 
their home, workplace, or school has a lead service line or not; or standard testing detects lead in 
their water or not. Toward this goal, we believe that the LCRI must: 
 
• Mandate a “Filter First” approach to public education that makes the proper use of point-of-
use lead-certified filters the rule’s primary and urgent recommendation to all consumers. 
 
• Prohibit all declarations about a community’s water being “safe” in relation to lead (and 
copper), simply because it meets the LCRI’s lead action level (and copper action level).11 
 
Aligning the LCRI’s public education treatment technique with the statutory requirement for 
treatment techniques would also plug the gaps of the LCR’s other three treatment techniques (i.e., 
source water treatment, corrosion control treatment, and lead service line replacement), which 
cannot alone achieve the LCR’s MCLG of 0 ppb.12 Additionally, it would render consumers far less 
vulnerable to lead action level exceedances; service line inventory errors; delays in full lead and 
GRR service line replacement (which, in some cases, might turn out to be permanent); partial lead 
service line replacements; physical disturbances of lead-bearing plumbing; failure of schools, 
childcare facilities, and workplaces to adopt lead-in-water mitigation strategies; and other high-
risk situations. In other words, by mandating a universal “Filter First” public education treatment 
technique and prohibiting misleading declarations about water safety, the LCRI would better 
protect public health by arming consumers with information that enables them to finally and for 
the long-term reduce, if not eliminate, lead at their taps right away.  
 
We have the technology. What we are missing is a public education requirement that functions as 
a treatment technique. This is the time for EPA to mandate such a requirement. 
 
10 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84946. 
11 For lead, see 2021 Campaign for Lead Free Water, “The EPA Lead and Copper Rule is an Optical Illusion.” For 
copper, see our 2020 community and environmental justice organization public comment to EPA, in which we 
highlight that tap sampling must target homes with new copper plumbing, in order to maximize the chance of 
capturing worst-case copper levels, as required by the LCR. To our dismay, the proposed LCRI has failed to correct 
the tap sampling requirement for copper, which is likely to perpetuate false assurances of safety and prolong 
preventable health harm without consumer knowledge or consent. 
12 The LCRI acknowledges that, even when properly implemented, source water treatment, corrosion control 
treatment, and lead service line replacement are insufficient at eliminating lead from consumer taps (p84911). 
Additionally, there are factors that can accelerate lead release from plumbing (e.g., high age of plumbing, physical 
disturbances from heavy traffic, seepage of road salt into the distribution system), without water utility knowledge 
or ability to address them.  

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
4
 
2. Close gaps and loopholes in the proposed service line replacement treatment technique to ensure 
that the LCRI’s mandatory “full” service line replacement requirement does not result in a costly, 
nationwide wave of partial lead service line replacements that place consumers at increased risk 
of exposure and harm. 
 
Permanent removal of all lead and GRR lines will be a significant step toward public health 
protection from lead in water. This important proposal, however, must be revised to close gaps and 
loopholes that currently, a) render the LCRI’s proposed “full” lead service line replacement 
requirement as, in actuality, a partial lead service line replacement requirement; b) risk leaving 
many lead and GRR service lines in operation long after water systems declare their distribution 
systems ‘lead service line free’; c) leave consumers vulnerable to direct and indirect charges (as 
well as overcharges) for the removal of a lead source that was, in many cases, imposed on them 
without their knowledge or consent and that has left them unprotected from routine lead-in-water 
exposures and associated health harm; and d) leave consumers in the dark, if not misled, about 
what mandatory service line replacement under the LCRI will and will not achieve vis-à-vis their 
risk of exposures. Toward this goal, we urge EPA to: 
 
• Correct the definitions of “service line,” to include plumbing across the entire length of a 
line, and “lead service line,” to include leaded plumbing across the entire length of a line. 
 
• Prescribe in the LCRI a) acceptable methods for water system identification of service line 
material along the entire length of a line, and b) a service line material validation program 
for lines categorized as ‘non-lead’ that is more robust than the LCRI’s proposed two-point 
approach. 
 
• Include in the LCRI a presumption that water systems ‘control’ all service lines in their 
distribution system and, if they claim they don’t, that they assert such ‘control.’ 
 
• Require continued use of the more rigorous first- and fifth-liter sampling protocol until water 
systems can provide incontrovertible evidence that all lead connectors and all lead and GRR 
service lines (including between a building’s exterior wall and interior) have been replaced. 
 
• Prohibit partial lead and GRR service line replacement during a water system’s planned 
infrastructure work when that work is unrelated to the LCRI’s lead service line replacement 
requirement. 
 
• Include in the LCRI a) a prohibition against direct charges to consumers for service line 
replacement, and b) a requirement that water systems aggressively pursue all possible 
funding sources for service line replacement before resorting to water rate increases. 
 
• Prohibit official declarations of a water system being ‘lead service line free’ in the absence of 
incontrovertible evidence that all portions of a lead and GRR service line, all lead 
connectors, and all lead-bearing water meters, solder, and fittings along the length of a 
service line have been identified and replaced. 
 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
5
• Mandate public messaging which spells out clearly and unequivocally that full lead and GRR 
service line replacement will reduce, but not eliminate, lead release from plumbing. 
Consumers are entitled to know that the LCRI’s service line replacement requirement is a 
crucially important step, but only one step, on a long path toward lead-free plumbing.   
 
Our recommendations are made in the hope that the LCRI’s commendable service line 
replacement requirement will not turn into a Trojan Horse, which deceives consumers into 
believing that their entire service line is finally free of lead, when that is not the case.  
 
3. Include in the LCRI a mandate for statewide and community advisory councils 
 
A close look at the LCR’s 30+ year history reveals that impacted communities have been at the 
forefront of uncovering widespread lead-in-water contamination events and associated health 
harm, water system irregularities in the rule’s implementation, and systematic dissemination of 
officially sanctioned misinformation about lead in water.  
 
And yet affected community members who take the initiative to study lead in water, monitor how 
their water systems address contamination, and challenge erroneous or misleading official 
messaging about the problem are systematically antagonized, marginalized, and silenced. This 
would be unethical in the context of any environmental health rule, but it seems especially 
unethical in the context of a rule with a ‘shared responsibility’ regime and a public education 
treatment technique.  
 
Adding to this troubling reality the tragic fact that the LCR has, in fact, resulted in “significant lead 
exposures”13 due, at least in part, to its improper implementation by many water systems and 
faulty oversight by many states, it is imperative that the LCRI mandates the creation of statewide 
and community advisory councils, like the ones required under Michigan’s state-specific LCR, that 
are independent from water systems and staffed primarily by affected community members. These 
councils must have the capacity to grant affected communities the authority to oversee and 
influence: 
 
o How the LCRI is implemented in their jurisdictions. 
o Whether it satisfies environmental justice, environmental equity, and consumer right-to-
know requirements—including transparency of water system data; engineering, public 
relations, and other water system contracts; and water system financial decisions and 
programs. 
o Whether it satisfies the environmental justice right to environmental self-determination. 
o How potential irregularities and challenges with service line inventories, compliance 
monitoring, lead service line replacement, and other aspects of the LCRI are addressed. 
o Whether the LCRI is providing the public health protection it promises to all consumers. 
 
EPA has a historic opportunity to issue a final rule that achieves its health-protective intent. We hope that 
the LCRI will open a new chapter for us all, wherein affected groups like ours are able to amplify EPA’s 
and water systems’ work, not question it. Telling our communities that the LCRI deceives them, misleads 
them, or places them at increased risk of exposure generates anger and confusion and, ultimately, further 
undermines consumer trust in EPA, water systems, and the water. This is not what we want. 
 
13 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84911. 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
6
 
Detailed explanations of our requests are below.  
 
Should you have any questions, please contact Yanna Lambrinidou, PhD at pnalternatives@yahoo.com. 
 
We thank you for your consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Yanna Lambrinidou, PhD 
Co-founder 
Campaign for Lead Free Water 
pnalternatives@yahoo.com 
 
Paul Schwartz 
Co-founder 
Campaign for Lead Free Water 
paulschwartzdc@gmail.com 
 
 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
7
COMMENTS 
 
 
1. PUBLIC EDUCATION TREATMENT TECHNIQUE14  
 
a. Under the LCR, consumers have responsibilities. This imposes on EPA an obligation to ensure that 
they also have rights. 
 
The preamble to the LCRI establishes that public education “has been, and remains, a 
cornerstone treatment technique to reduce risks from exposure to lead in drinking water.”15-16 As 
a treatment technique, public education must “prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on 
the health of persons to the extent feasible”17—“feasible,” in this context, refers to interventions 
that are implementable “with the use of the best technology, treatment techniques and other 
means which the Administrator finds, after examination for efficacy under field conditions and 
not solely under laboratory conditions, are available (taking cost into consideration).”18  
 
Specifically, public education must inform consumers about “the risk of exposure to lead and 
copper in drinking water and thereby allow them to take the necessary steps to reduce their 
exposure to lead.”19 Public education, more than any other provision, renders the LCR a shared 
responsibility rule. This is because it places partial responsibility for the realization of the rule’s 
goal – “to provide maximum human health protection by reducing the lead and copper levels at 
consumers’ taps to as close to the MCLG as is feasible” – on consumers themselves. Therefore, 
the LCRI’s public education treatment technique must be built on the acknowledgment that: 
 
• Consumer responsibilities come with consumer rights – specifically: 
o The consumer right-to-know, which was codified in the Safe Drinking Water Act 
(SDWA) 1996 Amendments and the 2016 Water Infrastructure Improvements for the 
Nation Act provisions on lead public education adopted during the Flint water crisis,20 
and 
o The environmental justice right to environmental self-determination through inclusive 
decision-making. 
 
 
 
14 Please also see Section c (“Public education”) under Section 2 (“Lead Service Line Replacement Treatment 
Technique”) below. 
15 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84946. 
16 The rule’s other three treatment techniques are source water treatment, lead service line replacement, and 
corrosion control treatment. 
17 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84946. 
18 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84901. 
19 1991 Lead and Copper Rule, p26463. Similar language appears in the 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (p84946): Public education must provide “the community with information on ways to reduce their 
exposure to lead in their drinking water and thereby can prevent adverse health effects associated with exposure to 
lead in drinking water.” 
20 See, Public Notice and public education requirements for lead action level exceedances, SDWA §1412(c)(1)(D), 
(c)(2)(D), & (c)(5), 42 U.S.C. §300g-3(c)(1)(D), (c)(2)(D), & (c)(5), and Consumer Confidence Report requirements in 
SDWA §1414(c)(4), 42 U.S.C. §300g-3(c)(4). 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
8
• Consumers under any shared responsibility environmental health rule arguably have a right 
to: 
o Full and regular disclosure about the reason and nature of their responsibility for self-
protection, and 
o Clear, accurate, complete, frequent, and accessible public education arming them 
with the information they need to carry out their responsibility (i.e., to significantly 
reduce—if not eliminate—exposures).   
 
To date, the LCR’s public education treatment technique has been violating these rights, because 
it has been both requiring and permitting water systems to deliver information that is 
scientifically unsound, deceptive, and/or misleadingly incomplete.21 Additionally, it has been 
allowing water systems to deliver this information through channels of communication with 
established ineffectiveness.22 This has translated into a three-decade status quo, in which low and 
high levels of lead have been flowing routinely out of consumer taps, not only in water systems 
that exceed the LCR’s lead action level, but also in water systems that do not.23 At the same time, 
consumers have been deprived of honest, clear, and urgent information about the availability of 
precautionary measures that are known to significantly reduce—if not eliminate—exposures.  
 
In other words, to date, the LCR has been assigning health- and self-protective responsibilities to 
consumers, while obstructing their ability to fulfill them. This suggests that the LCR’s public 
education treatment technique has been violating both LCR and SDWA requirements.    
 
b. The LCRI’s public education treatment technique must be revised to function as a treatment 
technique – that is, as an intervention that enables consumers to prevent “known or anticipated 
adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible.”24  
 
 
21 See, for example, the November 20, 2023 community and environmental justice organization letter to EPA (also 
attached). 
22 See, for example, Fox et al. 2023, “Improving drinking water consumer confidence reports: Applying user-
centered design,” which states that most study participants were unaware of water utility annual Consumer 
Confidence Reports (CCRs) until they were introduced to them by the researchers. See also Griffin & Dunwoody 
2000, “The relation of communication to risk judgment and preventive behavior related to lead in tap water,” which 
concludes that public education after a lead action level exceedance is not effective at changing consumer behavior. 
This same conclusion was presented to EPA’s National Drinking Water Advisory Council (NDWAC) LCR Working 
Group by former Denver Water employee Melissa Essex Elliot (see, Lambrinidou 2015, letter of dissent to the 
NDWAC). 
23 See, for example, Griffin & Dunwoody 2000, “The relation of communication to risk judgment and preventive 
behavior related to lead in tap water”; 2021 Campaign for Lead Free Water, “The EPA Lead and Copper Rule is an 
Optical Illusion.” 
24 According to the 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, “Public education is one of the treatment 
technique requirements EPA promulgated in the LCR, in addition to LSLR, CCT, and source water treatment. Section 
1412(b)(7)(A) of SDWA authorizes EPA to promulgate a regulation that requires the use of a treatment technique in 
lieu of an MCL if it is not economically or technologically feasible to ascertain the level of the contaminant. In such a 
rule, the statute requires the Administrator to ‘identify those treatment techniques which, in the Administrator’s 
judgment, would prevent known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible.’ 42 
U.S.C. 300g– 1(b)(7)(A). Public education provides the community with information on ways to reduce their 
exposure to lead in their drinking water and thereby can prevent adverse health effects associated with exposure to 
lead in drinking water” (p84946).  

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
9
For the LCRI’s public education treatment technique to function as a treatment technique, EPA’s 
proposed improvements must be both expanded and strengthened. This is because, although 
they are largely welcomed, these improvements: 
 
• Continue to rely primarily on misleading and ineffective annual Consumer Confidence 
Reports (CCRs) for informing all consumers, schools, and licensed childcare facilities about 
the risks of lead in water—independent of their water system’s lead action level 
compliance status and service line status—and best available measures to significantly 
reduce, if not eliminate, exposures,25 
• Continue to promote precautionary measures that are presented as “health-protective” 
but that can, in fact, prolong and even exacerbate consumer exposures,26 and 
• Continue to require communications to schools and licensed childcare facilities that center 
on tokenistic tap sampling, which a) is unsupported by the science of lead in water 
embraced by EPA, b) will waste scarce resources that could be otherwise better deployed, 
and c) will continue to mislead administrators, teachers, and parents into believing that the 
water is safe, even when it is not.  
 
To align the LCRI’s public education requirement with the statutory standard for a treatment 
technique, we urge EPA to: 
 
• First and foremost, mandate biannual, standalone disclosure to all consumers, including 
schools and licensed childcare facilities, of the reason and nature of their responsibility for 
self-protection under the LCRI. This disclosure must be coupled with clear, complete, and 
accurate public messaging recommending the proper use of point-of-use lead-certified 
filters to reliably and consistently keep lead-in-water levels at, or as close as possible to, the 
LCR’s MCLG of 0 ppb. This recommendation must include resources and training on how to 
find the right filters and how to install, maintain, and replace them.   
 
As we stated in our November 20, 2023 community and environmental justice organization 
letter to EPA (also attached), we now know that, if implemented correctly, a “Filter First” 
approach to lead in water is currently the most effective way to prevent consumer 
exposures at all times.27 This is because: 
 
o Low and high as well as chronic and acute exposures can occur at individual taps, even 
when one’s water system meets the lead action level; one’s home, workplace, or 
school has no lead service line; and standard testing detects no lead in one’s water.28  
 
 
25 See 2023 Campaign for Lead Free Water public comment to EPA about the CCR. 
26 See the November 20, 2023 community and environmental justice organization letter to EPA (also attached). 
27 See the November 20, 2023 community and environmental justice organization letter to EPA (also attached). 
28 See, for example, Masters et al. 2016, “Inherent variability in lead and copper collected during standardized 
sampling”; Triantafyllidou et al. 2007, “Lead Particles in Potable Water”; 2021 Campaign for Lead Free Water, “The 
EPA Lead and Copper Rule is an Optical Illusion”; Fedinick 2021, “Millions Served by Water Systems Detecting Lead.” 
See, also, the LCRI’s acknowledgement that, “Examples of isolated cases of lead poisoning in children have been 
documented and attributed to drinking water in communities whose systemwide lead levels remained below the 
action level of 0.015 mg/L (Triantafyllidou et al., 2007; Triantafyllidou & Edwards, 2012)” (p84911). 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
10
o When “properly installed and operated, filters certified under NSF/ANSI Standard 53 
for total lead removal and NSF/ANSI Standard 42 for fine particulates (Class I) are 
effective at reducing lead in drinking water.”29 
 
o Public education urging consumers to minimize, if not eliminate, exposures with point-
of-use lead-certified filters constitutes a treatment technique that is, arguably, 
“feasible” as per 42 U.S.C. 300g–1(b)(7)(A) since it involves awareness raising about 
the health-protective capacity of a technology that is currently the most efficacious in 
terms of its ability to remove lead. 
 
We echo lead corrosion expert Elin Betanzo with Safe Water Engineering, LLC who asserts 
that, “Messaging that is based on science must be clear about who needs to be aware of 
the risk of lead in drinking water: Anyone with a lead, galvanized or unknown service line 
and lead in their premise plumbing. When the true limitations of sampling and flushing are 
clearly communicated, it becomes obvious that certified lead reducing filters are and should 
be promoted as the most reliable and effective precautionary measure available at this 
time” (emphasis added). 
 
Against this backdrop, for the LCRI’s public education treatment technique to function as a 
treatment technique, “Filter First” must become the LCRI’s primary and urgent 
recommendation to all consumers whether their water system meets the lead action level 
or not; their home, workplace, or school has a lead service line or not; or standard testing 
of their water shows non-detect levels of lead or not. Importantly, water systems must 
make filters and cartridges available at no direct cost to low-income consumers.  
 
“Filter First” messaging must be delivered to all consumers, schools, and licensed child care 
facilities at least twice a year through multiple channels of communication tailored to reach 
them (e.g., text messages, emails, flyers, door hangers, public service announcements, 
social media postings, in-person visits, community events).30 This outreach must be 
mandated independently of CCRs, since CCRs foreground water systems’ regulatory 
compliance status, implicitly or explicitly communicate false assurances of safety, include 
additional types of information that do not relate to lead, and are largely unsuccessful at 
reaching consumers.31    
 
In the preamble to the LCRI, EPA rejects a “Filter First” approach based on the following 
justification: 
 
“… many factors can influence lead levels in drinking water, such as CCT performance, water 
use habits, and sources of lead in drinking water. Because of the various factors that 
influence lead tap water levels, EPA expects that a recommendation that all or a subset of 
consumers use a filter would lead to inconsistencies, confusion, and possibly a reduction in 
confidence in tap water even where lead is not present or remains very low. See section 
 
29 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84955. 
30 As illustrated in the preamble to the proposed LCRI, water systems have found many effective ways to reach 
consumers when they need to (p84921-84922).  
31 See, for example, 2021 Campaign for Lead Free Water, “The EPA Lead and Copper Rule is an Optical Illusion”; Fox 
et al. 2023, “Improving drinking water consumer confidence reports: Applying user-centered design.” 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
11
V.B.6. of this document for further discussion of language concerning use of filters certified 
to reduce lead in drinking water. EPA is proposing that water systems include this 
information about filters among the list of steps to reduce exposure to lead in drinking 
water in all the public education materials under § 141.85”32 (emphasis added). 
 
We believe that this justification flies in the face of the LCR’s health protective goal—“to 
provide maximum human health protection by reducing the lead and copper levels at 
consumers’ taps to as close to the MCLG as is feasible”33—while employing misleading 
argumentation and erroneous assumptions. Specifically: 
 
o It is true that many factors can influence lead-in-water levels at consumer taps. 
Indeed, we know that different factors can accelerate or decelerate the release of 
lead from plumbing. But we are not aware of any factors, other than the use of point-
of-use lead-certified filters, that can reliably keep lead-in-water levels at (or as close as 
possible to) the LCR’s MCLG of 0 ppb.34 If EPA is arguing that there are factors present 
in many, if not most, communities that are reliably keeping lead-in-water levels at (or 
as close as possible to) the LCR’s MCLG of 0 ppb, we request that the agency names 
these factors and discloses the evidence behind its position.   
 
o It is difficult to understand how a universal recommendation for point-of-use lead-
certified filtration would lead to “inconsistencies” or consumer “confusion,” whereas 
the proposed LCRI’s smorgasbord of—generally only partly health protective, if health 
protective at all—recommendations, which leave consumers on their own to decide 
what, if any, measure(s) to adopt would have the opposite effect.35 Should EPA again 
reject a “Filter First” approach, we request that it explains its preference for multiple 
(mostly) inferior recommendations over one superior recommendation. 
 
o It is troubling to read EPA’s argumentation against a “Filter First” approach to public 
education, in part out of agency concern that some consumers may have no or “very 
low” levels of lead in their water and, therefore, presumably, would not need filters. 
This reasoning seems to overlook the well-documented complexity of lead corrosion 
and the well-documented inherent variability of lead release, even when one’s water 
system meets the lead action level; one’s home, workplace, or school has no lead 
service line; and standard testing of one’s water shows non-detect levels of lead.36 
EPA’s reasoning also seems to subvert: 
 
→ The LCR’s health-based MCLG of 0 ppb and the proposed LCRI’s emphasis on 
“communicating clearly that there is no level of lead without health risks,”37  
 
32 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84952. 
33 1991 Lead and Copper Rule, p26478. 
34 For more information about filters, see point 7 in our November 20, 2023 community and environmental justice 
organization letter to EPA (also attached). 
35 For a detailed critique of these recommendations, see our November 20, 2023 community and environmental 
justice organization letter to EPA (also attached). 
36 See, for example, Masters et al. 2016, “Inherent variability in lead and copper collected during standardized 
sampling”; Triantafyllidou et al. 2007, “Lead Particles in Potable Water”; 2021 Campaign for Lead Free Water, “The 
EPA Lead and Copper Rule is an Optical Illusion.” 
37 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84953. 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
12
 
→ The proposed LCRI’s assertion that consumers should “be aware of the risks 
from lead exposure regardless of lead levels in the system,”38 and 
 
→ The environmental justice right to environmental self-determination through 
inclusive decision-making, which supports consumers, schools, and licensed 
childcare facilities to make informed decisions about what, if any, risks they 
want to take vis-à-vis lead in their water. Should EPA again reject a “Filter First” 
approach to public education, we request that it explains its position in relation 
to the LCR’s MCLG of 0 ppb and consumers’ right to environmental self-
determination.   
 
o Lastly, it would be important to know what, if any, evidence lies behind EPA’s feared 
“reduction in [consumer] confidence in tap water” if a “Filter First” public education 
treatment technique were adopted. To the contrary, a recent study with low-income 
Latino parents of infants/toddlers in the Washington, DC metropolitan area found that 
the provision of filters actually increased participants’ a) perception of the water’s 
safety, b) perception of the water’s affordability in relation to bottled water, and c) 
water intake.39 Should EPA again reject a “Filter First” approach, we request that it 
supports its concern about potential reduction of consumer trust in drinking water 
with compelling counterevidence.  
 
• Concomitantly, correct and strengthen the proposed LCRI’s public education messaging to 
ensure that it is scientifically-sound, clear, and complete and that it arms consumers, 
schools, and licensed childcare facilities with the information necessary for informed 
decision-making.   
 
Specifically: 
 
o General messaging 
 
→ Fix the proposed LCRI’s lead health effects language for all lead-in-water 
communications, including to schools and licensed childcare facilities. We 
appreciate that this language cannot include every detail about lead corrosion 
and lead release or a comprehensive list of adverse health effects from lead in 
water. However, we believe that this constraint does not justify keeping from 
consumers information that is vital for their understanding of their health risk 
from lead in water and for their ability to make informed decisions about 
effective precautions. Therefore, we urge EPA to add to the health effects 
language the following disclosures:  
 
- That a) any plumbing component containing lead can contaminate one’s 
water, even when one’s water system meets the lead action level; one’s 
 
38 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84952. 
39 Santillán-Vázquez et al. 2022, “How providing a low-cost water filter pitcher led Latino parents to reduce sugar-
sweetened beverages and increase their water intake: explanatory qualitative results from the Water Up!@Home 
intervention trial.” 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
13
home, workplace, or school has no lead service line; and standard testing 
of one’s water detects no lead,40 and b) lead-bearing plumbing is present in 
almost all US buildings, including those without lead service lines and those 
that are new.41 Consequently, the health effects language must urge 
consumers to be concerned about lead in water in all buildings and must 
eliminate conditional statements such as, “If you are concerned about lead 
in your water…” Such conditionals suggests that some (if not most) 
consumers face no lead-in-water risks, and they are therefore misleading.  
 
- That lead release from plumbing can be inconsistent, variable, erratic, and 
unpredictable. Moreover, when it appears in the form of particles, it can 
expose consumers to levels of lead that meet or exceed “hazardous waste” 
criteria (i.e., >5000 ppb) and that have been associated with miscarriage 
and fetal death.42 These devastating risks are not communicated clearly, if 
at all, through mentions of potentially serious health effects in “pregnant 
people.” Serious health effects in pregnant people can refer to many 
health conditions that do not typically terminate a pregnancy (e.g., 
gestational anemia, reduced circulation, hypertension). The LCRI’s lead 
health effects language must not leave it to consumers to deduce that 
‘risks to pregnant people’ include pregnancy loss.43 
 
- That the proper use of point-of-use lead-certified filters is currently the 
most effective way to keep lead-in-water levels at, or as close as possible 
to, the LCR’s MCLG of 0 ppb at all times.44 And that the rest of the 
precautionary measures recommended by EPA (e.g., testing, flushing, using 
cold water) have significant limitations, including in some cases 
prolonging—if not exacerbating—exposures.45 
 
- That removal of lead-bearing premise plumbing can significantly reduce 
but not reliably eliminate lead contamination, because even brand-new 
plumbing materials labeled “lead free” contain some lead, and this lead 
can still leach into the water.46   
 
Additionally, we urge EPA to eliminate language directing consumers to their 
health care providers for reliable information about lead in water, unless the 
 
40 See, for example, Masters et al. 2016, “Inherent variability in lead and copper collected during standardized 
sampling”; Triantafyllidou et al. 2007, “Lead Particles in Potable Water”; 2021 Campaign for Lead Free Water, “The 
EPA Lead and Copper Rule is an Optical Illusion.” 
41 2024 Safe Water Engineering, “Is my faucet lead free? Understanding new ‘lead-free’ requirements for faucets 
and household plumbing.” 
42 Triantafyllidou et al. 2007, “Lead Particles in Potable Water”; November 20, 2023 community and environmental 
justice organization letter to EPA (also attached); Edwards 2014, “Fetal Death and Reduced Birth Rates Associated 
with Exposure to Lead-Contaminated Drinking Water.” 
43 2023 Campaign for Lead Free Water public comment to EPA about the CCR). 
44 See, November 20, 2023 community and environmental justice organization letter to EPA (also attached). 
45 See, November 20, 2023 community and environmental justice organization letter to EPA (also attached). 
46 2024 Safe Water Engineering, “Is my faucet lead free? Understanding new ‘lead-free’ requirements for faucets 
and household plumbing.” 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
14
agency plans to develop a comprehensive and science-based lead-in-water 
training manual for the medical and allied communities (such a manual would, 
in fact, be especially helpful for direct dissemination to the medical, public 
health, and environmental health communities and for delivery to consumers 
who would be able to bring it with them to relevant medical appointments). 
Health care providers rarely possess accurate information about lead in water. 
Even worse, they routinely deliver erroneous messaging that leaves consumers 
misinformed and vulnerable to ongoing exposures. A case in point is the 2016 
Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Units (PEHSU) fact sheet, supported by 
the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the American College of Medical 
Toxicology (ACMT). Titled “Lead and Drinking Water: Information for Health 
Professionals Across the United States,” it provides four “key messages” every 
one of which is erroneous, unsupported by the science, and/or misleading.47 
Moreover, the last of the four—“Flush water pipes for up to 2 minutes before 
drinking or drawing water, this is especially important when preparing baby 
formula.”—can place bottle-fed infants in homes with a lead or GRR service line 
at increased risk of exposure.48 
 
It is also worth noting that the two papers EPA cites to support its 
recommendation for consumer reliance on health care providers don’t quite 
support the recommendation. The first paper credits Flint, MI pediatrician Mona 
Hanna-Attisha for “getting government officials to publicly acknowledge that 
lead in [Flint’s] water was causing lead poisoning in children.”49 It does not, 
however, disclose that the Flint water crisis caught Hanna-Attisha herself with 
little knowledge about lead in water and the LCR. In her memoir, Hanna-Attisha 
recalls reading about Flint resident complaints for over a year and processing 
them as “a loop of white noise,” while encouraging patients to keep using the 
city’s tap water because she believed government assurances of safety.50 The 
second paper emphasizes the promising role health care professionals can play 
in helping consumers understand their risks from lead in water and steps they 
can take to prevent exposures. But it does not establish that health care 
professionals possess accurate information about lead in water. Moreover, it 
reports that in the specific study discussed, consumer “reliance on health 
professionals was not associated with greater knowledge of preventive actions” 
and concedes that “it is possible that the apparent motivation provided by 
health professionals may not have lasted very long.”51  
 
 
47 The key messages are, a) “The primary source of childhood lead exposure in the US is from lead in dust and soil 
from deteriorated paint in pre-1978 housing,” b) “Drinking water in the US is typically not the major source of 
exposure to lead,” c) “Given the known health hazards related to lead, lead in water is regulated. If you have 
concerns about lead in drinking water, contact your local health department,” d) “Flush water pipes for up to 2 
minutes before drinking or drawing water, this is especially important when preparing baby formula.” 
48 For more information about the medical community’s role in misleading consumers about lead in water, see 
Lambrinidou 2018, “Top 10 Myths About Lead in Drinking Water.” 
49 Jennings & Duncan 2017, “Water Safety and Lead Regulation: Physicians’ Community Health Responsibilities.” 
50 Hanna-Attisha 2018, What the Eyes Don't See: A Story of Crisis, Resistance, and Hope in an American City. 
51 Griffin & Dunwoody 2000, “The relation of communication to risk judgment and preventive behavior related to 
lead in tap water.” 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
15
→ Mandate disclosure with all lead-in-water tap sampling results of the significant 
limitations of testing. Additionally, decouple such results from decisions about 
whether or not to urge consumers, schools, and licensed childcare facilities to 
use point-of-use lead-certified filters, even if testing detects no lead.52 This is 
even more imperative under a rule that proposes to mandate school/childcare 
sampling as a tool to raise public awareness about lead in water.53 Consumers 
have a right to know that lead release from plumbing can be inconsistent, 
variable, erratic, and unpredictable and that standard water sampling methods 
for regulatory compliance, school/childcare monitoring, supplemental 
monitoring (for consumers in water systems that exceed the LCRI lead action 
level or who are served by a lead, GRR, or unknown service line), or any other 
purpose can routinely miss worst-case lead levels dispensed at sampled taps.54 
Information about steps consumers, schools, and licensed childcare facilities can 
take to protect themselves from exposures encouraging “Filter First” must be 
included and highlighted in all reports of tap sampling results, even if no lead 
was detected. 
 
→ Mandate disclosure with all copper-in-water tap sampling results of the 
significant limitations of the LCRI’s copper testing requirement. Tap sampling for 
copper must target homes with new copper plumbing in order to maximize the 
chance of capturing worst-case copper-in-water levels, as required by the LCR. 
Yet the proposed LCRI has failed to correct the LCR’s faulty tap sampling 
requirement for copper. If EPA fails to fix this shortcoming, widespread copper 
contamination will continue to be easily missed and consumers will continue to 
be exposed, while receiving false assurances of water safety. 
 
o CCR messaging 
 
Fix the CCR to ensure that it does not mislead consumers, schools, and licensed 
childcare facilities into believing that their water is safe when it may not be.55 
Specifically:  
 
→ Prohibit all declarations about a community’s water being “safe” in relation to 
lead (and copper), simply because it meets the LCRI’s lead action level (and 
 
52 Contradicting the science of lead in water, the 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements link lead-in-
water sampling results with assessments about the need for precautionary measures. In the preamble, for example, 
the proposal states that a) “EPA’s proposed delivery within three days allows all consumers whose taps were 
sampled for lead to quickly be notified of their results and informed of steps they can take to reduce exposure” 
(p84949); b) “EPA is also proposing to require the system to notify consumers of the results of this tap sampling so 
they are informed and can decide to take any needed steps to reduce their exposure to lead in their drinking water” 
(p84950) (emphases added); c) “Nationally, EPA’s goal with the proposed requirements in the LCRI is to provide 
schools and child care facilities with the opportunity to be sampled for lead, to learn about the importance of lead 
testing in schools and child care facilities, and take additional actions if they choose” (p84958) (emphasis added). 
53 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84956. 
54 Triantafyllidou et al. 2007, “Lead Particles in Potable Water”; November 20, 2023 community and environmental 
justice organization letter to EPA (also attached). 
55 See 2023 Campaign for Lead Free Water public comment to EPA about the CCR. 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
16
copper action level).56 EPA’s proposal to counter such misleading declarations 
through language “communicating clearly that there is no level of lead without 
health risks”57 is insufficient for at least two reasons: a) declarations about 
water safety signal the absence of contamination and of any need for 
consumers to look further into the quality of their water, and b) the statement 
that there is no safe level of lead in water, although accurate and welcomed, is a 
truism which does not disclose that the individual taps consumers use may 
expose them to low and high, as well as chronic and acute, lead exposures. 
 
→ Align the CCR’s health effects language with the statutory requirement for 
treatment techniques (i.e., that they prevent “known or anticipated adverse 
effects on the health of persons to the extent feasible”).58 Ensure this language 
discloses that a CCR provides only general information about the state of lead in 
water in one’s community and does not address lead-in-water levels at 
individual consumer taps. Below, we are resubmitting example language that 
alerts consumers to the ubiquity of lead in water, key adverse health effects, 
and best precautionary measures.59 We believe that this language would be 
more effective at communicating “the risk of exposure to lead and copper in 
drinking water” and allowing consumers “to take the necessary steps to reduce 
their exposure to lead.”60  
 
 
56 For lead, see 2021 Campaign for Lead Free Water, “The EPA Lead and Copper Rule is an Optical Illusion.” For 
copper, see our 2020 community and environmental justice organization public comment to EPA, in which we 
highlight that tap sampling must target homes with new copper plumbing, in order to maximize the chance of 
capturing worst-case levels, as required by the LCR. To our dismay, the proposed LCRI has failed to correct the tap 
sampling requirement for copper, which is likely to perpetuate false assurances of safety and prolong preventable 
health harm, without consumer knowledge or consent. 
57 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84953. 
58 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84901. 
59 See 2023 Campaign for Lead Free Water public comment to EPA about the CCR. 
60 1991 Lead and Copper Rule, p26463. Similar language appears in the 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule 
Improvements (p84946): Public education must provide “the community with information on ways to reduce their 
exposure to lead in their drinking water and thereby can prevent adverse health effects associated with exposure to 
lead in drinking water.” 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
17
 
 
→ Mandate inclusion of detailed guidance on how consumers should read and 
interpret the CCR’s lead-related information.  
 
→ Align CCR messaging about schools and licensed childcare facilities with the 
science of lead in water, which establishes that standard lead-in-water sampling 
methods are inappropriate for identifying ‘safe’ taps vis-à-vis lead.61 If the final 
LCRI will require water systems to conduct tokenistic sampling at 
school/childcare taps—a proposed requirement that seems like an 
unconscionable waste of resources and is likely to foster more miseducation 
than education—the CCR must also: 
 
- Spell out the significant limitations of testing (see point about testing in the 
“General messaging” section above); 
 
 
61 Triantafyllidou et al. 2007, “Lead Particles in Potable Water”; Masters et al. 2016, “Inherent variability in lead and 
copper collected during standardized sampling”; November 20, 2023 community and environmental justice 
organization letter to EPA (also attached). We urge EPA to make this requirement health-protective by mandating 
that water systems install, maintain, and replace point-of-use lead-certified filters at all school/childcare taps used 
for drinking and cooking. 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
18
- Provide information on how teachers and parents can obtain from their 
water system sampling results as well as detailed guidance on how to read 
and interpret those results (it seems to us that if the final LCRI is going to 
require water systems to submit school/childcare sampling results to state 
and local health agencies, it must also require water systems to make the 
same results available to the very people who are responsible for the 
health and wellbeing of the infants and young children in question); and  
 
- Highlight clear language establishing that the most effective precautionary 
measure currently available is the proper use of point-of-use lead-certified 
filters, to help school communities reliably and consistently keep lead-in-
water levels at, or as close as possible to, the LCR’s MCLG of 0 ppb.  
 
o Messaging about lead, GRR, and unknown service lines 
 
→ Mandate disclosure with all lead-in-water tap sampling results of the significant 
limitations of testing and decouple such results from decisions about whether 
or not to inform consumers, schools, and licensed childcare facilities of steps 
they can take to prevent exposures.62 Consumers must be informed that lead 
release from plumbing—including service lines—can be inconsistent, variable, 
erratic, and unpredictable and that standard water sampling methods for 
regulatory compliance, for school/childcare monitoring, for water quality 
assessment following lead service line replacement, for supplemental 
monitoring (for consumers in water systems that exceed the LCRI lead action 
level or for consumers who are served by a lead, GRR, or unknown service line), 
or for any other purpose can routinely miss worst-case lead levels dispensed at 
their taps.63 Information about steps consumers can take to protect themselves 
from exposures emphasizing “Filter First” must be included and highlighted in all 
reports of tap sampling results, even if no lead is detected through testing. Such 
information can also help to preempt consumers’ interpretation of ‘non-detect’ 
lead readings as confirmation that their lead or GRR service line does not need 
replacement.64 
 
→ Mandate disclosure in all lead service line replacement program 
communications (public education, notification, CCRs) of the LCRI’s definition of 
a) “service line”—namely, which plumbing components it includes and excludes 
(with regard to all portions of the line from the water main into the home), and 
b) “lead service line”—namely, which lead-bearing plumbing components it 
 
62 The 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements state that, “EPA’s proposed delivery within three days 
allows all consumers whose taps were sampled for lead to quickly be notified of their results and informed of steps 
they can take to reduce exposure” (p84949) and “EPA is also proposing to require the system to notify consumers of 
the results of this tap sampling so they are informed and can decide to take any needed steps to reduce their 
exposure to lead in their drinking water” (p84950) (emphases added). 
63 Triantafyllidou et al. 2007, “Lead Particles in Potable Water”; November 20, 2023 community and environmental 
justice organization letter to EPA (also attached). 
64 See, November 20, 2023 community and environmental justice organization letter to EPA (also attached). 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
19
includes and excludes (with regard to lead service lines, GRR service lines, 
connectors, water meters, solder, fittings).  
 
→ If EPA rejects our request to fix the LCRI’s definition of a “service line”: 
 
- Mandate consumer notification about the possibility that the LCRI’s “full” 
lead and GRR service line replacement requirement will result in partial 
service line replacements. 
 
→ If EPA rejects our request to include all lead connectors, regardless of length, in 
the LCRI’s definition of a “lead service line”: 
 
- Mandate consumer notification about a) any known presence (through 
material records) of a lead connector that is shorter than two feet, and b) 
any potential presence of such a lead connector.  
 
- Mandate disclosure in all service line replacement program 
communications of the health risks posed by lead connectors under two 
feet, including the release of lead particles and their adsorption onto 
premise plumbing.  
 
→ For service line inventories, mandate disclosure of: 
 
- The precise methods a water system is using to make determinations 
about service line material(s) (e.g., plumbing codes, permits, different 
types of physical inspections). 
 
- Plumbing materials along the entire length of a service line: 
 
▪ from the water main to the service line,  
▪ from the service line to the water meter,  
▪ in the water meter,  
▪ from the water meter to the exterior wall of the residence,  
▪ from the exterior wall into the home. 
 
The service line inventory content must be thorough and complete, 
acknowledging the multiple lead-bearing components that can lie between 
a service line and a home’s internal plumbing. 
 
- The dates when these materials were inspected and confirmed. 
 
Thorough and transparent recording that discloses which portions of a service 
line have been identified, when, and how is the only way consumers as well as 
regulatory and legislative bodies can stay abreast of lead hazards from service 
lines and ensure that all lead-bearing plumbing is, indeed, replaced. Without 
such recording, it will be almost impossible for communities to assess the 
accuracy, trustworthiness, and completeness of inventories or rely on them for 
self-protection.  

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
20
 
→ Prohibit official declarations about lead service line replacement programs 
being complete in the absence of incontrovertible evidence that all portions of a 
lead and GRR service line (from the water main into the building) and all lead 
connectors have been identified and replaced. 
 
→ Expand notification requirements to all buildings in the vicinity of physical 
disturbances by water systems since such disturbances can cause accelerated 
lead release not only from lead and GRR service lines, but also from premise 
plumbing.65  
      
• • • 
 
2. SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT TREATMENT TECHNIQUE  
 
Permanent removal from service of all lead and GRR lines will be a significant step toward public health 
protection from lead in water. This important proposal, however, must be revised to close gaps and 
loopholes that: 
 
• Make the LCRI’s proposed full lead service line replacement requirement a partial lead service 
line replacement requirement,  
• Risk leaving many lead and GRR service lines in operation long after water systems declare their 
distribution systems ‘lead service line free,’ 
• Leave consumers vulnerable to direct and indirect charges (as well as overcharges) for the 
removal of a lead source that was, in many cases imposed, on them without their knowledge or 
consent and has left them vulnerable to routine lead-in-water exposures and associated health 
harm, and 
• Leave consumers in the dark, if not misled, about what mandatory service line replacement 
under the LCRI will and will not achieve vis-à-vis their risk of exposures.  
 
a. Gaps and loopholes that must be closed 
 
We concur with EPA that a lead service line replacement requirement must not result in millions 
of lead service lines being left in place and more “’generations of Americans being at risk of 
significant lead exposure through their drinking water’ (86 FR 71577 USEPA, 2021b).”66 We are, 
however, concerned that unless the proposed LCRI is corrected, it will achieve just that. Even 
worse, it will result in a costly, nationwide wave of partial lead service line replacements, which 
will place consumers at increased risk of exposures and health harm. Coupled with the possibility 
that EPA will allow water systems to issue unqualified declarations that they have met all LCRI 
service line replacement requirements and that their distribution systems are ‘lead service line 
free,’ such an outcome would be catastrophic.  
 
 
 
65 See the USA Today Building case in Edwards 2014, “Fetal Death and Reduced Birth Rates Associated with Exposure 
to Lead-Contaminated Drinking Water,” and our November 20, 2023 community and environmental justice 
organization letter to EPA (also attached).   
66 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84910. 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
21
• Definitions of ‘service line’ and ‘lead service line’ 
 
A regulatory mandate that promises to replace all the nation’s lead service lines because, 
“All families, children, and Americans should be able to turn on the faucet at home or 
school and drink clean water — including in low-income communities and communities of 
color that have been disproportionally affected by dangerous lead pipes”67 must cover in its 
definition of a) a “service line,” plumbing across the entire length of the line, and b) a “lead 
service line,” leaded plumbing across the entire length of the line. Failure to do so makes 
the proposed “full” lead service line replacement requirement a partial lead service line 
replacement requirement and risks placing consumers at increased risk of significant 
exposures to lead in water, long after billions of dollars have been spent, water systems 
have declared their distribution systems ‘lead service line free,’ and communities have 
falsely deduced that precautionary measures are unnecessary. We urge EPA to fix the 
proposed LCRI in order to prevent such a catastrophic scenario, by including in the 
definition of:    
 
o Service line, plumbing along the entire length of the line, including the portion from 
the exterior wall into a building.68 Excluding this portion from the definition would 
render many “full” service line replacements under the LCRI only partial service line 
replacements and would place many consumers at increased risk of exposure to lead. 
It would also render farcical the “scratch tests” water systems ask residents to 
conduct for lead service line identification purposes since a resident’s positive 
identification of a lead service line inside their home would not necessarily result in 
the replacement of that specific portion of the line, and 
 
o Lead service line, connectors of any length since even ‘short’ (under two feet) 
connectors pose a significant health risk to consumers through lead release that 
contaminates the water and adsorbs onto certain types of premise plumbing.69  
 
• Service line material identification and validation 
 
EPA states that, “[knowing] where lead pipes are is critical to replacing them efficiently and 
equitably”70 and “a complete and accurate service line inventory provides transparency of 
potential sources of lead exposure.”71 Indeed, transparency of known and potential sources 
of lead exposure is essential for consumer awareness of their health risk vis-à-vis lead in 
water as well as consumer ability to make informed decisions about appropriate 
precautions. For this reason, the methods used to develop and validate service line 
inventories must be scientifically sound and comprehensive and must be prescribed by 
 
67 The White House 2021, “FACT SHEET: The Biden-⁠Harris Lead Pipe and Paint Action Plan.” 
68 The 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements state that, “Service line, for the purpose of subpart I of 
this part only, means a portion of pipe which connects the water main to the building inlet” (emphasis added, 
p85054). 
69 The 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements state that, “EPA is also proposing a definition for lead 
connectors to not exceed two feet to ensure all LSLs are captured in the mandatory replacement requirement (see 
section V.L.3.) and not improperly categorized as connectors” (emphasis added, p84919). 
70 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84880. 
71 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84933. 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
22
EPA. Short of that, consumer awareness about lead sources along their service line will be 
at the mercy of individual water systems and states who, as EPA suggests, have a three-
decade record of cutting corners in relation to the LCR and allowing the continuation of 
preventable community exposures and associated health harm.72 Therefore, we believe 
that:        
 
o EPA, not water systems or states, must prescribe in the LCRI acceptable methods for 
water system identification of service line material along the entire length of a line 
(i.e., from the water main to the service line, from the service line to the water meter, 
in the water meter, from the water meter to the exterior wall of the building, and 
from the exterior wall into the home). Leaving states and water systems on their own 
to develop materials identification methods can result in vast inconsistencies between 
water systems and systematic errors in some systems that are difficult to detect and 
costly to fix. This, of course, raises serious environmental justice and equity concerns. 
Already, it looks like some water systems are wrongly relying on consumer “scratch 
tests” at the service line’s point of entry into a building to determine whether at least 
the portion of the line in private space is lead (it will be even more concerning if water 
systems are using these tests to draw conclusions about the materials across the 
entire length of the service line).73 We know from experience, however, that although 
“scratch tests” can successfully identify the presence of lead service lines, they can 
also miss them. This is because the correct recognition of different metals, especially 
in spaces that are often inaccessible, dark, and dusty, can be extremely difficult for the 
untrained eye. Pulitzer Prize reporter Wendy Ruderman who, herself, visited many 
homes in Philadelphia, PA to conduct this test, later recalled:   
 
“We knocked on lots of doors in mostly poor neighborhoods. […] For the people 
who let us into their homes, we went down to their basement and used a magnet 
and coin to determine if the service line pipe was lead or not. I remember doing 
several ‘tests’ and still unsure if it was lead. Perhaps because the lines were old, 
the scratch test was not helpful (at least not us, as lay people). […] Eventually, we 
abandoned that part of the project and wrote the first part of our series about 
lead paint in homes” (5.14.19, personal communication with Yanna 
Lambrinidou). 
 
Additionally, the exposed portion of the service line inside a building can be different 
from the portion behind the building’s wall and across the length of the remaining 
line. Therefore, prescription by EPA of scientifically sound and comprehensive 
methods to identify lead service line materials in water systems across the US is 
imperative for the development of accurate service line inventories that a) water 
 
72 The 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements state that, “Over the 30 years of implementing the LCR, 
EPA has found that the sampling and process steps of that rule created implementation uncertainties, difficulties, 
and errors that, in some cases, resulted in significant lead exposures. Improper implementation of the sampling and 
corrosion control treatment process has been the cause, or one of the primary causes, of significant lead exposures 
in multiple water systems” (p84911). 
73 See, for example, Wolfe 2023, “Rock Island requiring residents to fill out water service line survey”; DeVore 2024, 
“Crown Point launches water service line survey to comply with updated EPA Lead and Copper Rule”; South Bend, IN 
Public Works Department 2024, “City Asks Customers To Complete Survey On Water Service Line Material.” 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
23
systems can use to conduct full lead and GRR service line replacements, and b) 
consumers can rely on to assess their risk from lead in water and make informed 
decisions about mitigation.       
 
o EPA, not water systems or states, must prescribe a service line material validation 
program for lines categorized as ‘non-lead’ that is more robust than the LCRI’s 
proposed two-point approach.74 Such a program must specify appropriate validation 
methods that cover all portions of a service line (from the water main to the service 
line, from the service line to the water meter, in the water meter, from the water 
meter to the exterior wall of the building, and from the exterior wall into the home). 
The LCRI’s proposed two-point approach can miss entire sections of service lines that 
can be lead or GRR. This is a serious shortcoming that will render inventories 
untrustworthy by design. 
 
• Water system access to lead and GRR service lines in private space 
 
The LCRI’s mandatory lead service line replacement requirement must be strengthened to 
ensure that all lead and GRR service lines are replaced, not just those that water systems 
claim are under their ‘control’—a vaguely defined concept that refers to the legal and 
physical accessibility of service lines, but can be given different meanings by different water 
systems and states. Toward this goal, the LCRI must presume that water systems ‘control’ 
all service lines in their distribution system and, if they claim they don’t, the LCRI must 
require that they assert such ‘control.’ Either way, the required outcome must be full 
replacement of all lead and GRR service lines at water system expense. This revision will be 
crucial for preventing a lead service line replacement requirement that leaves entire 
communities or some of their members (e.g., low-income property owners and people of 
color) in harm’s way, based on water system claims that may be unfounded, erroneous, or 
outright unjust. Indeed, failure to close this loophole raises grave environmental health and 
justice concerns because it leaves consumer protection from lead service lines at the mercy 
of entities with a long history of improper—and, from a public health standpoint, reckless—
implementation of the LCR.     
 
• Compliance sampling following replacement of all lead and GRR service lines 
 
If EPA rejects our recommendation to fix the definition of “service line” and “lead service 
line,” water systems that have completed the LCRI service line replacement requirement 
must still be required to continue to use the more rigorous first- and fifth-liter sampling 
protocol until they can provide incontrovertible evidence that all lead connectors and all 
lead/GRR service lines between a building’s exterior wall and interior have been replaced. 
 
• Partial lead service line replacement 
 
Considering that partial lead service line replacement can a) increase consumer exposures 
to lead at least in the short-term and likely in the long-term as well,75 and b) result in 
 
74 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84935. 
75 See, for example, Cartier et al. 2013, “Impact of treatment on Pb release from full and partially replaced harvested 
Lead Service Lines (LSLs)”; Hu et al. 2012, “Copper-Induced Metal Release from Lead Pipe into Drinking Water”; 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
24
elevated blood lead levels in children,76 we urge EPA to prohibit such replacement during a 
water system’s planned infrastructure work that is unrelated to LCRI lead service line 
replacement requirements. When such work takes place, the LCRI must require water 
systems to conduct full lead service line replacement or, in extraordinary circumstances 
and with state permission, to leave the lines intact for full replacement at a later time.     
 
b. Reporting, accountability, and cost-sharing 
 
We applaud EPA for acknowledging that, “Over the 30 years of implementing the LCR, [the 
agency] has found that the sampling and process steps of that rule created implementation 
uncertainties, difficulties, and errors that, in some cases, resulted in significant lead exposures. 
Improper implementation of the sampling and corrosion control treatment process has been the 
cause, or one of the primary causes, of significant lead exposures in multiple water systems” 
(p84911, emphasis added). 
 
Against this backdrop and because: 
 
• In many jurisdictions, lead service lines were imposed on property owners by law;77 
• Under the LCR, and with active water system participation, consumers have for over 30 
years received misleading information about the health risks associated with both intact 
and partially replaced lead service lines (e.g., falsely linking water system regulatory 
compliance with water safety and falsely suggesting that if lead-in-water contamination 
problems were detected, consumers would be notified);78 and 
• Under the LCR, and with active water system participation, consumers have been left 
unprotected from both low-level, chronic and high-level, acute exposures to lead in water;79 
 
we believe that consumers must be protected against having to pay for mitigation of a 
contaminant that was inflicted on them, often without their knowledge or consent, and from 
which it is reasonable to assume that they have suffered irreparable health harm. This protection 
must be mandated by EPA and must include both out-of-pocket costs and water rate increases for 
lead and GRR service line replacement.  
 
By leaving cost matters to water systems, local laws, and states, EPA is not staying “neutral,” as it 
claims.80 It is passively preparing the ground for the imposition of one more layer of injustice on 
the very communities that the LCR has harmed. 
 
 
Wang et al. 2013, “Effect of connection methods on lead release from galvanic corrosion”; Triantafyllidou & 
Edwards 2011, “Galvanic corrosion after simulated small-scale partial lead service line replacements.” 
76 Brown et al. 2011, “Association between children’s blood lead levels, lead service lines, and water disinfection, 
Washington, DC, 1998–2006.” 
77 Troesken 2006, “The Great Lead Water Pipe Disaster”; Rabin 2008, “The Lead Industry and Lead Water Pipes ‘A 
MODEST CAMPAIGN’”; McCormick & Uteuova 2022, “Profiting from poison: how the US lead industry knowingly 
created a water crisis”; Penner 2023, “The Historical Circumstances of Lead Lateral Installation in Milwaukee,” 
Power Point presentation, available upon request. 
78 See, November 20, 2023 community and environmental justice organization letter to EPA (also attached). 
79 See, November 20, 2023 community and environmental justice organization letter to EPA (also attached). 
80 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84923. 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
25
From a water system perspective, the easiest path to full service line replacement is charging 
consumers—partly or fully—at least for private-side replacement. But assertions water systems 
make about how much this replacement will cost can be arbitrary and nontransparent. For 
example, DC Water’s latest cost-estimate for each lead service line replacement is over $36,000, 
which amounts to a total of $1.5 billion for about 41,000 estimated replacements. This estimate 
far exceeds the roughly $7,000 per replacement in Newark, NJ and Benton Harbor, MI. Yet most 
communities are not in a position to defend themselves from excessive overcharge. 
 
Moreover, direct charges for service line replacement risk exacerbating environmental injustice 
because they are likely to place new financial burdens on low- and moderate-income residents, 
many of whom are already struggling to pay their water bills or facing water shut-offs. Additional 
charges can result in consumer refusal to have service lines replaced, community opposition to 
service line replacement programs, and millions of lead and GRR service lines left in operation for 
decades to come. Such a scenario is also likely to perpetuate water system narratives that blame 
the victims.   
 
We, therefore, urge EPA to require water systems to aggressively pursue all possible funding 
sources for system-wide lead service line replacement, including: 
 
• Existing ratepayer funds (i.e., by allocating or reallocating portions of these funds to lead 
service line replacement), 
• Federal, state and local funding, and 
• Innovative funding and financing programs (e.g., Newark, NJ’s use of port fees or Madison, 
WI’s use of revenue from allowing cell phone antennae on its water towers). 
 
If, after pursuing all such sources, a water system needs additional funding to fully replace all lead 
and GRR service lines and decides to resort to water rate increases, the LCRI must require that it 
submits to state drinking water programs—and makes public: 
 
• The funding sources it has pursued,  
• The funding proposals it has submitted, and  
• The responses it has received.  
 
In turn, the LCRI must require states to review and report on whether the water system has, 
indeed, exhausted all possible funding options. Of course, when funding options are exhausted 
and rates are raised, rate reforms should insulate low- and moderate-income consumers from 
affordability challenges (see Water Affordability Advocacy Toolkit). 
    
Absence of such financial protection—and of clear disclosure in the LCRI about the imperative of 
such protection—will be inherently unfair and will exacerbate environmental injustices, as it: 
 
• Will force consumers to pay for the removal of a contaminant they did not choose and, in 
many cases, did not know about, and  
• Will compound the longstanding environmental injustice of lead in water, both on low-
income consumers and on consumers of middle and high incomes, most of whom have 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
26
likely been unwittingly exposed to lead in water and suffered associated health harms for 
many generations.81 
 
c. Public education82  
 
As welcomed as EPA’s proposed service line replacement requirement is, it will not make service 
lines lead-free anytime soon. This is due to gaps and loopholes in the proposed LCRI as well as 
inadequate available federal, state, and local government funding. But even if all lead service 
lines—including connectors, water meters, solder, and fittings—were fully replaced right away, 
consumers would still need to be concerned about premise plumbing that: 
 
• Has adsorbed lead from replaced service lines and is now a significant lead source too,83 
• Contains lead from the manufacturing process.  
 
For this reason, it is imperative that public education, public notification, and CCR messaging 
under the LCRI spell out clearly and unequivocally that full lead and GRR service line replacement 
will reduce, but not eliminate, lead release from plumbing. Consumers are entitled to know that 
the LCRI’s service line replacement mandate is a crucially important step, but only one step, on a 
long path toward lead-free plumbing.   
   
Additionally, if EPA rejects our recommendation to tighten the LCRI’s service line replacement 
requirement, public education, public notification, and CCR messaging under the LCRI must 
disclose that: 
 
• Service line replacement programs might leave some lead and GRR service lines (i.e., 
between a building’s exterior wall and interior) intact—this, of course, would make these 
programs partial service line replacement programs, 
• Service line replacement programs will not prioritize buildings whose only lead pipe across 
the length of the service line is a short (i.e., under two feet) lead connector,   
• Service lines categorized as ‘non-lead’ may still have lead-bearing water meters, solder, and 
fittings along their length, 
• Some water systems’ service line inventory will be more reliable than others’, and 
 
81 Troesken 2006, “The Great Lead Water Pipe Disaster”; Baehler et al. 2021, “Full Lead Service Line Replacement: A 
Case Study of Equity in Environmental Remediation.”  
82 Please also see Section 1 (“Public Education Treatment Technique”) above. 
83 EPA correctly states that, “The co-occurrence of lead with iron was documented in a study in Washington, DC, 
that found at least 10 homes with galvanized iron premise plumbing that, after full or partial LSLR [lead service line 
replacement], still had tap samples exceeding 0.015 mg/L lead, which was attributed to continued release of lead 
particles from exposed iron scales (McFadden et al., 2011). This study also conducted laboratory experiments on 
harvested galvanized iron pipes that had been downstream of LSLs [lead service lines] specifically and showed 
elevated lead release over the entire 21 weeks of experiments. Due to the depth of lead scales in these iron pipes, 
the authors concluded that lead release could be triggered over the remaining pipe lifetime, acknowledging that 
changes in flow patterns or other site-specific circumstances could impact whether or not such releases occur 
(McFadden et al., 2011). While one stakeholder recommended that galvanized lines that were downstream of an 
LSL should be classified as non-lead after a period of time, stating that these lines eventually stop being a lead 
source (USEPA, 2023j), EPA disagrees with this stakeholder because the scientific literature does not support a 
timeline for these GRR service lines to cease contributing lead into drinking water” (2023 proposed Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements, p84918). 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
27
• Water systems may continue to conduct high-risk partial lead service line replacements 
during work that is unrelated to the LCRI’s service line replacement requirement.  
 
Finally, because of these shortcomings and the proposed LCRI’s ‘control’ and ‘access’ offramps, 
the LCRI must prohibit official declarations of a water system being ‘lead service line free’ in the 
absence of incontrovertible evidence that all portions of a lead and GRR service line, all lead 
connectors, and all lead-bearing water meters, solder, and fittings have been identified and 
replaced. Failure to issue such a prohibition, risks turning the LCRI’s commendable service line 
replacement requirement into a Trojan Horse, which deceives consumers into believing that their 
entire service line is finally free of lead, even when that is far from the case and even when their 
risk of exposure is actually increased.  
 
• • • 
 
3. STATEWIDE AND COMMUNITY ADVISORY COUNCILS 
 
A close look at the LCR’s 30+ year history reveals that impacted communities have been at the 
forefront of uncovering: 
 
• Widespread lead-in-water contamination events and associated health harm (see, for example, 
affected residents’ early discovery of contamination and health harm in Washington, DC and Flint, 
MI, as well as parents’ groundbreaking exposés of severe lead-in-water problems in schools across 
the US),84 
• Water system irregularities in the rule’s implementation (see, for example, affected residents’ 
discovery of systematic water utility cheating in LCR compliance sampling and demand that pre-
flushing the night before sampling be prohibited by EPA),85 and   
• Systematic dissemination of officially sanctioned misinformation about lead in water (see, for 
example, affected residents’ actions to set the record straight on basic facts about lead in water in 
general as well as in their specific communities).86  
 
Arguably, EPA’s numerous revisions to the LCR since 2004—when Washington, DC’s historic lead-in-
water coverup was first exposed by the Washington Post based on tips from affected residents—would 
not have occurred without this arduous work.  
 
And yet affected community members who take the initiative to study lead in water, monitor how their 
water systems address contamination, and challenge erroneous or misleading official messaging about 
 
84 Holder 2004, “Summary of Investigation Reported to the Board of Directors of the District of Columbia Water and 
Sewer Authority”; Renner 2006, “Lead on tap: An alarming return of lead in drinking water is being ignored by the 
EPA and municipal officials”; Jackson 2018, “The Goldman Prize missed the black heroes of Flint — just like the 
media did”; Lambrinidou et al. 2010, “Failing Our Children: Lead in U.S. School Drinking Water.” 
85 Milman 2016, “US authorities distorting tests to downplay lead content of water,” 2008 Coalition letter to EPA 
about water system pre-flushing for LCR compliance sampling.  
86 McFarlane 2023, “Lead in Portland’s drinking water called ‘worse than Flint’”; Penner 2023, “The Historical 
Circumstances of Lead Lateral Installation in Milwaukee,” Power Point presentation, available upon request; 
Martinez 2022, “Activists call for federal investigation into Milwaukee’s Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention 
program”; Lambrinidou 2018, “Top 10 Myths About Lead in Drinking Water”; Bence 2017, “Milwaukee Homes Built 
Between 1952-1962 May Also Have Lead Water Pipes” (this revelation was discovered by the grassroots community 
group Freshwater for Life Action Coalition (FLAC)). 

CLFW Public Comments 2.5.24 — Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801  
28
the problem are systematically antagonized, marginalized, and silenced.87 This would be unethical in 
the context of any environmental health rule, but it seems especially unethical in the context of a rule 
with a ‘shared responsibility’ regime and a public education treatment technique.  
 
Adding to this troubling reality the tragic fact that the LCR has, in fact, resulted in “significant lead 
exposures”88 due, at least in part, to its improper implementation by many water systems and faulty 
oversight by many states, it is urgent that the LCRI echoes EPA’s commitment to environmental justice. 
This can help redress the very power imbalances at the root of the systematic, yet preventable, lead-in-
water exposures and associated health harm that have been inflicted on consumers, without their 
knowledge or consent, for over three decades. To this end, we urge EPA to:   
 
• Acknowledge the critical role affected communities have played in advancing official 
understandings about lead in water and the LCR in the face of systematic institutional resistance, 
 
• Demonstrate the agency’s allegiance to the environmental justice goal of “fair treatment and 
meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race, color, national origin, or income, with 
respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws, 
regulations, and policies,” and   
 
• Mandate in the LCRI the creation of statewide and community advisory councils, like the ones 
required under Michigan’s state-specific LCR, that are independent from water systems and 
staffed primarily by affected community members. These councils must have the capacity to grant 
affected communities the authority to oversee and influence: 
 
o How the LCRI is implemented in their jurisdictions. 
o Whether it satisfies environmental justice, environmental equity, and consumer right-to-
know requirements—including transparency of water system data; engineering, public 
relations, and other water system contracts; and water system financial decisions and 
programs. 
o Whether it satisfies the environmental justice right to environmental self-determination. 
o How potential irregularities and challenges with service line inventories, compliance 
monitoring, lead service line replacement, and other aspects of the LCRI are addressed. 
o Whether the LCRI is providing the public health protection it promises to all consumers. 
 
In short, these councils hold promise for strengthening all aspects of the LCRI and, ultimately, 
maximizing its potential for success.  
 
87 Campaign for Lead Free Water 2024, “Community Coalition Meeting with EPA Re Lead-In-Water Public Education 
and Messaging.” 
88 2023 proposed Lead and Copper Rule Improvements, p84911. 

November 20, 2023 
 
Radhika Fox  
Assistant Administrator for Water  
US Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
 
 
Dear Assistant Administrator Fox, 
 
We, the undersigned community and environmental justice organizations, are reaching out to you with 
urgency about EPA’s public messaging on steps consumers can take to protect themselves from lead in 
water. EPA has been delivering this messaging for over 30 years – and continues to deliver this messaging 
today – in official informational meetings, trainings, webinars, and through the agency’s website. As we 
outline in the attached letter, and have discussed in prior public comments to EPA, rather than mitigate 
risk of exposure, much of this messaging can prolong and even exacerbate exposures.  
 
We believe that the upcoming release of a new Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) and other public initiatives to 
reduce consumer exposures to lead in water are important opportunities for EPA to work with affected 
communities in order to improve effectiveness and accuracy in communications on this topic.  
 
We now know that a Filter First approach to lead in water is the best available protective measure in 
terms of its effectiveness, accessibility, environmental sustainability, and cost. When implemented 
correctly, it also offers immediate protection from exposures. With this letter, we ask EPA to adopt Filter 
First as the agency’s primary and urgent recommendation to all consumers, whether they live in a home 
with a lead service line or not. 
 
The ramifications of relying on outdated, incomplete, or misleading talking points regarding lead-in-water 
safety are grave, not only for public health and environmental justice, but also for the scientific, 
regulatory, and programmatic integrity of EPA’s lead-in-water regulations, guidance documents, and 
infrastructure funding programs. EPA is one – if not the most important – source of information on the 
subject, and it is critical for this administration, as the President continues to prioritize this issue, to 
update its messaging. 
  
To give a brief example, EPA’s claim that standard water testing will reveal if there is lead in one’s water, 
a) contradicts the science of lead in water; b) generates vast underestimations of the prevalence of lead-
contaminated water and inaccurate understandings about the contribution of lead-contaminated water 
to elevated blood lead levels;1-2 c) misleads consumers into thinking that a ‘non-detect’ lead reading, for 
example, signifies their water is ‘safe;’ d) gives implicit permission to water utilities to issue false 
assurances of safety to consumers whose one-time test happened to capture no lead; and e) cultivates in 
consumers the erroneous impression that the adoption of precautionary measures – including lead 
 
1 See, for example, Stanek et al. 2020; Triantafyllidou et al. 2014; Triantafyllidou & Edwards 2012.   
2 Engel 1986 (Appendix 2) and Renner 2006 illustrate how erroneous governmental assumptions about the 
contribution of lead-contaminated water to blood lead levels in children has delayed the protection of children with 
elevated blood lead levels from ongoing ingestion of contaminated water, even when this water is the children’s sole 
source of exposure to lead.  

 
2
service line replacement – is both a nuisance and a financial waste. The letter below provides more 
details as well as citations on this and other similar points.  
 
In light of EPA’s commendable efforts to improve the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR) and to 
accelerate the full replacement of lead service lines across the nation within ten years, we believe it is 
imperative that the agency move quicky to align its approach to lead in water with: 
 
• 
the science of lead corrosion, 
• 
basic environmental justice principles, and 
• 
the public health goals of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA).   
 
Toward this end, we would like to have a meeting with you at your earliest convenience to discuss this 
matter further and explore how we can support EPA to make necessary corrections in a timely manner. 
At this meeting, we propose inviting Professional Engineer Elin Betanzo (cc-ed herein) for her expert input 
on the science of lead in water and the LCR. We also hope that EPA will support our conversation with 
agency staff who bring analogous expertise.  
 
Should you have any questions, please contact Yanna Lambrinidou, PhD at pnalternatives@yahoo.com.   
 
Thank you and kind regards, 
 
 
Campaign for Lead Free Water  
 
Childhood Lead Action Project  
 
DC EJ Coalition  
 
DC Environmental Network  
 
DC Statehood Green Party  
 
Earthjustice  
 
Environmental Transformation Movement of 
Flint (ETM Flint)  
 
Freshwater For Life Action Coalition – MKE  
 
Get The Lead Out Coalition – MKE  
 
Green New Deal for DC  
 
Lead-Free Delaware  
 
Little Village Environmental Justice Organization 
(JVEJO)  
 
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC)  
 
Newark Water Coalition  
 
Parents for Nontoxic Alternatives 
 
Portland Advocates for Lead-free Drinking Water  
 
Sierra Club  
 
Women for a Healthy Environment  
 
 

 
3
cc.  Zaineb Alattar, US EPA  
KC Becker, US EPA Region 8  
       Navis Bermudez, US EPA  
Eric Burneson, US EPA  
David Cash, US EPA Region 1  
Leslie Darman, US EPA  
Marianne Engelman-Lado, US EPA  
Lisa Garcia, US EPA Region 2  
Jeaneanne Gettle, US EPA Region 4  
Yu-Ting Guilaran, US EPA  
Gem Guzman, US EPA Region 9  
Hannah Holsinger, US EPA  
Jeffrey Kempic, US EPA  
Meg McCollister, US EPA Region 7  
Jennifer McLain, US EPA  
Earthea Nance, US EPA Region 6  
Jonathan Nelson, US EPA  
Adam Ortiz, US EPA Region 3  
Michael S. Regan, US EPA  
Zach Schafer, US EPA  
Debra Shore, US EPA Region 5  
Casey Sixkiller, US EPA Region 10  
Carrie Wehling, US EPA  
Wendy Wilkes, US EPA  
Mae Wu, US EPA  
Elin Betanzo, Safe Water Engineering, LLC  
       Ronnie Levin, Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health  
       Michael R. Schock, formerly with US EPA's National Risk Management Research Laboratory 
Wisconsin State Senator Lena C. Taylor  
 
    
 
 

 
4
Re: The scientific basis and public health protective capacity of EPA’s recommendations to consumers for 
preventing exposures to lead in water 
 
On behalf of the community and environmental justice signatories above, we want to express gratitude to 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for the October 17, 2023 webinar, “Engaging in EPA’s 
Upcoming Proposed LCRI Drinking Water Regulatory Process.” This event was especially informative with 
regards to the timeline for the upcoming LCRI and steps communities can take to participate in the 
rulemaking process. Spelling out all the ways in which consumers can provide input on the proposed LCRI 
aligns with environmental justice principles and helps overcome the common challenge of knowing what 
the opportunities are for weighing in on proposed environmental rules and how to take advantage of 
these opportunities. 
 
EPA’s webinar, however, alarmed us as well. In a segment about measures we can take “right now” to 
“protect” ourselves from lead in our tap water, an EPA scientist with the Standards and Risk Management 
Division of EPA’s Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water (OGWDW) delivered a medley of seven 
recommendations (Appendix 1). We are familiar with these recommendations, as EPA has promoted 
most of them for over 30 years (Appendix 2).3 But we also know that they are marred with such serious 
deficiencies that they risk prolonging – rather than eliminating – consumer exposures to lead in tap 
water.   
 
Specifically, the recommendations: 
 
• 
Overlook or contradict the best available, peer-reviewed science, as required by the Safe Drinking 
Water Act (SDWA) §1412(b)(3)(A), 42 U.S.C. §300g-1(b)(3)(A)4 (Recommendations 1-5); and/or  
• 
Ask of our communities to take measures that – although potentially challenging, demanding, 
time-intensive, and/or costly – are only partly or unreliably health protective, if health protective 
at all (Recommendations 1-6); or  
• 
Lack basic information that is necessary for educated decision-making concerning the specific 
measure promoted (Recommendation 7). 
 
Additionally, EPA leaves consumers on their own to decide which measure (or combination of measures) 
to adopt, in the absence of any guidance about each of the seven measures’ advantages and 
disadvantages. And, lastly, none of the seven recommendations: 
 
• 
disclose that lead in water is ubiquitous in buildings with and without a lead service line and, 
therefore, should concern everyone, or 
• 
discuss who must bear the cost of measures that involve (or may involve) the purchasing of 
materials and/or the hiring of professional services.  
 
All these deficiencies violate foundational consumer right-to-know principles codified in the Safe Drinking 
Water Act (SDWA) 1996 Amendments and the 2016 Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation 
 
3 See EPA’s 1992 “Lead in Drinking Water Regulation: Public Education Guidance” for Recommendations 1-3 and 5-7. 
4 Safe Drinking Water Act §1412(b)(3)(A), 42 U.S.C. §300g-1(b)(3)(A) provides, “(3)(A) Use of science in 
decisionmaking.—In carrying out this section, and, to the degree that an Agency action is based on science, the 
Administrator shall use—(i) the best available, peer-reviewed science and supporting studies conducted in 
accordance with sound and objective scientific practices; and (ii) data collected by accepted methods or best 
available methods (if the reliability of the method and the nature of the decision justifies use of the data).” 

 
5
Act provisions on lead public education adopted during the Flint lead crisis5 and raise serious 
environmental justice and equity concerns (see the Campaign for Lead Free Water 2023 comment on 
EPA’s proposed “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Consumer Confidence Report Rule 
Revisions” [EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0260]). 
 
As we await the announcement of EPA’s proposed LCRI, we bring these deficiencies to your attention with 
urgency and with the hope that EPA has fixed them. If it has not, we urge the agency to fix them as soon 
as possible (preferably before the release of the proposed improvements) or to make clear which peer-
reviewed science it has used to maintain them.  
 
Our sense of urgency is rooted in two concerns: 
 
1. The grave environmental injustice embedded in the LCR’s ‘shared responsibility’ regime, as this 
regime has been conceptualized and implemented up to today   
 
For the past 30+ years, the LCR’s treatment technique approach (i.e., corrosion control, source 
water treatment, lead service line replacement, and public education) has left our communities 
largely unaware that they are at risk of exposures to both low-level, chronic and high-level, acute 
lead-in-water concentrations, even when their water utilities are in full regulatory compliance.6 
Worse, it has communicated consistently that, unless a community receives mandated public 
education about a lead action level (LAL) exceedance, lead in water at this community’s taps 
does not pose a health risk.7  
 
Yet LCR compliance sampling results from water utilities across the US, as well as highly visible 
lead-in-water contamination events in cities like Benton Harbor, MI; Flint, MI; Jackson, MS; 
Newark, NJ; Portland, OR; and Washington, DC, have shown that lead-in-water levels at a 
community’s taps can be present – as well as high and even exceedingly high – long before the 
LAL is exceeded, if it is exceeded at all.  
 
In other words, the LCR does not, and cannot, achieve the public health goals of the Safe 
Drinking Water Act (SDWA)8 without regular delivery of scientifically sound, complete, and 
accurate public education about the nature and prevalence of lead in water, the unpredictability 
of its release, health risks from ingestion, the LCR’s ‘shared responsibility’ regime, and effective 
 
5 See Public Notice and public education requirements for lead action level exceedances, SDWA §1412(c)(1)(D), 
(c)(2)(D), & (c)(5), 42 U.S.C. §300g-3(c)(1)(D), (c)(2)(D), & (c)(5), and Consumer Confidence Report requirements in 
SDWA §1414(c)(4), 42 U.S.C. §300g-3(c)(4). 
6 See, for example, the Campaign for Lead Free Water 2021 blog post “The EPA Lead and Copper Rule is an Optical 
Illusion.” 
7 EPA’s webpage “Basic Information about Lead in Drinking Water” states unequivocally that “EPA's Public 
Notification Rule requires public water systems to alert you if there is a problem with your drinking water” (emphasis 
in original). 
8 According to the SDWA, “A required treatment technique for a contaminant which is listed under paragraph (1) (B) 
shall require treatment necessary in the Administrator’s judgment to prevent known or anticipated adverse effects 
on the health of persons to the extent feasible. For purposes of this paragraph, the term 'feasible' means feasible 
with the use of the best technology, treatment techniques, and other means, which the Administrator finds are 
generally available (taking cost into consideration)” (pp. 1663-1664). 

 
6
and reliable steps that consumers can take to prevent exposures at all times and in all buildings.9 
In the absence of such disclosures that empower consumers to understand how the LCR works 
and protect themselves effectively and immediately,10 the LCR turns into an instrument of public 
deception, which disables consumers’ ability to take the best available health-protective 
measures and prolongs the risk of exposure, while falsely assuring our communities that their 
tap water is, with rare exceptions, safe.  
 
2. The worrisome connection between deficient public education and the LCR’s integrity more 
broadly  
 
The LCR’s treatment technique approach consists of four components: corrosion control, source 
water treatment, lead service line replacement, and public education.11 To achieve the public 
health goals of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), each of these components separately must 
introduce an effective layer of consumer protection, and all these components together must 
produce a system of consumer protections that maximizes the LCR’s public health protective 
capacity as a whole. For this to happen, the four components must be based on: 
 
• 
the best available, peer-reviewed science, as well as  
• 
robust understanding about how water utilities implement (or don’t) the LCR, how 
oversight agencies enforce (or don’t) the LCR, and how consumers are empowered (or 
not) to make health-protective decisions in relation to lead in water and the LCR.12 
 
If the deficiencies in EPA’s seven recommendations, which we discuss in the analysis that follows 
and summarize in Table 1, carry over to the LCRI’s four (interrelated and interdependent) 
components, then there is reason to be concerned about the LCRI’s overall ability to protect our 
communities from lead in tap water and achieve the public health goals of the Safe Drinking 
Water Act (SDWA) for generations to come.  
 
To be specific – if, for example, EPA overlooks the inherent variability in lead release from 
plumbing (as is the case in EPA’s recommendations to consumers, see point 1 below), proper 
implementation of lead-in-water monitoring and corrosion control treatment is likely to be 
compromised.13 Similarly, if EPA fails to make explicit that reliable identification of lead-bearing 
plumbing on the private side and along the entire length of a service line can require several types 
of interventions14 (as is the case in EPA’s recommendations to consumers, see point 2 below), 
 
9 See Section II, “Public Education for Lead and LSLs,” in Parents for Nontoxic Alternatives 2015 and Section 8, “Public 
Education,” in Coalition Letter 2020. 
10 Such empowerment was envisioned by EPA over 30 years ago. The preamble to the 1991 LCR states that a) the 
agency chose solely a treatment technique approach over a dual MCL/treatment technique approach because it 
believed that the former would be “simpler” for the public – among others – to understand (1991 Lead and Copper 
Rule, 56 Fed. Reg. at 26472) and b) the “public education program included in the final rule can prevent adverse 
health effects by supplying people with information on ways to reduce the amount of lead in the water consumed 
(1991 Lead and Copper Rule, 56 Fed. Reg. at 26500).  
11 These components are triggered, in large part, after a LAL exceedance. 
12 See, for example, the 2016 NRDC report “What's in Your Water? Flint and Beyond” and the 2017 NRDC report 
“Threats on Tap: Widespread Violations Highlight Need for Investment in Water Infrastructure and Protections.” 
13 See, for example, Schock, M. R. and F. G. Lemieux 2010. Challenges in Addressing Variability of Lead in Domestic 
Plumbing. Water Science & Technology—Water Supply 10(5):793-799. 
14 These interventions can include visual examination, water sampling, and excavation (Hensley et al. 2021).  

 
7
successful implementation of full lead service line replacement programs is likely to be 
undermined. Worse, many lead service lines are likely to be left in operation long after water 
utilities declare that the lead service lines in their system have been fully replaced.    
 
We have high hopes that EPA’s proposed LCRI is going to be the long-overdue, public health protective, 
equitable, and just regulation communities across the nation deserve. Toward this goal, we trust that EPA 
will give serious consideration to our request. Thank you. 
 
 

 
8
EPA’s Recommendations 
 
 
1. “Have your water tested. Contact your water utility to have your water tested and to learn more 
about the lead levels in your drinking water.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This recommendation defies decades of scientific research on a) the inherent variability in 
lead release, and b) the inability of standard water sampling methods to capture reliably 
worst-case lead-in-water levels at any single tap. It is a recommendation that can, in fact, 
prolong – rather than mitigate – exposures to lead in water, by giving water users the 
impression that their water is “safe” when, in reality, it exposes them to low-level, chronic 
and/or high-level, acute lead-in-water concentrations.  
 
EPA has known since at least the 1980s that the release of lead from individual taps tends to 
be highly variable, both before and after corrosion control treatment installation (e.g., Pocock 
1980, cited in 1991 Lead and Copper Rule). This variability was mentioned repeatedly in the 
preamble to the 1991 Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) and was even used as an argument against 
the adoption of a Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) for lead in water.15  
 
More recently, EPA scientists established that, because of the inherent variability in lead 
release, “most sampling protocols cannot accurately represent Pb exposure” (Triantafyllidou 
 
15 The preamble to the LCR of 1991 states that, “Numerous commenters supported the establishment of a treatment 
technique, stating that the primary source of lead is from home plumbing materials, which are beyond the water 
system's direct control. These commenters argued that water systems can only control the water quality parameters 
that affect the corrosivity of the water and should not be held responsible for lead and copper levels at individual 
taps. They contended that it is infeasible to measure MCLs accurately at taps because corrosion control technology 
does not guarantee specific or predictable tap water lead levels, as is evident by monitoring programs that have 
shown significant variability in tap lead levels within a system and even within a tap over time after installation of 
treatment” (1991 Lead and Copper Rule, 56 Fed. Reg. at 26472, emphasis added). 
This EPA “Concerned About Lead in Your Drinking Water?” infographic 
was not included in the agency’s October 17, 2023 webinar, but it echoes 
the webinar’s messaging. We insert it here to provide a visual example of 
the EPA’s erroneous claim that water testing can establish with certainty if 
one’s water is contaminated with lead.     

 
9
et al. 2021:12). Indeed, according to Masters et al. 2017,16 in cases of extreme lead-in-water 
variability, one would need to collect over 1,200 samples from a single tap to assess average 
lead-in-water concentrations at this tap to within 20% of the true mean. In practice, this 
means that one, two, or even three water samples at any given tap – which is what most 
standard sampling protocols involve – are likely to miss worst-case lead-in-water levels to 
which people using this tap are exposed. In other words, standard water testing – whether for 
LCR compliance sampling or other purposes – is associated with routine and potentially 
significant underestimations of real-world lead-in-water exposures and is unreliable for 
capturing the true extent of contamination problems at any single tap (Masters et al. 2016, 
Del Toral et al. 2013).   
 
Moreover, consumer inquiries to water utilities about the safety of their water are often 
addressed with information about: 
 
• 
90th-percentile values (which usually meet the LCR’s 15 parts per billion LAL), and 
• 
the water “meeting or exceeding” LCR safety standards. 
 
These responses echo standard language on the EPA website, as well as in annual Consumer 
Confidence Reports (CCRs).17 This language erroneously links LCR compliance to water safety 
and suggests that if lead-in-water contamination problems were detected, consumers would 
be notified. Such assurances do not disclose, however, that lead levels at individual taps can 
reach hundreds and even thousands of parts per billion, even when 90th-percentile values are 
well below the LAL and LCR requirements are met. Conflating the LCR’s LAL with the Rule’s 
Maximum Contaminant Level Goal (MCLG) of zero, EPA and water utilities also often 
insinuate, and sometimes claim, that a single water sample from a single tap showing non-
detect levels of lead, or measuring below 15 parts per billion, confirms the water’s safety at 
this tap.18 Such suggestions are incorrect.  
 
We are concerned that EPA’s testing recommendation – which is amplified by water utilities, 
health departments, government agencies, and media outlets and which does not address 
the potential cost that might be involved19 – perpetuates a grossly simplistic and misleading 
 
16 Masters, S. V. et al. 2017. “Inherent variability in lead and copper collected during standardized sampling” [Power 
Point presentation] (slides available upon request).  
17 See, for example, the Campaign for Lead Free Water 2023 comment on EPA’s proposed “National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations: Consumer Confidence Report Rule Revisions” [EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0260] and the Campaign for 
Lead Free Water 2021 blog post, “The EPA Lead and Copper Rule is an Optical Illusion.” 
18 In some documents EPA actually acknowledges the problem with this conflation – see, for example, the agency’s 
2016 “Lead and Copper Rule Revisions White Paper,” which states that, “Although public discussion often mistakes 
the action level as having significance in terms of health impacts, EPA has consistently emphasized that the health-
based maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG) for lead in the current LCR is zero and that there is no safe level of 
lead exposure. While the future LCR will maintain treatment technique requirements (e.g., CCT, public education and 
LSLR) to reduce lead exposures, a health-based benchmark for lead in drinking water could help to guide appropriate 
actions to communicate and mitigate risk, particularly at the household level” (p. 11).  
19 Some water utilities offer free annual lead-in-water testing to their customers, but others do not. Additionally, 
customers who want to have their water tested independently are on their own to cover the cost. A survey of three 
independent certified labs in the Washington, DC area revealed that this cost can range from $25-$125 for a 1st-draw 
sample and go up to $200 for a 1st- and 2nd-draw sample. Customers interested in more than two samples would be 
charged over $200.  

 
10
characterization of the nature of lead in water. Even worse, it risks steering consumers away 
from health-protective action and leaving them unnecessarily in harm’s way. Indeed, 
qualitative research about property owner decision-making vis-à-vis lead service line 
replacement has revealed that some property owners refuse to consent to private-side 
replacement precisely because a one-time test at one of their home taps showed lead-in-
water levels below 15 parts per billion – a reading which assured them that the water at their 
home did not pose a health risk and, therefore, did not justify a costly remedy (Lambrinidou 
2015).20   
 
 
2. “Learn if you have a lead service line. Contact your water utility or a licensed plumber to 
determine if the pipe that connects your home to the water main (called a service line) is made 
from lead.” 
 
 
Determining one’s service line material is a sound recommendation since lead service lines 
are made of 100% pure lead and “represent the greatest source of lead in drinking water” 
(Hensley et al. 2021). This, however, is an exercise consumers should be encouraged to carry 
out after taking immediate measures to protect themselves from lead-in-water exposures. 
Waiting to confirm the presence of a lead service line before taking such measures – or 
forgoing proper precautions all together when one’s service line is confirmed to not be lead – 
places consumers at risk of prolonged lead-in-water exposures and associated health harm. 
 
Additionally, this recommendation must disclose a) common challenges in obtaining 
complete and reliable information from one’s water utility about one’s service line 
material(s), b) steps one can take to verify one’s water utility claims, and c) the costs 
associated with hiring a licensed plumber to determine the presence or absence of lead-
bearing plumbing materials along the entire length of one’s service line. Specifically, the 
recommendation must spell out that:  
 
• 
Although there are different definitions of a “lead service line,” lead-bearing 
plumbing materials along the length of a service line can include: 
o lead pipe, 
o galvanized iron or galvanized steel pipe, 
o brass pipe, 
o water meters,  
o compression fittings,  
o goosenecks, pigtails, and connectors (these plumbing components, for 
example, are not included in EPA’s definition of a “lead service line” under 
the Lead and Copper Rule Revisions (LCRR)). 
In other words, even when the pipe that connects a building to a water main is not 
lead, one or more of the above plumbing components may still be present along the 
length of the building’s service line and may still cause significant elevations of lead 
in water.  
 
 
20 Lambrinidou, Y. “Empirical and Legal Evaluation of Public Health Protection Under the Federal LCR” (2015, 
unpublished research, Appendix 3). 

 
11
• 
One’s water utility may – and, in many cases, is likely to – have incomplete or 
incorrect information about one or more service line materials along the length of 
one’s service line (Kite 2022, DC Water 2023 disclaimer). This is especially the case at 
the present moment, when lead service line inventories are still in the process of 
completion.21 Therefore, consumers must be given information on how to verify 
their water utility claims.    
 
• 
Reliable identification of lead-bearing plumbing materials along the length of one’s 
service line may necessitate several types of interventions. Specifically, lead that is 
visible inside the home means that there is a lead service line. But the absence of 
lead inside the home does not rule out the possibility of buried lead between the 
water main and the building. Further investigation is necessary to rule out the 
possibility of a lead service line (and/or other lead-bearing plumbing materials). In 
those cases where a simple visual examination of the service line is inconclusive or 
shows no lead, additional investigation may involve extensive water sampling 
(Schock et al. 2021). When such sampling shows no lead, excavation may be 
required to rule out with certainty the presence of a lead service line (and/or other 
lead-bearing plumbing materials) in private space and along the service line’s entire 
length (Hensley et al. 2021, Betanzo & Attal 2022, Michigan Department of 
Environment). 
 
This is an important point, as the majority of public facing instructions for identifying 
a lead service line assume that the material seen inside the home is the same for the 
entire length of the service line. Water system inventories demonstrate that this is 
frequently not the case. EPA and water utility instructions inaccurately imply that 
homes do not have a lead service line if lead is not visible inside the home. Indeed, 
some water utilities seem to rely on customer-conducted visual examinations to 
confirm or rule out the presence of a lead service line in private space or throughout 
the entire length of the line (e.g., Baltimore, MD; Chatham Borough, NJ; Lake 
County, IL; the state of Louisiana; Milwaukee, WI. These few examples likely scratch 
the surface of a much larger set of water utilities and other authoritative bodies – 
such as municipal and state agencies, technical assistance providers, and the media 
– that issue misleading information about how to identify a lead service line). In fact, 
EPA’s website can also give the false impression that customer-conducted visual 
examinations suffice for identifying lead service lines:   
 
21 It is worth noting that even DC Water – the water utility which has conducted among the highest, if not the 
highest, number of (full and partial) lead service line replacements in the nation to meet LCR requirements – still 
does not know with certainty where all the city’s lead service lines are. In July 2023, DC resident, attorney, and 
longtime Advisory Neighborhood Commissioner Mr. Randy Speck testified in front of DC City Council that: 
“Shockingly, after knowing about the lead-in-water problem for 20 years, DC Water still has only the vaguest notion 
of how many LSLs require replacement or where they are located. Its estimates seem to be little more than guesses, 
and they have increased even in the absence of any more reliable data. DC Water’s June 2021 ‘Lead Free DC’ plan 
estimated about 28,000 replacements, but by May 2023 that number increased to 41,000. Still, however, DC Water’s 
latest guess is based on arbitrary assumptions that half of the 14,000 service lines with unknown materials are lead 
and one fifth of the 66,000 previously identified non-lead lines will be discovered to have lead and must be replaced. 
There's no empirical basis for those numbers. These malleable inventory assumptions are a primary driver of DC’s 
ever escalating cost estimate [for the full replacement of all of the city’s LSLs] …” (Council of the District of Columbia, 
Committee on Transportation & the Environment, Public Hearing, July 6, 2023).  

 
12
 
 
 
 
• 
Hiring a licensed plumber to conduct a thorough investigation of one’s service line 
might be costly. Therefore, the approximate cost range for such work must be 
provided and customer inability to pay for such a service must be addressed. 
 
• 
The presence of a lead service line (and/or other lead-bearing plumbing materials 
across the length of a service line) necessitates its replacement. Because however: 
o in many jurisdictions, lead service lines were forced on property owners by 
law (Troesken 2006, Rabin 2008, McCormick & Uteuova 2022);  
o under the LCR, and with active water utility participation, consumers across 
the US have received misleading information about the health risks 
associated with both intact and partially replaced lead service lines (see 
point 1 above about EPA linking LCR compliance to water safety and 
suggesting that if lead-in-water contamination problems were detected, 
consumers would be notified; see also Brown et al. 2011); and 
o under the LCR, and with active water utility participation, consumers have 
been left unprotected from both low-level, chronic and high-level, acute 
exposures to lead in water (see point 1 above and Brown et al. 2011); 
consumers must be protected against having to pay for remediation of a 
contaminant that was inflicted on them and from which they may have suffered 
irreparable health harm. This includes both out-of-pocket costs and water rate 
increases for lead service line replacement. Thus, water utilities must be required to 
aggressively pursue all possible means of paying for system-wide lead service line 
replacement, including: 
o existing ratepayer funds (i.e., by allocating or reallocating portions of these 
funds to lead service line replacement), 
o federal, state and local funding, and 
o innovative funding and financing programs (e.g., Newark, NJ’s use of port 
fees or Madison, WI’s use of revenue from allowing cell phone antennae on 
its water towers). 
If, after pursuing all such means, a water utility needs additional funds for lead 
service line replacement and decides to resort to water rate increases, it must be 
required under the LCR to submit to state drinking water programs – and make 
public: 
o the funding sources it has pursued,  
o the funding proposals it has submitted, and  
EPA’s “Protect Your Tap: A Quick Check for Lead” Guide 

 
13
o the responses it has received.  
In turn, state drinking water programs should have the obligation to review and 
report on whether the water utility has truly exhausted all possible funding options. 
Of course, when funding options are exhausted and rates are raised, rate reforms 
should insulate low-income consumers from affordability challenges (see Water 
Affordability Advocacy Toolkit). 
    
Absence of such financial protection – and of public disclosure about the imperative 
of such protection – will be inherently unfair and will exacerbate environmental 
injustices, as it: 
o will force consumers to pay for the removal of a contaminant they did not 
choose and, in many cases, did not know about, and  
o will compound the longstanding environmental injustice of lead in water, 
both on low-income consumers and on consumers of middle and high 
incomes, most of whom have likely been unwittingly exposed to lead in 
water and suffered associated health harms for many generations (Troesken 
2006, Baehler et al. 2021). 
  
 
3. “Run your water. Before drinking, flush your home’s pipes by running the tap, taking a shower, 
doing laundry, or doing a load of dishes. The amount of time to run the water will depend on 
whether your home has a lead service line or not, and the length of the lead service line. 
Residents should contact their water utility for recommendations about flushing times in their 
community.” 
 
 
This recommendation overlooks the complexities of flushing, as have been established in the 
scientific literature. Although flushing can, indeed, temporarily reduce – or even eliminate – 
lead from water, this outcome is not guaranteed. Research has shown that, under certain 
circumstances, flushing can in fact increase lead-in-water levels.  
 
Additionally, the suggestion that water utilities possess scientifically reliable information 
about appropriate community-wide “flushing times” fails to address the challenge of the 
particularities at the household level of plumbing materials, plumbing arrangements, water-
use practices, water age, water chemistry, and other factors, which can give rise to markedly 
different lead release patterns in different buildings within the same community (and even 
within the same neighborhood or the same street). Such differences would, presumably, 
necessitate tailoring recommended flushing times to each building’s particularities and would 
make community-wide “flushing times” scientifically difficult, if not impossible.  
 
In short, this is not an appropriate recommendation, especially since there are far more 
reliable measures for eliminating lead in water and preventing exposures (e.g., filtration, 
bottled water use, water distillation).    
 
Stagnation of water in lead-bearing plumbing has, indeed, been shown to increase lead 
leaching (Lytle & Schock 2000). Although flushing can temporarily reduce – or even eliminate 
– lead-in-water contamination, it cannot be relied upon to prevent exposures. Indeed, under 
certain circumstances, flushing can: 

 
14
 
• 
Increase lead release from plumbing (Katner et al. 2018, Del Toral et al. 2013). Del 
Toral and coauthors state that, “Much of the current published and web-based 
flushing guidance inadvertently increases the risk of exposure to elevated lead levels 
by clearing an insufficient amount of water volume. Even fully flushing LSLs may only 
lower lead levels to a limiting, measurable lead level, that relates to the 
plumbosolvency of the water, the flow rate, the length and internal diameter of the 
pipe, and possibly effects of prior disturbances” (Del Toral et al. 2013:9305). 
• 
Be rapidly followed by a return of the lead levels present in the water prior to the 
flush (Murphy 1993); and 
• 
Reduce the risk of childhood elevated blood lead levels from water to a smaller 
degree than bottled water consumption (Fertmann et al. 2004, Moralez et al. 
2005:452)22 or fail to reduce this risk all together (Triantafyllidou et al. 2014). Notably, 
Triantafyllidou and Edwards report that, “Even flushed water samples for lead 
poisoned children in the 2009 data from Massachusetts contained as high as 146 
μg/L lead” (2012:1337). 
  
This recommendation is justified only as a last resort for situations where consumers are 
unable to remove lead from water through filtration and other processes and also lack access 
to bottled water. 
 
 
4. “Learn about construction in your neighborhood. Be aware of any construction or maintenance 
work that could disturb your lead service line. Construction may cause more lead to be released 
from a lead service line.”  
 
 
Although science-based, this recommendation is incomplete and inappropriate for health 
protection. Since there are steps one can take to practically eliminate lead from water (e.g., 
filtration, bottled water use, water distillation) at all times and regardless of activity levels in 
one’s neighborhood, asking consumers to monitor construction/maintenance work is a tall 
order with insufficient returns. 
 
Research has shown that physical disturbances of lead service lines are associated with 
higher lead release from these lines (Del Toral et al. 2013). However, the problem of physical 
disturbances is more complex than what this recommendation suggests – namely: 
 
• 
Construction and plumbing maintenance work constitute only one category of 
activity that can disturb lead-bearing plumbing. It is highly likely that lead-bearing 
plumbing can also be disturbed by other categories of activities, such as nearby 
movement of heavy-weight vehicles, high-traffic roads, earthquakes, and any other 
phenomenon that can vibrate the ground (e.g., a large tree falling); and 
 
22 A study on blood lead levels in Mexican-American children and adolescents in the US concluded that, “… Mexican-
American children with tap water as their principal source of drinking water have higher BLLs than Mexican-
American children drinking bottled water, suggesting that plumbing may be an important source of lead exposure in 
Mexican-American children” (Moralez et al. 2005:452). Similar findings from Hamburg, Germany were reported in 
Fertmann et al. 2004.  

 
15
• 
Physical disturbances can result in higher lead release not only from lead service 
lines, but also from lead-bearing premise plumbing (Edwards 2014). As such, they 
pose a risk to all consumers, whether or not they reside in a home (or attend a 
school or work in a building) with a lead service line. 
 
In light of this complexity, asking only consumers in lead service line homes to: 
 
• 
monitor only construction/maintenance work in their neighborhood (an ask that is 
practically impossible for many), and  
• 
presumably, take additional precautions when such work is taking place,  
 
constitutes a ‘whack-a-mole’ approach to lead in water, which is inadequately health 
protective. This approach overlooks the entirety of phenomena that can cause physical 
disturbances of lead-bearing plumbing as well as the entirety of buildings that are vulnerable 
to higher lead release from such disturbances.  
 
There is no justification for this recommendation when there are steps consumers in all 
buildings can take at all times to practically eliminate lead from water (e.g., filtration, bottled 
water use, water distillation) regardless of the state of ground vibrations in their 
neighborhoods. 
 
 
5. “Use cold water. Use only cold water for drinking, cooking and making baby formula. Remember, 
boiling water does not remove lead from water.” 
 
This recommendation may protect consumers from the higher lead-in-water levels 
associated with hot water use, but it does not prevent either low-level, chronic or high-level, 
acute exposures to lead in water. Since there are measures consumers can take to practically 
eliminate lead from water (e.g., filtration, bottled water use, water distillation), promoting 
the consumption of unfiltered cold water for anyone, and especially for infants dependent on 
reconstituted formula, steers consumers in a direction that prolongs their risk of exposure 
and leaves them vulnerable to significant health harm.   
 
LCR compliance sampling data from utilities across the country are based on the collection 
and analysis of 1st-draw cold-water samples following a period of stagnation in faucets and 
other plumbing materials close to faucets. These data show that cold water often contains 
both soluble and particulate lead and places consumers at risk of exposure to both low-level, 
chronic and high-level, acute exposures. This is the case even when the 90th-percentile value 
of a water utility’s sampling round falls well below the LCR’s 15 parts per billion LAL. In other 
words, lead in cold water is ubiquitous and affects all homes, whether they have a lead 
service line or not.  
 
Washington, DC is a case in point: 
 
• 
In 2019, the 90th-percentile value for DC Water’s January-June sampling round was 
2.2 parts per billion lead and for the July-December sampling round, 2.3 parts per 
billion lead. Yet in the January-June sampling round 85% of 1st-draw samples 
contained some amount of lead, and in the July-December sampling round 86% of 

 
16
1st-draw samples contained some amount of lead. The highest lead reading in 
January-June was 33.3 parts per billion and in July-December, 209 parts per billion.  
 
• 
In 2020, the 90th-percentile value for DC Water’s January-June sampling round was 
1.8 parts per billion lead and for the July-December sampling round, 2.8 parts per 
billion lead. Yet in the January-June sampling round 77% of 1st-draw samples 
contained some amount of lead, and in the July-December sampling round 84% of 
1st-draw samples contained some amount of lead. The highest lead reading in 
January-June was 17.3 parts per billion and in July-December, 37.3 parts per billion. 
 
Given the inherent variability in lead release (see discussion about Recommendation 1 
above), it is reasonable to assume that cold water contamination in Washington, DC (and 
other jurisdictions) is even more prevalent and severe than LCR compliance data suggest (Del 
Toral et al. 2013). Specifically, the taps that measure at zero lead at the time of LCR 
compliance sampling likely dispense both low and high levels of lead at other times. And the 
taps that measure below 15 parts per billion at the time of LCR compliance sampling likely 
dispense high levels of lead at other times. In short, using “only cold water for drinking, 
cooking and making baby formula” (EPA recommendation above) is far from a health 
protective practice (Baum & Shannon 1997).23 Therefore, we believe that EPA’s cold-water 
recommendation is justified only as a last resort for situations where consumers are unable 
to remove lead from water through filtration and/or other processes and lack access to 
bottled water. 
 
Lastly, boiling not only “does not remove lead from water” (EPA recommendation above), it 
tends to concentrate it. According to a peer-reviewed scientific paper on lead poisoning in 
infancy, excessive boiling “increases the lead concentration of tap water, amplifying the risk 
of lead intoxication and exposing the infants to substantial quantities of lead with every 
formula feeding” (Shannon & Graef 1992:89). And yet this information is missing from most 
recommendations for preventing exposures to lead in water as well as from many – perhaps 
even most – boil-water advisories that water utilities issue to protect consumers from 
waterborne pathogens. It is, therefore, imperative that EPA’s messaging is clear: when it 
comes to lead from plumbing, boiling one’s water can be dangerous because it can expose 
consumers to unusually high levels of lead, causing potentially significant health harm.          
  
  
6. “Clean your aerator. Regularly clean your faucet’s screen (also known as an aerator). Sediment, 
debris, and lead particles can collect in your aerator. If lead particles are caught in the aerator, 
lead can get into your water.” 
 
 
This recommendation is scientifically sound and we encourage it, albeit only as a second line 
of defense following filtration. To be implementable, however, it must address the practical 
challenges and potential costs it involves under some (if not many) circumstances. 
Additionally, it must include crucial information about the nature of lead particles and the 
 
23 In their study, Baum and Shannon (1997) analyzed the lead content in 40 samples of reconstituted infant formula 
and found that two measured above 15 parts per billion (i.e., at 17 and 70 parts per billion). According to the 
authors, both of these samples were prepared with cold tap water.  

 
17
gravity of the health risk they pose. This information is necessary for consumers’ appreciation 
of the importance of clean aerators and/or other measures one can take to prevent lead 
particle exposures.  
 
We certainly support the idea of clean aerators. However, this recommendation omits 
crucially important information that consumers need to a) understand the purpose of the 
measure, b) assess its practicality for their specific circumstances, and c) resort to alternatives 
if and when they conclude that this measure is out of their reach. Indeed, cleaning faucet 
aerators can seem like a nuisance in the absence of basic information about what lead 
particles are and what risk they pose to human health. After many years of public education 
delivery under the LCR – through annual CCRs and other public outreach requirements – 
most consumers do not know that: 
 
• 
lead in water can appear in the form of lead particles (i.e., tiny pieces of pure lead, 
lead solder, leaded brass, and other lead-bearing components) (Triantafyllidou et al. 
2007);  
• 
the release of such particles is common (McNeill and Edwards 2004); and 
• 
the ingestion of such particles can expose one to hundreds and thousands of parts 
per billion lead – concentrations which sometimes meet or far exceed “hazardous 
waste” criteria (i.e., >5000 μg/L) (Triantafyllidou et al. 2007, Lambrinidou et al. 
2010).24 
 
Research has shown that food cooked with lead particles can contain lead levels higher than 
the levels in a lead paint chip approximately the size of a penny (Triantafyllidou et al. 2007) 
and that consuming “even a small amount of water containing >5000 μg/L lead would greatly 
exceed the dose from 1900s lead abortion pills” (Edwards 2014:739).  
 
 
 
 
Exposures to such high concentrations of lead have been associated with miscarriage, fetal 
death, infant mortality, and elevated blood lead levels in young children (Triantafyllidou et al. 
2007, Edwards 2014, Troesken 2006).    
 
 
24 For a detailed critique of the annual CCR requirement, see, for example, the Campaign for Lead Free Water 2023 
comment on EPA’s proposed “National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Consumer Confidence Report Rule 
Revisions” [EPA–HQ–OW–2022–0260]. 
Triantafyllidou et al. 2007:114 

 
18
At the same time, depending on one’s faucet age, condition, and/or design, aerator removal 
can be entirely impossible25 or can cost money for pliers, masking tape, and other necessary 
materials. Moreover, both the removal and the reassembling can be challenging for many 
consumers without the help of a plumber (which can be financially burdensome or even 
prohibitive). For this reason, any mention of this recommendation must be coupled with 
precise instructions on how to remove an aerator, an acknowledgement of the challenges this 
might involve, and alternative measures for consumers who are unable to carry out the 
measure (e.g., filtration, distillation, use of bottled water). 
 
 
7. “Use your filter properly. If you use a filter, make sure you use a filter certified to remove lead. 
Read the directions to learn how to properly install and use your cartridge and when to replace it. 
Using the cartridge after it has expired can make it less effective at removing lead. Do not run hot 
water through the filter.” 
 
Given that proper filtration in common water chemistries and common lead service line scale 
formations can remove lead effectively and protect consumers from lead-in-water exposures 
immediately, this recommendation must be highlighted and prioritized over all other 
recommendations and must include all the information a consumer needs to make informed 
decisions about health-protective filter use.     
 
Lead in water is ubiquitous, no matter what one-time testing shows (due to the challenge of 
the inherent variability in lead release, see discussion about Recommendation 1 above). This 
is the case even when: 
 
a. one’s water utility meets LCR requirements,26 
b. one’s home (or business, workplace, public building/space) has no lead service line 
(Triantafyllidou et al. 2007, Stanek et al. 2020, Triantafyllidou et al. 2021), 
c. one runs the water before using it (Katner et al. 2018), 
d. one draws only cold water for drinking and cooking,27 
e. one’s neighborhood is free of construction,28 and 
f. 
one cleans faucet aerators routinely.29  
 
In other words, unless and until EPA revises its definition of “lead free” plumbing to mean 
plumbing that contains no lead, and unless and until all existing lead-bearing plumbing is 
replaced with true lead free plumbing, consumers will continue to be at risk of exposures to 
both low-level, chronic and high-level, acute lead-in-water concentrations.  
 
 
25 Some faucets, like this pulldown kitchen faucet for example, come with built-in aerators that are not removable.   
26 See, for example, the Campaign for Lead Free Water 2021 blog post, “The EPA Lead and Copper Rule is an Optical 
Illusion.” 
27 LCR compliance sampling, which routinely captures lead-in-water contamination in jurisdictions across the US, 
includes only cold-water samples. 
28 It is safe to assume that LCR compliance sampling, which routinely captures lead-in-water contamination in 
jurisdictions across the US, includes homes with no neighborhood construction at the time of sampling. 
29 Soluble lead and many lead particles are small enough to fit through faucet aerators (Triantafyllidou et al. 2007). 

 
19
Given that it will take many decades to rid all of the nation’s water distribution systems of 
lead, EPA must highlight and encourage above all else actions consumers can take 
immediately to protect themselves from exposures.  
 
To our knowledge, filtration is the best available such action in terms of its effectiveness, 
accessibility, environmental sustainability, and cost. It is, in fact, precisely for this reason that 
Washington, DC in 2017 and the state of Michigan in 2023 enacted legislation mandating a 
“Filter First” approach to lead in school water. “Filter First” involves the proactive installation 
of filters at all taps used for drinking and cooking, regardless of how those taps tested in the 
past or would test in the present (due to the challenge of the inherent variability in lead 
release).  
 
Against this backdrop, EPA’s filter recommendation must a) be revised to read as an urgent 
call to all consumers (as well as businesses, workplaces, and public buildings/spaces) for the 
end to unnecessary exposures to lead in water through filtration, and b) highlight information 
that is necessary for informed decision-making about filters, proper filter use, and health-
protective alternatives to such filters. Specifically, this call must include: 
 
• 
guidance on how to identify a lead-certified filter; 
• 
a description of all types of point-of-use filters certified to remove lead (i.e., faucet-
mount, refrigerator, pitcher-style, and bottle-fitted activated carbon filters); 
• 
the most health-protective combination of certifications currently available for 
activated carbon filters (i.e., NSF/ANSI 42 standard for particulate Class I reduction 
and NSF/ANSI 53 standard for soluble and particulate lead reduction, coupled with 
the statement that the filter is certified to reduce lead) (see EPA’s “Consumer Tool for 
Identifying POU Drinking Water Filters Certified to Reduce Lead” and filter 
certifications for Newark, New Jersey in Lytle et al. 2020); 
• 
general information about the approximate cost (while also addressing customer 
inability to pay), installation procedures, maintenance, and replacement schedule for 
each type of filter; 
• 
limitations and/or challenges posed by these filters (e.g., the potential difficulty of 
installing faucet-mount filters, the potential for bacterial growth in the filters under 
certain conditions (Wu et al. 2017, Williams 2017), the potential suboptimal 
effectiveness of the filters in waters with uncommon water chemistries and/or 
uncommon lead service line scale formations (Lytle et al. 2020)); 
• 
solutions to those limitations and/or challenges (e.g., using a pitcher-style filter when 
faucet-mount filters cannot be easily installed, flushing stagnant water out of filters 
every morning (Williams 2017), verifying the effectiveness of filters following 
installation (Lytle et al. 2020), notifying and working with one’s water utility if filters 
fail to remove lead); 
• 
performance characteristics of faucet-mount versus pitcher-style filters per EPA’s 
Benton Harbor, MI water filter study (Tully et al. 2023; in this study, pitcher-style 
filters that met the NSF/ANSI 53 lead reduction standard (<5 ppb) were more likely to 
have detectable lead in the filter effluent compared to faucet-mount filters); 
• 
information about devices that can offer additional layers of protection as a 
complement to activated carbon filters (e.g., reverse osmosis filters) or that can be 
used instead of activated carbon filters (e.g., water distillers), and 

 
20
• 
strong warnings about the limitations of point-of-entry filters, under-sink filters, and 
all other filters certified to remove lead that are not designed for point-of-use 
installation. This is especially important as in many cities – including Flint, MI and 
Washington, DC – residents install such filters thinking that they offer them full 
protection from lead in water, when they do not.  
 
We believe that EPA, as the agency tasked with implementing the Safe Drinking Water Act 
(SDWA) and ensuring tap water is safe for human consumption, has a moral obligation to arm 
consumers with complete and accurate information about the ins and outs of water filtration 
for lead removal. Not doing so condemns even more generations to the health harms of this 
entirely preventable scourge. 
 
 

 
21
Table 1. Highlights of deficiencies in EPA’s recommendations to consumers for protecting themselves 
from lead in water  
 
 
 
Overlooks 
and/or 
contradicts 
relevant 
peer-
reviewed 
science 
 
Contains misleading 
and/or incomplete 
information 
 
Places unrealistic, 
unsustainable, and/or 
questionable 
expectations on 
consumers 
 
Perpetuates 
false 
assurances 
of water 
safety and/or 
of consumer 
ability to 
achieve such 
safety 
 
 
Fails to 
disclose 
measures 
known to be 
more 
effective at 
protecting 
consumer 
health 
Rec 1: “Have your water 
tested.” 
Re the 
inherent 
variability in 
lead release 
Misleads re the 
connection between LCR 
compliance and water 
safety 
 
Stays silent on the 
potential cost of lead-in-
water testing (whether 
this testing is done 
through one’s water utility 
or an independent, 
certified lab)  
Re the cost of testing, if it 
is not covered by one’s 
water utility and/or if one 
wants to test one’s water 
using a sampling protocol 
that is more thorough 
than the sampling 
protocol offered by one’s 
water utility  
 
 
Rec 2: “Learn if you have a lead service line.” 
Re the 
inadequacy of 
resident-led 
“scratch” or 
“magnet” 
testing for 
identifying all 
lead (and 
galvanized 
iron/steel) 
components 
across the 
entire length 
of a service 
line  
Misleads re the multiple – 
lead-bearing and non-
lead-bearing – materials 
that can make up a 
service line 
 
Misleads re the 
complexities, challenges, 
and costs associated with 
obtaining reliable 
information about the 
plumbing materials along 
the entire length of one’s 
service line 
 
Stays silent on steps 
consumers might want to 
take to verify their water 
utility claims re the 
material of their service 
line 
Re relying on one’s water 
utility for complete and 
accurate information 
about the plumbing 
materials along the entire 
length of one’s service line 
 
Re the cost of hiring a 
licensed plumber  
 
 

 
22
 
 
Overlooks 
and/or 
contradicts 
relevant 
peer-
reviewed 
science 
 
Contains misleading 
and/or incomplete 
information 
 
Places unrealistic, 
unsustainable, and/or 
questionable 
expectations on 
consumers 
 
Perpetuates 
false 
assurances 
of water 
safety and/or 
of consumer 
ability to 
achieve such 
safety 
 
 
Fails to 
disclose 
measures 
known to be 
more 
effective at 
protecting 
consumer 
health 
Rec 3: “Run your water.” 
Re the 
unreliability of 
flushing for 
health-
protective 
purposes 
 
Re the 
scientific 
difficulty – if 
not 
impossibility – 
of establishing 
health-
protective 
community-
wide “flushing 
times.” 
Misleads re the ability of 
flushing to reliably 
reduce/eliminate lead in 
water 
Re flushing taps before 
drinking/cooking 
 
 
 
 
Rec 4: “Learn about construction 
in your neighborhood.” 
Re premise 
plumbing’s 
ability to 
release higher 
levels of lead 
due to 
physical 
disturbances  
Misleads re lead service 
lines being the only lead-
bearing plumbing 
component that can 
release higher levels of 
lead due to physical 
disturbances 
 
[Likely misleads re 
construction/maintenance 
work being the only factor 
that can cause physical 
disturbances of lead-
bearing plumbing]  
Re monitoring 
construction/maintenance 
work in one’s 
neighborhood 
 
 
Rec 5: “Use cold 
water.” 
Re lead 
contamination 
in cold water 
 
Re the health 
risks of boiling 
lead-
contaminated 
water 
Re the safety of unfiltered 
cold water 
 
Re the safety of unfiltered 
and boiled water 
Re avoiding hot water to 
mix infant formula and/or 
make meals/drinks, when 
one relies on this practice 
 
 

 
23
 
 
Overlooks 
and/or 
contradicts 
relevant 
peer-
reviewed 
science 
 
Contains misleading 
and/or incomplete 
information 
 
Places unrealistic, 
unsustainable, and/or 
questionable 
expectations on 
consumers 
 
Perpetuates 
false 
assurances 
of water 
safety and/or 
of consumer 
ability to 
achieve such 
safety 
 
 
Fails to 
disclose 
measures 
known to be 
more 
effective at 
protecting 
consumer 
health 
Rec 6: “Clean your 
aerator.” 
 
Stays silent on the nature 
and health risks of lead 
particles 
 
Stays silent on the 
potential cost involved  
Re the ease and potential 
cost of aerator cleaning 
 
 
Rec 7: “Use your filter properly.” 
 
Fails to highlight the 
benefits of lead-removing 
filters – in buildings with 
and without lead service 
lines – over and above 
less effective measures 
 
Fails to mention 
important information 
about lead-removing filter 
options, effectiveness, 
cost, 
limitations/challenges, 
solutions 
Fails to provide 
information necessary for 
informed decision-making 
about lead-removing 
filters and proper filter 
installation, operation, 
and maintenance 
 
Fails to provide 
information about health-
protective alternatives to 
lead-removing filters and 
their cost 
 
 
 
This table highlights limitations in the seven EPA recommendations to consumers who are “concerned about lead in their drinking 
water.” Two recommendations (Rec 1 and Rec 5, marked in red) contradict current scientific understanding about the nature of 
lead release from plumbing and encourage the adoption of measures likely to prolong consumer exposures to lead in water. One 
recommendation (Rec 3, marked in red) can, in fact, increase lead-in-water levels, placing consumers at higher risk of exposure. 
Three recommendations (Rec 2, Rec 4, and Rec 6) promote measures that are neither always easy to execute, nor as health 
protective as other available measures (e.g., filtration, bottled water use, water distillation). And the one recommendation (Rec 7) 
that is generally effective at preventing lead-in-water exposures fails to reinforce the advantages – in terms of accessibility, 
effectiveness, environmental sustainability, and cost – of the measure it promotes. Lastly, none of the recommendations: a) 
disclose that lead in water is ubiquitous in buildings with and without a lead service line and, therefore, should concern every 
consumer, or b) discuss who must bear the cost of measures that involve (or may involve) the purchasing of materials and/or the 
hiring of professional services. All these deficiencies raise serious environmental justice and equity concerns. 
 
 

 
24
Appendix 1. Recommendations presented at EPA’s October 17, 2023 webinar, “Engaging in EPA’s 
Upcoming Proposed LCRI Drinking Water Regulatory Process” 
 
 
 
 

 
25
Appendix 2. For over 30 years EPA, as well as water utilities and other authoritative bodies (e.g., municipal 
and state agencies), have been delivering deficient recommendations to consumers for protecting 
themselves from lead in water. Below are four illustrations from the Washington Post, although similar 
recommendations appear in newspapers from other cities.30 Illustration 1 shows how, at times, erroneous 
governmental assumptions about the contribution of lead-contaminated water to blood lead levels in 
children have delayed the protection of children with elevated blood lead levels from ongoing ingestion of 
contaminated water, even when this water is the children’s sole source of exposure to lead. 
 
 
Illustration 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 For example, a) Anonymous. 1989. Toxic Hazards Can Make Your Home Dangerous. Chicago Sun-Times (July 7), b) 
Delgado, D. 1988. OUC Running Random Tests on Lead Content in Water. Orlando Sentinel (May 12), c) Lore, D. 1988. 
Water Customers Cautioned About Dangers of Lead Pipes. Columbus Dispatch (February 28). 

 
26
Illustration 2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
27
Illustration 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Illustration 4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
28
Appendix 3. We provide relevant slides from a 2013 Power Point presentation to the Public Health Law 
Research program of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation as well as an outline of preliminary results 
submitted in 2015 to the National Drinking Water Advisory Council (NDWAC) Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) 
work group. These documents report on the findings of qualitative research in Washington, DC and 
Providence, RI, which revealed that some property owners refused to consent to private-side lead service 
line replacement because a one-time test at one of their home taps showed lead-in-water levels below 15 
parts per billion – a reading which assured them that the water at their home did not pose a health risk 
and, therefore, did not justify a costly remedy. 

Homeowner Decision-Making
About LSLR Under the LCR
Yanna Lambrinidou, PhD
Parents for Nontoxic Alternatives
Washington, DC
Ralph Scott, BA
Parents for Nontoxic Alternatives
Washington, DC

Washington, DC
Providence, RI
Total
Full LSLR
18
1
19
Partial LSLR
13
7
20
Total
31
8
39
Washington, DC
Providence, RI
Total
White/Caucasian
17
6
23
Black/African 
American
10
10
Hispanic/Latino
2
2
4
Other
2
2
Total
31
8
39
Demographics
Type of LSLR 
Homeowner Interviews 

Result 1: Why do most homeowners decline full LSLR 
despite their water utility’s LAL exceedance?
My water 
has lead
The lead 
comes 
from my 
LSL
My utility 
will 
replace 
only part 
of my 
LSL
I don’t 
want lead 
in my 
water
I will 
replace 
the 
remaining 
part of my 
LSL
Preliminary Results

My water 
has lead
The lead 
comes 
from my 
LSL
My utility 
will 
replace 
only part 
of my 
LSL
I don’t 
want lead 
in my 
water
I will 
replace 
the 
remaining 
part of my 
LSL
• 50% - no pre-test
• 15% - no results
• 15% - results <LAL
Is there a lead-in-
water problem at my 
particular house?
Recalled estimate range: $1,000-$7,000
If the utility were to cover the cost:
• 80% - would agree to a full replacement
• 20% - would agree to a full replacement if it 
were advisable for preventing known (rather 
than speculative) health harm
Given the cost, I must 
weigh all relevant 
factors in my decision.
Cost concern across 
income levels

COST
PERCEPTION OF LOW RISK
• Reliance on alternative protective methods 
(e.g., filters, flushing, bottled water)
NO SIGNIFICANT LEAD 
PROBLEM TO BEGIN WITH
• Water test results in the past 
showed low lead levels
• Water test results after the partial 
replacement showed low lead 
levels
NO VULNERABLE 
POPULATIONS TO PROTECT
• No children in the house
RISK OF PROPERTY DAMAGE
• Disruption and potential damage to property 
is unnecessary and might be costly

Result 2a: Why do higher-income homeowners 
choose a partial LSLR? 
Partial LSLR with
annual income > $100,000
N = 7
PRELIMINARY EMERGING THEMES
Common motivations for partial LSLR:
• Cost of full LSLR
• Avoidance of potential physical disruption
• No children in the house
• Perception of low risk
• Water tests <LAL
• Not drinking unfiltered water
• Short length (and threat) of remaining LSL
• Belief that any spikes would be short-lived

2.6.15 
 
 
Empirical and Legal Evaluation of Public Health Protection Under the Federal LCR 
Public Health Law Research Program, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation 
 
Qualitative Research 
 
Yanna Lambrinidou, PhD 
 
 
Preliminary findings (please do not quote or circulate without permission): 
 
→ Homeowners in all income brackets mentioned cost as the main impediment to 
replacing the private portion of their LSL: 
→ 80% would opt for full LSLR if the cost were covered 
→ Remaining 20% would opt for full LSLR if the cost were covered and a 
full LSLR was known to be definitively better than a partial LSLR 
→ Common factors that reinforced homeowner decision to opt out of full LSLR: 
→ Belief that the water in one’s specific home was safe (based on test results 
<15 ppb) 
→ No children in the house 
→ Fear of costly damage to one’s property 
→ Perception of low-risk due to use of other precautionary measures (e.g., 
filters, bottled water, etc.) 
→ Homeowners who had a partial LSL replacement characterized their utility’s 
informational materials about LSL replacement as: 
→ Focusing on the logistics of the construction 
→ Lacking consumer-friendly information and/or helpful facts about the pros 
and cons of full versus partial replacement (50% said that clear messaging 
about the short- and long-term health risks of partials would have 
convinced them to opt for a full replacement or, at least, to take the option 
more seriously) 
→ Homeowners who opted for full LSLR (all in highest income bracket), did so for 
reasons that were largely independent from utility messaging: 
→ Discounted rate 
→ Health protection due to general awareness about lead’s toxicity 
→ Resale value of home 
→ Getting rid of entire lead source once and for all, and replacing aging pipes 
proactively

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-2269 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
From: Angela Lee <angelal@care2team.com>
Sent: Thursday, February 22, 2024 3:09 PM
To: LCRI <LCRI@epa.gov>; Eric Rardin <eric@care2team.com>
Subject: Submitting comments for EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding 
whether to open attachments or click on provided links. 
Attn to: Michael Goldberg, Standards and Risk Management Division, Office of Ground Water and 
Drinking Water, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Hi Mr. Goldberg, my name is Angie and I work for an online petition site. We have users who submitted 
comments for EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0036, which we set up to deliver electronically. However we just 
learned the electronic delivery did not work, and since the comment period ended earlier this month we 
cannot attempt redelivery that way. 
In the past I've been able to submit a csv with the signer's names directly to the EPA, is it at all possible 
for this docket? The gesture would be much appreciated with our online community of advocates. 
I look forward to your response!
Best,
Angie 
--
Angie Lee 
Senior Director, Client Services & Growth Marketing | Care2 Inc.
angelal@care2team.com
preferred pronouns: she/her
--
Angie Lee 
Senior Director, Client Services & Growth Marketing | Care2 Inc.
angelal@care2team.com
preferred pronouns: she/her

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801-0820 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801 ---
The Honorable Michael Regan  
 
 
 
 
 
February 5, 2024 
Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
 
For electronic delivery to the docket via https://www.regulations.gov/  
  
RE: National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for Lead and Copper: Improvements (Docket 
Id#: EPA-HQ-OW-2022-0801)  
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
On behalf of the New England Water Works Association (NEWWA), in conjunction with the 
state associations Green Mountain Water Environment Association, Maine Water Utilities 
Association, Massachusetts Water Works Association, New Hampshire Water Works 
Association, and Rhode Island Water Works Association, we are pleased to provide the 
following comments to the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Lead and Copper 
Rule Improvements (LCRI).  Our organizations represent drinking water professionals 
throughout the New England states.  
Our organizations applaud the U.S. EPA for its efforts in developing a rule that will provide 
important, positive changes that will lead to further reduction of lead in the nation’s drinking 
water. Doing so will involve substantial, collaborative efforts between state and federal agencies, 
utilities, and the general public, where all will need to work together and conduct due diligence 
to minimize lead exposure. We recognize that while significant progress has been made over the 
past several decades in reducing children’s exposure to lead in their environment, even small 
exposures may result in detrimental health effects. The Lead and Copper Rule Improvements 
offer the opportunity to make further progress in reducing potential lead exposure from drinking 
water.   

2 
 
Upon review, our organizations offer the following comments to the below key items within the 
proposed rule, and endorse the much more detailed comments being offered by the national 
water associations. In addition to our comments on the substance of the proposed rule, we wish 
to focus your initial attention on an important issue of rule scheduling and compliance that 
should be resolved immediately.  
EPA must immediately provide regulatory clarity and certainty about LCRR requirements 
and deadlines.  We support EPA’s approach of eliminating confusion and unnecessary 
expenditures of resources by deferring compliance with many aspects of the LCRR until the 
compliance date of LCRI.  However, until the LCRI is finalized, water systems have no 
assurance of what will be in it, and there is concern that even if we assume that the final rule will 
contain the deferral of LCRR deadlines, any delay in issuance leaves systems vulnerable to non-
compliance. NEWWA will be providing training and guidance on the LCRI in upcoming courses 
and at our spring and fall conferences. At present, we cannot in good faith provide specific 
advice on whether systems should continue to assume compliance with LCRR by October 2024.  
COMMENTS ON THE LCRI PROPOSAL:  
The following sections provide specific recommendations on the proposed rule provisions and 
responses to some of the related EPA requests for comments. A number of NEWWA members 
participated in the development of multiple national water association’s comments, and we urge 
you to carefully consider those as well. 
LCR AS A TREATMENT TECHNIQUE:  
NEWWA supports the continued use of the Safe Drinking Water Act’s (SDWA’s) Treatment 
Technique framework for reducing the risk of lead in drinking water.  
LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS:  
EPA has overstepped its authority in saying that access equals control: NEWWA supports 
the timely full removal of all lead service lines (LSLs1). However, we have serious concerns 
that EPA has overstepped its authority under the Safe Drinking Water Act.  EPA has presented 
contorted logic in attempting to demonstrate that having an owner allow access equals actual 
control. We do not agree that this is the case. Many of our water systems are actively working 
with their customers to voluntarily replace service lines on private property, often with 
substantial local funding, but the emphasis in those programs is that participation is voluntary. 
Water systems are not asserting that they have control, but rather are requesting access from the 
owner who has control over their property. Water systems do not control customer-owned 
portions of their plumbing and therefore cannot force customers to remove lead fixtures or 
plumbing materials without major changes to terms and condition agreements and methods to 
address legal liability implications.  
 
1 Unless specifically stated, for simplicity we are referring to both lead service lines and galvanized requiring 
replacement as LSL.  

3 
 
Federal Funding is Essential: EPA must make additional targeted funding available if 
communities across the nation are to succeed in eliminating LSLs within a decade. NEWWA 
members have serious concerns that the federal government’s financial commitment falls far 
short of the funds needed to complete the job nationwide, and that much of EPA’s public rhetoric 
on funding deliberately understates what a small fraction of the total cost will be covered by 
current federal commitments. Failure of the federal government to step up and provide adequate 
resources will either result in communities being unable to meet the deadlines in the LCRI, or 
will affect their ability to meet other regulatory requirements and system maintenance needs.  
Proposed PFAS standards, suggested changes in the disinfection byproducts rules, and concerns 
about aged infrastructure will all require attention and funds at many of our member’s systems. 
Many systems are already challenged by existing state rules for PFAS, and will be further 
challenged if EPA finalizes its PFAS rule as proposed. New England has many of the oldest 
water systems in the U.S., and much of the oldest infrastructure in need of the most resources is 
in our poorest communities.  EPA’s own estimates2 of need for Drinking Water State Revolving 
Fund-eligible infrastructure projects that are necessary over the 20-year period for water systems 
in New England to continue to provide safe drinking water to the public exceeds $28 billion. 
With respect to cost estimates to address the replacement of lead service lines, EPA estimated in 
the same report that “Based on the findings from the 7th DWINSA, the total projected number of 
LSLs in the United States is 9.2 million for the states, U.S. territories, Puerto Rico, and the 
District of Columbia…. The estimated cost to replace these LSLs ranges from approximately $50 
billion to $80 billion (2021 dollars).”  This estimate does not account for the cost to replace 
Galvanized Requiring Replacement lines.  Unless the federal government increases its support, 
the burden of resolving the decades or centuries old issue of lead service lines will be borne by 
our most vulnerable ratepayers. 
Accelerated Replacement and CCT: NEWWA supports EPA’s use of incentives to 
accelerate LSL replacement, particularly the provision to defer construction or re-optimization of 
corrosion control treatment if a system can replace all its LSLs within 5 years of exceeding the 
proposed new lead Action Level. Both the LCRR and the LCRI recognize that lead service lines 
represent the most significant source of lead when they are present, and emphasize this by 
requiring that salvaged lead service lines be included in any evaluation of corrosion control.  
Requiring a focus on modifying carefully balanced treatment objectives, even as LSLs are 
bringing replaced, is inappropriate. NEWWA believes that EPA has struck an appropriate 
balance with this provision of encouraging that LSL replacement be conducted faster.  
Ten Year Deadlines: EPA should separate the metrics for replacing LSLs from those for 
resolving lead status unknown services. The current combined 3-year rolling average metrics 
for monitoring compliance with LSL replacement and resolution of unknowns are unworkable, 
and will almost inevitably result in unavoidable non-compliance for many if not most water 
systems. Systems with many more unknowns than confirmed LSLs, which appears to be the case 
for many systems in the preliminary inventories we have seen, will quickly exhaust the pool of 
 
2DRINKING WATER INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT 7TH REPORT TO CONGRESS – September 
2023:  https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-09/Seventh%20DWINSA_September2023_Final.pdf 

4 
 
LSLs to replace. And even if that were not an issue (for example, in a system with mostly 
confirmed LSLs and relatively few unknowns), the 3-year rolling average may discourage efforts 
to initially replace LSLs quickly. Replacing or resolving more than 10 percent for several early 
years will prevent compliance in later years with the proposed 3-year rolling average mechanism.  
NEWWA recommends that EPA revise this requirement by instead requiring a cumulative 
10 percent average beginning in year three for replacement of LSLs and a separate cumulative 10 
percent average for resolving unknowns.  
Counting Refusals: NEWWA also recommends that the final rule clarify how homes with 
LSLs where the owner has refused access to their private property and declined participation in 
the system’s LSL replacement program are accounted for in progress reporting. It is clear that 
some owners will simply refuse access, even at no cost, leaving some properties with a LSL in 
place. EPA’s proposal provides an appropriate provision that refusal after four attempts indicates 
that the property is not within the control of the water system. What is left unclear is whether a 
system can count that towards its annual 10 percent progress, and more importantly, whether the 
system would be in compliance at the end of 10 years (or five in the case where a system is 
availing itself of the incentivized deferral of corrosion control treatment provision). The final 
rule must make it clear that the replacement obligations are only applicable to those LSLs where 
the owner has allowed access.   
Partial Replacements: NEWWA supports the provision to allow partial replacements when 
they are conducted as part of an emergency repair or in coordination with planned infrastructure 
work. While the proposed exclusion of partial replacements during planned infrastructure work 
relative to LSL replacement projects is intended to prevent systems from intentionally 
conducting partial replacements, it does not account for customer refusal and further impedes 
lead removal. If a system is implementing a LSL replacement project in a neighborhood and a 
customer refuses to participate, prohibiting a partial replacement prevents the removal of the 
public-portion of the LSL and would require remobilization and additional costs to conduct the 
replacement in the future. EPA should remove this prohibition or at a minimum include language 
permitting partial replacements in these cases. 
SYSTEMS WITH MULTIPLE ACTION LEVEL EXCEEDANCES:  
Requiring filters: EPA should revisit the requirement to offer filters to all customers if a 
system has multiple Action Level (AL) exceedances.  With the lower proposed AL and the 
changes in sampling and reporting protocols, many systems will likely exceed the AL. Even in 
our older region, for many of the systems that have lead service lines, they account for less than 
one percent of the total number of service lines in the system.  If filters are needed at all, the 
focus should be on those buildings with LSLs.  Providing filters to buildings without a LSL will 
confuse the public and dilute the focus on replacing LSLs where they exist.  Providing them to 
buildings with LSLs could reduce the owner’s impetus to replace the LSL. EPA should 
eliminate this provision in its entirety, or at a minimum focus the offer on only those buildings 
with LSLs. 

5 
 
Availability of certified filters:  There are likely to be substantial issues with availability of 
appropriately certified filters if this becomes a nationwide mandate. We have already heard from 
systems that are proactively making filters available as part of LSL investigations and 
replacements that they are having difficulty purchasing even lots of a few hundred filters, let 
alone the thousands that would be needed for larger systems if this requirement were to be 
implemented.  
If EPA chooses to retain any part of this requirement, it must clarify what the term “make 
filters available” means in practice, as the preamble states that the system must only make them 
available at “no direct cost” for low-income customers which implies that for all others, they 
could be offered to the customer at cost3.  EPA should consider the feasibility of creating a 
national program, similar to the COVID test kit program, where EPA would directly provide 
certified filters to consumers.  This would simplify the requirement and make it nationally 
uniform. 
We also believe there will need to be an aggressive public outreach campaign conducted by EPA 
on the proper maintenance of POU filters.  Filters need to be regularly changed to ensure that 
water quality is maintained.  Our members are concerned that improperly maintained filters 
could lead to unintended negative public health impacts due to biological growth, etc.      
SAMPLING AND RESULTS REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:  
Rejecting inappropriate samples: EPA should further clarify when a system can reject an 
inappropriately collected sample. The rule preamble discusses ways a system can identify and 
avoid analyzing inappropriately collected samples, but there is no parallel rule. EPA should 
either provide additional language in the rule itself, or at a minimum develop explicit 
guidance that buildings that are not currently occupied or samples with stagnation times in 
excess of 12 hours should be discarded and new samples collected.  
Sample reporting requirements:  Requiring that sample results be provided to the sampler 
within three calendar days presents systems with the substantial risk of inadvertent and 
potentially unavoidable non-compliance.  Analysis and reporting of results typically takes 
several weeks from when the sample is collected - one or two additional days to provide the 
results is not a crisis. Monday holidays and shortened Friday work hours mean that when results 
are received on a Friday, there may well be no one to receive and respond to the data during that 
entire three-calendar-day period.  Water system staff have many varied responsibilities to 
manage their systems actively and safely; there is not a dedicated staff person awaiting results, 
ready to jump into action to immediately generate and distribute letters. EPA should change the 
rule to allow at a minimum, 5 business days and more ideally 7 business days, and limit 
rapid data transmittal to samples over the Action Level, retaining the current 30-day 
notification for all other samples.  Requiring as EPA proposes in the LCRI that all samples 
receive rush delivery notification defeats the purpose of quickly delivering elevated results.  
When a result is over the AL, water system staff should be able to prioritize directly connecting 
 
3 This requirement is clearly distinguished for the language related to replacement of LSL or disturbances of LSL 
which requires that the system “provide filters and replacement cartridges.”  

6 
 
with and educating those samplers (and beginning the process of working with the resident to 
begin the required Distribution System and Site Assessment).  
Sampling schedules: EPA should consider staggering implementation of standard monitoring. 
In prior rules, EPA has staggered certain requirements for monitoring with larger systems going 
first, and smaller systems staggered behind.  This allows for some lessons to be learned, and 
mitigates overload of laboratory capacity and primacy agency attention.  
Sample Collection Frequency: Systems with no LSLs with current sampling results below the 
AL that have qualified for reduced monitoring for many consecutive years should have a means 
to continue on reduced monitoring as deemed appropriate by the Primacy Agency. 
INVENTORY REQUIREMENTS:   
EPA should remove fire services and other non-potable service lines from inventory and 
replacement requirements if there are appropriate administrative safeguards to prevent potable 
uses. Similarly, there has been confusion about system obligations for piping downstream of the 
recognized service line.  A service line is clearly defined as connecting the system’s main with 
the building.  Additional piping connecting buildings, or connecting buildings with 
appurtenances on private property are not service lines. It should not be the responsibility of the 
water system to try to decipher materials beyond the service line, in facilities such as trailer parks 
or office or condominium complexes.  
 
EPA should remove service lines serving abandoned properties from inventory and 
replacement requirements if there are appropriate administrative safeguards to assure 
construction of appropriate service line materials prior to the property receiving service. If the 
system has the appropriate administrative safeguards in place, this serves no useful purpose and 
diverts resources from achieving LSL replacement at occupied locations.  
 
EPA should retain the LCRR requirement that systems must only replace lead connectors as 
they are encountered.  EPA should not include the replacement of connectors in the mandatory 
LSL replacement requirements because in many cases connector material records are not 
available, and field investigating all connector material in the absence of records would not be 
feasible or practical for most systems. Lead connectors should only be included in service line 
inventories for the purpose of identifying potential sampling locations, and only where existing 
records indicate their presence.  
Galvanized service lines: While NEWWA supports the inclusion of galvanized service lines 
downstream of a LSL in the inventory and replacement mandates of the proposed rule, we do 
not support the inclusion of those galvanized services that ever were downstream of a LSL or 
are currently downstream of unknown service lines in the inventory and replacement mandates. 
Including them in the mandate increases the total cost of replacement programs, with limited 
benefit. In addition, as EPA is requiring that all unknowns be resolved within 10 years, any 
galvanized service lines downstream of unknowns will be either identified as needing 
replacement because the upstream line was positively identified as lead, or the upstream service 
line will be positively identified as not lead. In the case of the latter, EPA should remove its 
requirement for systems to demonstrate that the upstream portion was never a LSL, as this is not 

7 
 
possible given the previously unknown nature of the material, and instead reclassify the service 
line as non-lead and remove it from the replacement pool.  
Use of state laws or regulation prohibiting lead: EPA should be explicit that service lines 
without recorded material can  be classed as non-lead if state law or regulation extant at the time 
of construction prohibited the use of lead.  For example, the 1926 Maine State Law Lead Pipe 
ban should be allowed to qualify homes built in or after 1927 to be classified as Non-Lead.  
 
Simplifying Inventory Updates:  Systems with online inventories should be able to simply 
notify their state primacy agency annually with summary statistics on any changes and provide 
instructions on how to access their online inventory. There is no need for these systems to 
annually re-submit the complete inventory to the state.  
 
Validation Requirements: EPA should reconsider the content and timing of the proposed 
inventory validation requirement. The validation requirement will represent a distraction and 
unnecessary resource drag for many systems. The requirements are overly prescriptive, and the 
deadline overlaps with the most important time when systems will be working to make real 
progress at LSL replacement. Validation should only be necessary if the state primacy agency 
finds that the methods used to develop the inventory are unreliable. States should be given the 
latitude to review and approve validation work done prior to the LCRI implementation date.  
NEWWA also recommends that the validation language explicitly state that only one point on 
the private side and one point on the public side need validation.  EPA should also state that 
service lines that have been identified by a record on one side of the service and physical 
inspection on the other side do not need to be included in the validation pool.  
ELIMINATION OF THE TRIGGER LEVEL AND LOWERING THE ACTION LEVEL  
NEWWA supports the efforts that EPA has made to slightly simplify the rule by eliminating 
the Trigger Level.  However, EPA has failed to adequately analyze and document the 
synergistic impacts of lowering the Action Level, changes to the sampling site selection focusing 
on LSLs, and new sampling and reporting protocols using the highest of 1st and 5th liter samples. 
These proposed changes combined with the 24-hour public notice requirement will do 
unnecessary damage to public confidence as more systems exceed the Action Level, not because 
water quality is worse, but because the goal posts and game rules have been changed.  
OUTREACH AND EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS:  
Flexibility to improve coordinated outreach: EPA should carefully review all outreach 
activities for consistency, and design them as an integrated public education program. The 
outreach requirements must allow sufficient flexibility so that they can be thoughtfully 
integrated into a cohesive whole, helping consumers make good choices rather than 
unnecessarily scaring or confusing them. As currently proposed, customers in systems over the 
Action Level would receive the following outreach during a 12-month period:  
1. Two consumer confidence reports, with additional information on LSLs;  

8 
 
2. an annual notice that they have a LSL or unknown (perhaps 4 additional times if their 
street is in a current LSL replacement program);  
3. exposure to the 24 hour Public Notice, and  
4. a lead education brochure with information on LSLs and replacement efforts (potentially 
twice that year).   
As part of that cohesive education program, for systems with LSLs, EPA should ensure that 
the 24-hour Public Notice template emphasizes the following:  
1. That the samples were taken at homes with LSLs,  
2. That customers would have received information about the presence of a LSL or 
unknown, and  
3. A focus on actions the system and residents can take to replace  LSLs and identify 
unknowns.  
The goal should be to encourage consumer action to permanently reduce their potential exposure 
through drinking water by replacing their LSL if they have one.   
The current 60-day delivery requirement should be retained for Public Education after an 
Action Level exceedance. Especially with all the lead-related outreach efforts described above, 
including the new 24-hour Public Notice, there is no need to unnecessarily rush delivery of the 
public education brochures.  
CORROSION CONTROL TREATMENT: 
Corrosion control treatment: Any required changes to treatment and water quality parameters 
needs to be system specific. A one size fits all approach to establishing Optimum Corrosion 
Control Treatment presents real risk to what is often a carefully crafted balancing of objectives 
for simultaneous compliance. Rule text and guidance must make this clear.  
 
SIMPLIFYING REQUIREMENTS FOR SYSTEMS WITH FEW OR NO LSLs: 
 
EPA should consider simplifying the compliance and reporting path for systems with no LSLs or 
unknowns. If a system has no identified LSLs or GRR, and no specific indication that they were 
used historically, there should be no need to conduct extensive potholing or other validation 
efforts, nor should service lines currently inventoried as unknown require risk mitigation efforts 
after disturbances. In cases where there are no known LSLs and no documented history that any 
had ever been installed, the likelihood of unknowns being lead is slight, and the primacy agency 
should have the flexibility to reduce the level of required effort.  
Systems with no LSLs and unknowns or connector updates should be able to submit a statement 
to their Primacy Agency to certify that no inventory updates are currently required.  
SCHOOL SAMPLING:  
NEWWA agrees that EPA has offered some additional flexibility for systems that have worked 
with schools and/or childcare facilities on lead testing, but believes the changes do not go far 
enough.  Primacy agencies should have the flexibility to exempt (or reduce the scope of testing 

9 
 
for) systems with recent past or ongoing school and childcare facility lead testing programs, even 
if they are not exactly congruent with the specific requirements in the proposed rule.  
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to comment on this complex and important effort to further 
reduce potential lead exposures to consumers from drinking water and premise plumbing.  
 
Kirsten King, CEO 
New England Water Works Association, Inc. 
Representing 2,000 Water Professionals Across New England 
 
Joseph Duncan, President 
Green Mountain Water Environment Association 
Representing 450 Vermont Water Professionals 
 
 
Nicole Pellenz, Executive Director 
Maine Water Utilities Association 
Representing 1,600 Maine Water Professionals 
 
Jennifer Pederson, Executive Director 
Massachusetts Water Works Association, Inc. 
Representing 1,400 Massachusetts Water Professionals 
 
Samuel Currier, President and CEO 
New Hampshire Water Works Association, Inc. 
Representing 300 New Hampshire Water Professionals 
 
Jessica Lynch, President 
Rhode Island Water Works Association 
Representing 150 Rhode Island Water Professionals
