
--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0248 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
® 
Board of Directors & Officers 
President, Mary Anne Nelson,  
Surface & Wastewater Division 
Administrator, Idaho Department of 
Environmental Quality 
 
Vice President, Amanda Vincent,  
Environmental Scientist Manager, 
Louisiana Department of 
Environmental Quality 
 
Treasurer, Andrew Gavin,  
Deputy Executive Director, 
Susquehanna River Basin Commission 
 
Secretary, Karen Mogus, Deputy 
Director, Division of Water Quality, 
California State Water Resources 
Control Board 
 
Past President, Andrew Gavin,  
Deputy Executive Director, 
Susquehanna River Basin Commission 
 
Regional Representatives 
Region I    - Tracy Wood (NH) 
Region II    - Jennifer Feltis (NJ)   
Region III    - Jeff Seltzer (DC) 
Region IV    - Jennifer Dodd (TN) 
Region V    - Adrian Stocks (WI) 
Region VI    - Shelly Lemon (NM) 
Region VII   - Lori McDaniel (IA) 
Region VIII  - Jennifer Zygmunt (WY) 
Region IX    - Karen Mogus (CA)  
Region X    - Randy Bates (AK) 
Interstates - Evelyn Powers (IEC)  
 
Executive Director & General Counsel  
Julia Anastasio 
 
1634 I Street, NW, Ste. # 750,  
Washington, DC  20006 
 
TEL:  202-756-0600 
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
 
 
 
August 3rd, 2023 
 
Sara Hisel McCoy 
Director, Standards and Health Protection Division 
EPA Office of Water 
 
Via electronic mail and Regulations.gov 
 
Re: ACWA Comments in Response to Proposed Federal 
Baseline WQS for Indian Reservations 
 
Dear Director McCoy, 
 
The Association of Clean Water Administrators (“ACWA”) is the 
independent, nonpartisan, national organization of state, interstate, 
and territorial water programs (“states”) that, on a daily basis, 
implement the water quality programs of the Clean Water Act 
(“CWA”), including the development and implementation of Water 
Quality Standards (“WQS”). Under the tenets of cooperative 
federalism, states, authorized Tribes, and EPA (“the parties”) are co-
regulators that jointly implement the CWA. States appreciate the 
opportunity to comment on the proposed Federal Baseline Water 
Quality Standards: Tribal Reservations (“the rule”) as well as EPA’s 
engagement with states during the public comment period, 
particularly given the rule’s implications to states. In this letter, 
ACWA first outlines states’ 1  general perspectives and concerns, 
followed by rule text recommendations and implementation 
guidance recommendations. ACWA urges EPA to closely consider 
comments from individual states and Tribes. States directly affected 
by the rule may have further concerns than this letter expresses, while 
some states where the rule may not apply are interested in affects to 
their EPA Region’s CWA programs and, by extension, their own CWA 
programs. 
 
ACWA concurs that WQS are the foundation of pollution controls 
enabled by the CWA and recognizes that efforts to date in assisting 
Tribes to obtain treatment as a state (TAS) authority have been 
insufficient. Waters lacking WQS pose risks to all immediate and 
downstream users, as well as attainment of downstream state WQS. 
In lieu of all Tribes receiving TAS authority or finalizing in-process 
Tribal WQS, the rule intends to provide an interim remedy to 
establish a baseline of protection (“Baseline WQS”), a concept that 
states support. 
 
 
1 Alaska, Idaho, and Oregon abstain from this comment letter. 

 
2 
 
After initial work during 1999’s “core WQS” effort and 2001 proposed rule, in 2015/2016, 
EPA met with 130 Tribes (just under a quarter of federally recognized Tribes), 
promulgated revisions to the TAS attainment process, and generated an Advanced Notice 
of Proposed Rulemaking (“ANPRM”). EPA did not finalize a rule but did lean on those 
consultations with Tribes and states’ feedback to develop the 2023 proposed rule. EPA 
did not work sufficiently or meaningfully with states while developing the current draft of 
the rule. Some states report that their comments to the 2016 ANPRM remain 
unaddressed, and ACWA is concerned that the rule lacks a detailed implementation 
framework necessary to succeed. Some states are especially concerned that EPA is 
asserting authority over what constitutes Indian reservations 2  and trust lands 
inconsistent with the whole of the federal government, and that the rule disincentivizes 
the pursuit of TAS. 
 
States are highly concerned that EPA Regions, already struggling to meet current CWA 
obligations, are tasked with implementing the bulk of the rule. It is unclear whether 
federal and state funding and workforce resources directed at robustly supporting Tribes 
to pursue TAS would be greater or lesser than implementing the rule. Some states have 
recommended the rule take a Region-by-Region approach, rather than waterbody-by-
waterbody, to better manage implementation. After reviewing the rule and questioning 
EPA during two listening sessions during this comment period, it is still unclear to ACWA 
what constitutes applicable trust lands and the rule’s exact applicability as well as how 
EPA will publicly inventory and update that information. The rule does not, as requested 
by Tribes and ACWA, describe all waters to which Baseline WQS would apply and not 
apply. States strongly respect confidentiality related to certain Tribal waters and uses, but 
also wish to discuss among the parties how states can identify applicable waters; where 
and how downstream Tribes and/or Baseline WQS need to be protected; and if proposed 
protections are under- or over-protective of uses, consistent with the WQS framework. 
 
EPA’s WQS responsibilities under the rule do not mirror states’ WQS responsibilities. In 
regulation, states are required3 to hold public hearings when establishing and reviewing 
WQS, designating Outstanding Natural Resource Waters (ONRW), or translating 
narrative criteria. In the rule, EPA holds itself to public notices rather than hearings. In 
practice, EPA Regions and Headquarters increasingly require significant cross-program 
transparency and public engagement from states as they establish or consider numeric 
nutrient criteria, but the rule does not require EPA to meet that bar when developing 
numeric translators for baseline WQS. 40 CFR 131.22(c) describes that EPA, when 
promulgating WQS, shall be held to the “same policies, procedures, analyses, and public 
 
2 40 CFR 131.8 describes TAS requirements to administer WQS “within the borders of Indian reservations.” 
3 Section 303(c)(2)(B) of the CWA requires states to adopt numeric criteria, where available, for all toxic pollutants 
listed pursuant to CWA section 307(a)(1) for which EPA has published S. 304(a) criteria. EPA proposed narrative 
criteria with “narrative translations”; 40 CFR 131.11(a)(2) requires, for toxic pollutants, that where a state adopts 
narrative criteria, the State must provide information identifying the method by which the State intends to regulate 
point discharges of the pollutants based on such narrative criteria. EPA does not propose a specific method in the 
rule, but proposes five options for deriving criteria; 40 CFR 131.6(b) requires States to submit methods used and 
analyses conducted to support WQS revisions. The rule does not provide methods for deriving numeric translators or 
the use and value demonstration for designating waters for traditional and cultural uses. 

 
3 
 
participation requirements established for States...” Nor does the rule’s Economic 
Analysis include costs associated with deriving and implementing numeric nutrient 
criteria, which ACWA anticipates will require significant work by EPA and timely 
coordination with the parties.  
 
According to EPA’s summary of Tribal consultation for the rule4, “some tribal government 
representatives requested that EPA ensure there is a process to address any future 
inconsistencies between state and baseline water quality standards.” ACWA, too, has 
raised this question, and EPA has suggested a process mirroring how two states, or a state 
and Tribe, up and downstream of one another address WQS on a cross-jurisdiction 
waterbody. However, the same scenario under the rule is not analogous given that EPA 
would be resolving a dispute involving WQS and criteria that EPA derived, a glaring 
conflict of interest. That scenario involving a Tribe(s) is not analogous given the federal 
trust responsibility, the sovereign-sovereign relationship between Tribes and EPA, and 
because 40 CFR § 131.7 includes a dispute procedure that only applies to states and 
authorized Tribes (those with TAS).  States request EPA clarify how it can impartially 
address disputes if EPA Regional Administrators are enabled to both establish criteria 
and manage disputes about criteria. Some disputes regarding jurisdictional boundaries 
are ongoing and likely need to be addressed outside the CWA before the rule can be 
implemented with necessary boundary clarity. 
 
ACWA is not taking a position on whether EPA should finalize the rule, but urges EPA to 
work with the parties to craft implementable approaches that meet EPA’s obligations to 
Tribes, uphold Tribes’ sovereign rights during state and federal WQS actions, avoid 
unnecessary burdens on state WQS programs seeking to integrate Baseline WQS, and 
ensure the parties – particularly EPA Regions – can feasibly implement all CWA 
programs despite their timeline and resource constraints. Regarding the rule text relative 
to the objectives of the rule and the CWA, ACWA recommends that EPA: 
• Consider an additional narrative criteria statement specific to nutrients (for 
example, "All waters shall be free from nutrients in concentrations that would cause 
or contribute to impairment of existing or designated uses.”). While the definition of 
nonconventional pollutants under the NPDES program does include nutrients, this 
is not clear based on the rule’s narrative criteria statements.  
• Publish narrative translators for review prior to publishing draft permits. 
• Designate a Public Water Supply (PWS) use where requested, or clearly used by, 
Tribes. EPA is requesting comment on a proposed PWS use throughout applicable 
waters. ACWA believes this could yield unnecessarily stringent or inappropriate 
designations where, for example, groundwater is used for drinking water supply 
rather than a CWA-applicable surface water. 
• Clarify in the rule whether issuing draft permits, rather than finalizing the rule, 
constitutes a final action subject to Endangered Species Act (ESA) consultation. 
 
4 US Environmental Protection Agency. Summary Report of Tribal Consultation and Coordination for the Proposed 
Rule: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations. November, 2021. Accessible at: 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0200  

 
4 
 
• Clarify why the rule contains an ESA-related criterion when EPA has a duty to ESA 
consultation on final actions regardless. 
• Articulate that EPA will consult the affected parties during numeric translator 
development, prior to public review. 
• Clarify whether a Tribe may receive NPDES TAS without WQS TAS. If scenarios 
could arise where a Tribe issues NPDES permits to implement Baseline WQS, EPA 
should specify whether the Agency would publish separate notice of numeric 
translations before the Tribe publishes the draft NPDES permit. 
• Provide the expectation for an EPA Triennial Review of Baseline WQS. 40 CFR 
131.20 (a) and (b) requires states and authorized Tribes, “…at least once every 3 
years, hold public hearings for the purpose of reviewing applicable WQS” … “the 
proposed WQS revisions and supporting analyses shall be made available to the 
public prior.” The rule does not require EPA to follow suit, instead providing for EPA 
to review and update numeric translators as applicable NPDES permits are renewed. 
Assuming a Tribal waterbody has a permitted discharger, renewals occur every five 
years. This will result in less-frequent updates to Baseline protections for Tribal 
waters and, by definition, inconsistency with Environmental Justice5. 
 
Transparent, detailed implementation procedures will be integral to the rule’s success. 
EPA’s 2014 Protection of Downstream Waters in WQS: FAQ document provides some 
relevant information but will need updates to address Baseline WQS. Before finalizing the 
rule, ACWA recommends EPA develop and consult the parties on guidance addressing:  
1. Methods EPA will use for translating narrative criteria, by criteria type (e.g., metals 
vs. nutrients), and clear procedures for EPA prioritizing which of the five narrative 
translator options it will use and when. States recommend that for locations where 
EPA-approved state WQS apply to waters upstream or downstream of Tribal waters 
and support uses, Option 3, existing state WQS (see Table 1 in the rule) be default. 
This aligns with the fifth element of the rule’s narrative criteria, which requires, “all 
waters maintain a level of water quality at their pour points to downstream waters.” 
2. How Baseline WQS will be implemented in permits (NPDES, 404, 401), TMDLs and 
303(d) listing assessments6 within and immediately surrounding Tribal land. 
3. The factors or criteria EPA will consider during ONRW nominations, including how 
upstream economic impacts will be considered and at what threshold those impacts 
will be deemed unreasonable. 
 
5  “Environmental justice is the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race, color, 
national origin, or income, with respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement of environmental 
laws, regulations, and policies [emphasis added]. This goal will be achieved when everyone enjoys (1) the same 
degree of protection from environmental and health hazards [emphasis added], and (2) equal access to the 
decision-making process to have a healthy environment in which to live, learn, and work.” Via 
https://www.epa.gov/environmentaljustice  
6 Neither Section 303(d) or 40 CFR 130.7 confer authority to EPA for assessment and identification of impaired 
waters.  
 

 
5 
 
4. What notice period and public participation process will occur at which stage(s) of 
implementation, and how states may provide feedback to EPA and Tribes.  
5. How traditional and cultural use criteria would be developed. 
6. What EPA considers “tribal-regulated nonpoint source controls.” Under the rule, 
when the Regional Administrator determines whether to allow lowering of water 
quality, EPA shall achieve the highest statutory and regulatory requirements for all 
“tribal-regulated, cost-effective, and reasonable best management practices for 
nonpoint source control.” 
7. Visual tools indicating implementation roles and timelines among the parties. 
8. A consistent, nationwide communication system among the parties, to ensure EPA 
can apprise all states and Tribes that applicable NPDES permits and/or Baseline 
WQS translators are available for review and comment (and use such a system for 
related CWA actions under the rule, such as designated use revisions, water quality 
variances, notification of Listed (303(d)) waterbodies, etc.). 
9. Clear dispute resolution procedures for the parties to follow under the rule. 
10. The level of analysis required to derive numeric criteria and documentation 
necessary to include in the translation procedure, the spatial extent of the criteria 
derivation, and persons responsible for conducting the translation. For example, it 
is not clear if criteria derived for a Section 401 Certifications applies to Section 402 
permits or if criteria in permits on applicable waters can be used in nonpoint source 
management. 
11. Mechanisms and guidance for upstream facilities demonstrated to be unable to meet 
downstream WQS, especially if EPA determines states cannot issue variances for a 
downstream jurisdiction’s WQS. 
12. How, in detail, narrative WQS will be interpreted when there is no point source 
discharger requiring a permit. The rule does not inform upstream states how to 
integrate Baseline WQS into their WQS or far upstream permits, or protect 
applicable waters that do not have a permitted discharger but may in the future. 
13. Specific timelines between (a) states requesting downstream numeric translators 
and (b) EPA providing them, how EPA will determine to object to a state permit if 
numeric translators have not yet been developed, and how states can protect 
downstream waters while waiting for a numeric translator. The rule as written, and 
recent EPA review timelines for state WQS updates, give states cause for concern 
that the NPDES and WQS backlogs will increase. 
14. The universe of applicable discharge permits. EPA’s public presentations on the rule 
indicate ~270 NPDES permits within a 5-mile radius from potentially applicable 
waters, as used in the rule’s Economic Analysis, to estimate impacts to 57 major 
NPDES dischargers. EPA only identified a portion of these facilities. EPA should 
identify all “majors” and general or individual minor permits. Minor dischargers 
may experience disproportionate economic impacts from the rule. 
15. The statutory authority for the proposed narrative criterion which prohibits adverse 
impacts to the hydrologic integrity of covered waters, as well as procedures for 
removing or downgrading uses in the rule and how those would be supported with 
“use and value” demonstrations. EPA should describe how this criterion would be 

 
6 
 
translated, and whether EPA envisions regulating instream flows using a translator. 
The rule does not consider whether designated uses are attainable, and it is not clear 
how EPA would manage scenarios where Baseline WQS, especially for traditional 
and cultural uses, conflict with adverse impacts of “hydrologic conditions.”  CWA 
Section 101(g) articulates that the authority of each state to “allocate quantities of 
water within its jurisdiction shall not be superseded, abrogated, or otherwise 
impaired by this chapter.” Many state and/or Tribal waterbodies assumed to be 
affected by the rule do not have sufficient flow to support primary contact recreation 
and/or organisms that are consumed by people, per CWA Section 101(a)(2) 
designated uses.  
16. Whether and how the parties would be required to work together on a TMDL if an 
affected waterbody applies downstream.  
 
Thank you for considering ACWA’s comments. We reiterate our request that EPA 
carefully consider comments submitted by individual states. ACWA looks forward to 
discussion with the parties about the rule. Please contact me with any questions about the 
contents of this comment letter. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Julia Anastasio 
Executive Director and General Counsel, ACWA 
 
 
 
CC:  
James Ray, Rule Lead, Office of Science and Technology 
Deborah Nagle, Director, Office of Science and Technology 
Karen Gude, Tribal Program Manager, Office of Water 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0236 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0228 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0244 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Telephone 401.222.4700 | www.dem.ri.gov | Rhode Island Relay 711 
RHODE ISLAND 
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT 
OFFICE OF WATER RESOURCES 
235 Promenade Street 
Providence, Rhode Island 02908  
 
 
 
 
August 3, 2023 
 
Via Federal eRulemaking Portal 
 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
Mail Code 2822IT 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
RE: Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
The Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIDEM) appreciates the 
opportunity to comment on the Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian 
Reservations proposed rulemaking as outlined in the May 5, 2023 Federal Register Notice.  
 
RIDEM is supportive of water quality standards (WQS) to be fully protective of tribal interests 
and believes clean water is an essential right of all persons. The proposed rule to broadly enact 
baseline WQS to Indian reservation waters that do not have WQS in effect under the Clean 
Water Act (CWA) has broad economic and regulatory impacts, which are not fully identified and 
described in the proposed rulemaking. The Association of Clean Water Administrators (ACWA), 
of which RIDEM is a member, is submitting a letter that outlines several points related to the 
lack of clarity that RIDEM supports. The remainder of RIDEM’s comments are specific to Rhode 
Island. 
 
There is significant lack of clarity to what waters these baseline WQS will apply. Presentations 
to date and mapping tools available do not explicitly outline what type of land holdings and/or 
waters, whether partially or wholly within tribal lands, will be affected by the proposed 

 
Telephone 401.222.4700 | www.dem.ri.gov | Rhode Island Relay 711 
rulemaking. Further, in the proposed rulemaking, certain states are identified as having 
jurisdiction to administer WQS on Indian reservations under the CWA. It is unclear how the 
process to identify these legal jurisdictional frameworks is undertaken.  
 
Specifically, in Rhode Island, the federally recognized Narragansett Tribe’s 1,800-acre 
Settlement Lands are governed by State civil and criminal laws and jurisdiction pursuant to an 
act of the United States Congress (25 U.S.C. 1701, et seq (the “Settlement Act”)), which includes 
laws governing water quality and the associated regulations. 25 U.S.C. 1708(a). It is the State of 
Rhode Island’s position that the Settlement Act requires that the Narragansett tribal waters be 
subject to the State of Rhode Island’s Water Quality Regulations (250-RICR-150-05-1), which are 
approved by EPA as Rhode Island’s WQS. Under this legal framework, EPA could not work with 
the Tribe independently to create WQS and instead must identify Rhode Island as having 
jurisdiction to administer WQS on the Settlement Lands under the CWA, effectively exempting 
Rhode Island from this rulemaking. 
 
Should you have any questions concerning these comments, please do not hesitate to contact 
me. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Joseph Haberek, P.E. 
Administrator of Surface Water Protection 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Joseph B. 
Haberek
Digitally signed by Joseph B. 
Haberek 
Date: 2023.08.03 13:28:13 -04'00'

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0251 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
1 
 
 
Submitted via www.regulations.gov 
 
August 3, 2023 
 
Hon. Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C.  20460 
 
Re: 
Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations, Docket ID No. EPA-
HQ-OW-2016-0405, RIN 2040-AF62 
 
Dear Administrator Regan:  
 
The Petroleum Alliance of Oklahoma (The Alliance) appreciates this opportunity to provide 
comments on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) above-captioned rulemaking 
(hereinafter referred to as the Proposed Rule).   
The Alliance represents more than 1,400 individuals and member companies and their tens of 
thousands of employees in the upstream, midstream, and downstream sectors and ventures ranging 
from small, family-owned businesses to large, publicly traded corporations. Our members produce, 
transport, process and refine the bulk of Oklahoma’s crude oil and natural gas.  Our members will 
be directly and/or indirectly impacted by EPA’s Proposed Rule (e.g., section 404 permit 
requirements).   
The Alliance acknowledges and supports the state’s role in establishing and regularly reviewing 
water quality standards for waterbodies within the state.  Those standards form the basis for other 
Clean Water Act (CWA) programs, such as water-quality-based effluent limitations and section 401 
and 404 permits.  Clearly, these are critical responsibilities under the CWA and the State of 
Oklahoma has a robust program in place to meet the state’s water quality obligations.  Similarly, the 
EPA must acknowledge the State of Oklahoma’s existing unique, complex legal framework as it 
relates to tribes.  Thirty-nine recognized Native American tribes call Oklahoma home. The Alliance 
appreciates and values what American Indians and tribes contribute to the state’s economy, culture 
and diversity.  The tribes are a vital part of our state. Oklahoma’s non-Indians and tribal members 
alike share a common interest in economic prosperity. 
However, The Alliance has several concerns with the Proposed Rule.  Fundamentally, EPA fails to 
provide where this Proposed Rule would apply and how it would work in Oklahoma with thirty-
nine recognized tribes that may result in a patchwork of differing water quality standards (WQSs) 
across the State.  Moreover, EPA fails to assess the financial impacts to state’s (Oklahoma and 
surrounding states) water quality programs, municipalities, and other stakeholders (that currently 
hold existing permits or will obtain new permits).1  In addition, it brushes over Oklahoma’s unique 
 
1 EPA, Economic Analysis For Proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations, April 5, 
2023.  EPA states that, “The economic analysis does not examine any Indian reservation lands in Oklahoma due to the 

 
 
 
2 
 
regulatory framework under EPA’s approved Section 10211(a) of the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, 
Efficient Transportation Equity Act of 2005 (SAFETEA).2  
Finally, EPA’s Proposed Rule will have significant and profound impacts on all Oklahoma citizens, 
surrounding states, and our members by creating regulatory uncertainty.  For all these reasons, we 
call on EPA to withdraw the Proposed Rule, clarify how it will directly impact Oklahoma, and 
repropose it for public review and comment so that our members can provide informed comments.  
 
I. 
SAFETEA OF 2005 Limits EPA’s Authority in Oklahoma 
The Alliance believes EPA has failed to adequately consider the unique and complex landscape that 
exists in Oklahoma.   Section 10211 of SAFETEA3 clarified and streamlined the State of 
Oklahoma’s role in managing virtually all environmental media within the state’s exterior borders. 
Subsection (a) of Section 10211 provides that if the EPA Administrator has approved regulatory 
programs submitted by the State of Oklahoma for implementation of federal environmental 
programs in non-Indian country, then upon request of the State, the Administrator shall approve the 
State to administer the State programs within certain areas of Indian country.  Significantly, 
SAFETEA does not provide EPA Administrator discretion to consider the merits or circumstances 
of the State request or to impose conditions on approval; if the State’s request falls within the 
statute’s parameters, then the Administrator must grant the State’s request. It is virtually a 
ministerial task on the Administrator’s part. 
On July 22, 2020, the Governor of Oklahoma duly requested approval under Section 10211(a) of 
SAFETEA to administer in Indian country those environmental programs that had previously been 
approved by EPA for application outside Indian country.4 In a letter to the Governor dated October 
1, 2020, the Administrator acknowledged that despite its general practice with respect to Indian 
country, EPA must apply the statutory mandate embodied by SAFETEA5 and grant the Governor’s 
request.  The EPA Administrator’s approval applied to all of the State of Oklahoma’s existing EPA-
approved regulatory programs, including, but not limited to, water quality standards and 
implementation plans6 and national pollutant discharge elimination system programs7 of the CWA 
implemented by a range of state agencies.8 
 
lack of appropriate geospatial information. For example, for most Oklahoma Tribes the only lands potentially covered by 
the proposed baseline WQS would be checkerboarded Tribal trust lands and on-reservation Indian allotments for which 
EPA has no reliable geospatial information.” 
2 EPA’s approval of the State of Oklahoma’s request under Section 10211(a) of the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient 
Transportation Equity Act of 2005, October 1, 2020, EPA’s website.   
3 Pub. L. 109-59, 199 Stat. 1144, 1937 (Aug. 10, 2005). 
4 The state did not seek authority over certain excepted lands, including Indian allotments, lands held in trust by the 
United States on behalf of individual Indians or a tribe, or certain lands owned in fee by a tribe. 
5 The Administrator’s letter to the Governor noted that “to the extent EPA’s prior approvals of these State programs 
excluded Indian country, any such exceptions are superseded for the geographic areas of Indian country covered by this 
approval under SAFETEA.” 
6 Section 303, 33 U.S.C. § 1313. 
7 Section 402, 33 U.S.C. § 1342. 
8 On December 22, 2021, EPA proposed to withdraw and reconsider the October 1, 2020, decision approving the 
Governor of the State of Oklahoma’s request to extend approval of the state’s EPA-approved environmental regulatory 
programs to certain areas of Indian country within the state of Oklahoma. See https://www.epa.gov/ok/proposed-

 
 
 
3 
 
Subsection (b) of Section 10211 of SAFETEA is also relevant to understanding the state’s exclusive 
regulatory authority over most of the state. Subsection (b) specifies that EPA may extend treatment 
as a state status for purposes of administering environmental programs to an Oklahoma tribe only if 
the state voluntarily enters into a cooperative agreement with the tribe for treatment of a tribe as a 
state and concurrently agrees to joint administration of an environmental program’s requirements.9 
Congress clearly articulated its intent in the SAFETEA provision regarding Oklahoma and EPA 
may not disregard this law.  EPA should withdraw the Proposed Rule.  At a bare minimum, EPA 
must explain how it has taken the SAFETEA provision into account in developing the Proposed 
Rule and how it would specifically apply in Oklahoma so that our members can provide informed 
comments. 
 
II. 
EPA fails to provide information on where this Proposed Rule applies in Oklahoma 
a. EPA’s Proposed rule lacks clarity as to where the requirements apply in Oklahoma.  
EPA’s slide (see below) from its public webinar provides where the Proposed Rule does 
not apply (e.g., states that have authority from Congress to administer WQS over Indian 
country), and it lists “partial areas of Indian country: Oklahoma (6 tribes)”; however, it 
does not provide any additional details.   
  
 
 
withdrawal-and-reconsideration-and-supporting-information (last visited July 19, 2022). EPA acknowledged the request 
was made pursuant to Section 10211(a) of SAFETEA. EPA stated it sought greater consultation with affected tribes and 
the need to review implementation of EPA programs by the State of Oklahoma. 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-12/notice-of-proposed-withdrawal-and-reconsideration_0.pdf (last 
visited July 19, 2022). In a comment letter dated January 31, 2022, the State of Oklahoma forcefully rebutted the EPA’s 
authority to reconsider or withdraw the Administrator’s earlier decision to approve the state’s request to extend 
approval of the state’s EPA-approved environmental regulatory programs into certain areas of Indian country within the 
state. See https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-02/state-of-oklahoma-comment.pdf.    
9 Such a cooperative agreement would require approval by EPA Administrator after notice and an opportunity for 
public hearing. 

 
 
 
4 
 
 
In addition, EPA’s slide (see below) on where the Proposed Rule would apply 
specifically states, “Geographic information not available for tribes in Oklahoma.”  
It is unclear how EPA can propose a rule without specifically knowing where it 
would apply. Again, at a minimum, EPA must withdraw the Proposed Rule, repropose it 
and provide more clarity as to where the Proposed Rule would apply in Oklahoma.   
 
 
III. 
EPA’s Proposed Rule provides ambiguous processes and requirements that prevent 
stakeholders from providing informed comments   
a. EPA’s Proposed Rule provides information on how it would implement the Proposed 
Rule, but fails to compare the proposed process, in an easy, understandable format, (e.g., 
a regulatory crosswalk table) to the process for State delegation.  This would be 
beneficial to help stakeholders better understand how the two processes differ, that 
would enable stakeholders to provide informed comments. 
b. EPA’s Proposed Rule sets up a process that would create a patchwork of WQSs in 
Oklahoma.  Many times, in the Proposed Rule, EPA mentions “customization”, 
“tailoring” and “site specific” WQSs for each reservation that would be accomplished 
using the narrative criteria and binding translations procedures identified in the rule.  
With thirty-nine recognized tribes in Oklahoma, this sets up a process that will establish 
differing WQSs across the state creating a patchwork of differing standards that will 
lead to significant regulatory uncertainty.  Additionally, these varying WQSs would lead 

 
 
 
5 
 
to significant cost impacts to state(s), municipalities and businesses obtaining new 
and/or revised permits.  
c. EPA’s Proposed Rule lacks clarity as to how non-tribal members would have input into 
the establishment of beneficial uses and WQSs before they are approved by EPA. We 
request that any proposed beneficial use or WQS (as well as other related requirements) 
resulting from this Proposed Rule be made available for review and comment in the 
Federal Register prior to approval by EPA.  
  
IV. 
Oklahoma has a robust CWA WQSs program in place to meet the needs of all 
Oklahomans   
As previously mentioned, the State of Oklahoma has a robust WQSs program in place to meet its 
CWA obligations.  It has established regulatory processes and procedures in place that allow all 
Oklahomans to participate in the WQSs process.  It is important to note that withdrawal of this 
Proposed Rule does not diminish tribes’ ability to provide input into the State of Oklahoma’s 
regulatory WQSs program.  Tribes, as with any other citizen in the state, are always allowed to 
engage in the state’s rulemaking actions as provided by well-established Oklahoma laws, 
regulations, processes, and procedures.   
Additionally, the State has a comprehensive view and a unique understanding of Oklahoma’s water 
quality and its current and future needs.  The State has expertise in place and has successfully 
managed its WQSs program since obtaining delegated authority.  Additionally, the State’s WQSs 
do not start/stop at an imaginary line in a water body - they apply consistently, are protective for all 
Oklahomans, and they provide all Oklahomans with the much-needed regulatory certainty.   
EPA’s Proposed Rule provides unnecessary bureaucracy to a well-functioning process and creates 
significant regulatory uncertainty.  At a minimum, EPA must withdraw the Proposed Rule, 
repropose it and provide more clarity as to how and where the Proposed Rule would apply in 
Oklahoma.  
  
V. 
Multiple, Related EPA Proposed CWA Rules Provides Significant Regulatory 
Uncertainty to Regulated Community  
In addition to this Proposed Rule, EPA has multiple CWA proposed rules that have yet to be 
finalized that provide significant regulatory uncertainty for the regulated community. These 
include:   
a. 87 Fed. Reg. 35318, June 9, 2022, Clean Water Act Section 401 Water 
Quality Certification Improvement Rule 
b. 87 Fed. Reg. 74361, December 5, 2022, Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions 
to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
c. Announced - Proposed CWA Section 404 Tribal and State Program Regulation10 
d. EPA’s forthcoming revised Waters of the U.S. (WOTUS) rule as a result of the Supreme 
 
10 On July 19, EPA announced a proposed rule to revise the CWA Section 404 Tribal and State Program Regulations. 

 
 
 
6 
 
Court’s decision in Sackett v. EPA.11   
Taken together, these proposals are expansive and provide significant uncertainty as to how they 
collectively build upon and function with the other, and how they jointly increase the burdens and 
costs on the state, local municipalities and the regulated community.  Each of EPA’s proposed rules 
have important implications on Oklahoma’s unique regulatory framework as it relates to tribes.12  
We request EPA withdraw the Proposed Rule and provide further clarity as to how the Proposed 
Rule functions with the other proposed rules so that our members can provide informed comments. 
 
VI. 
Conclusion  
The Alliance appreciates the opportunity to provide comments to EPA on the Proposed Rule.  For 
the reasons outlined above, the Alliance request EPA to withdraw the Proposed Rule.  If you have 
questions, please contact me at angie@okpetro.com or 405-601-2124. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Angie Burckhalter 
Senior V.P. of Regulatory & Environmental Affairs 
 
 
cc: 
James Ray (ray.james@epa.gov) 
EPA Office of Science and Technology, Standards and Health Protection Division 
 
 
 
11 Sackett v. EPA, No. 21-454, May 25, 2023, Supremecourt.gov website.  
12 EPA’s approval of the State of Oklahoma’s request under Section 10211(a) of the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient 
Transportation Equity Act of 2005, October 1, 2020, EPA’s website.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0256 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
WESTERN STATES WATER COUNCIL 
682 East Vine Street, Suite 7 / Murray, Utah 84107 / (801) 685-2555 / FAX (801) 685-2559 
Web Page: www.westernstateswater.org 
 
 
 
 
August 3, 2023 
 
Mr. Michael Regan, Administrator 
 
Environmental Protection Agency 
 
Washington, DC 
 
regan.michael@epa.gov 
 
  
Ms. Radhika Fox 
Assistant Administrator, Office of Water   
Environmental Protection Agency 
Washington, DC 20460 
fox.radhika@epa.gov 
 
 
Re:  Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
       Docket #EPA–HQ– OW–2016–0405 
 
Dear Administrator Regan and Assistant Administrator Fox: 
 
The Western States Water Council (WSWC) is a bi-partisan government entity created by Western 
Governors in 1965 that represents eighteen states. Our members are appointed by and serve at the pleasure of 
their respective Governors, advising them on water policy issues. Our mission is to ensure that the West has 
an adequate, secure, and sustainable supply of water of suitable quality to meet its diverse economic and 
environmental needs now and in the future.  
 
Water quality standards are central to achieving the goals of the Clean Water Act on both state lands 
and tribal reservation lands. However, many states have expressed concerns that the promulgation of 
nationwide baseline water quality standards for tribes without treatment as states (TAS) authority has the 
potential to create a more complicated regulatory environment for state water quality and water resources 
managers and users. At this time, the rule as proposed may raise more questions and conflicts than it will 
resolve, particularly in western states where a complex mix of state and tribal lands may be present. 
 
As we have noted frequently in the past, the WSWC supports meaningful and substantive consultation 
with States as co-regulators of the Clean Water Act, seeking input from states beyond mere information-sharing, 
prior to publication of any proposed or final rules with federalism implications. As described in Executive Order 
13132, regulations with federalism implications include actions, “that have substantial direct effects on the 
States, on the relationship between the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power and 
responsibilities among the various levels of government.” Of particular relevance, the Executive Order directs 
great caution and meaningful consultation when establishing uniform national standards. 
 
The WSWC urges EPA to fully consider the legal and administrative issues associated with 
promulgating nationwide tribal baseline water quality standards. Questions our states have previously raised 
include:  

(1) How will EPA implement this rule, and under what authorities, particularly with regard to non-
jurisdictional waters and unquantified reserved water rights? 
 
(2) How will the baseline WQS impact existing state jurisdictions and water quality programs, 
particularly where the outer reservation boundaries do not reflect current regulatory jurisdictions or non-
tribal lands within reservation boundaries? 
 
(3) How will EPA resolve any differences between state and tribal standards, as well as states’ standards 
and EPA’s baseline standards for tribes without TAS authority? 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Tony Willardson 
Executive Director 
 
Enclosures: Resolution #490 regarding federal baseline water quality standards for Indian reservations, and 
WSWC letter commenting on the advanced notice of proposed rulemaking in 2017. 
 
cc: ray.james@epa.gov  
 

 
Position No. 490 
 
 
RESOLUTION 
of the 
WESTERN STATES WATER COUNCIL 
Regarding 
 
 WATER QUALITY STANDARDS, PROTECTING TRIBAL RESERVED RIGHTS, and FEDERAL 
BASELINE WATER QUALITY STANDARDS FOR INDIAN RESERVATIONS 
 
Reno, Nevada 
May 24, 2023 
 
WHEREAS, the mission of the Western States Water Council is to ensure that the West has an adequate, 
sustainable supply of water of suitable quality to meet its diverse economic and environmental needs now and in 
the future; and 
 
WHEREAS, states are co-regulators under the Clean Water Act, which does expressly “recognize, 
preserve, and protect the primary responsibilities and rights of States to prevent, reduce, and eliminate pollution, 
to plan the development and use (including restoration, preservation, and enhancement) of land and water 
resources….” CWA § 101(b); and 
 
WHEREAS, water quality standards are central to achieving the goals of the Clean Water Act on both 
state lands and tribal reservation lands; and 
 
WHEREAS, the state water quality agencies have long-established water quality standards to protect and 
maintain existing designated uses, with water quality criteria designed to protect aquatic life and human health 
regardless of geographic location, and under the Clean Water Act these water quality standards are subject to 
triennial review with the opportunity for public comment; and 
 
WHEREAS, the arid Western States include numerous federally-recognized tribes with diverse historical 
and cultural uses of water; and 
 
WHEREAS, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is proposing to establish Federal water quality 
standards for Indian reservation waters that currently do not have water quality standards in effect under the Clean 
Water Act; and  
 
WHEREAS, many states and tribes put considerable time, effort, and resources into developing 
constructive relationships and coordinating cross-jurisdictional efforts while seeking to respect one another’s 
sovereignty; and 
 
WHEREAS, the cultural needs of tribes, their health, and their economic prosperity are an important 
priority for tribal, federal, and state governments; and 
 
WHEREAS, the identification and interpretation of federal instruments (treaties, statutes, executive 
orders, and other sources of federal law), with the potential to create express or implied federal reserved rights, is 
a complex exercise – often involving consultation, research, analysis, and extensive court proceedings – that 
requires expertise unrelated to water quality assessment; and 
 
WHEREAS, in November 2021, the Department of the Interior, the EPA, and 15 other federal agencies 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding Regarding Interagency Coordination and Collaboration for the 

 
Protection of Tribal Treaty Rights and Reserved Rights, committing to protect such rights and implement federal 
treaty obligations: (1) through early consultation and consideration of those rights in decision-making and 
rulemaking; (2) by creating a searchable and indexed database of all treaties; (3) by developing tools and 
resources to identify, understand, and analyze tribal treaty and reserved rights; and (4) by providing a means of 
dispute resolution regarding tribal complaints of the sufficiency and timing of federal consultation; and 
 
WHEREAS, western water laws provide a complex system of allocating and administering water, 
including the determination of the quantity and priority of water rights, with their sources of water, points of 
diversion, and places of beneficial use, and this system includes the necessary quantification and priority dates of 
tribal reserved water rights as implied under the Winters doctrine, as well as any additional state-based water 
rights for tribes or tribal members; and 
 
WHEREAS, states have the exclusive authority to allocate and administer quantities of water within their 
respective jurisdictions; and 
 
WHEREAS, water quality agencies generally lack the means and authority to determine the full nature 
and geographic extent of tribal reserved rights to natural resources that may require specific quantities or quality 
of water to satisfy the purposes of the reservations; and   
 
WHEREAS, historical waterbodies have been extensively modified in the arid West with federal, state, 
tribal, and local infrastructure to capture, store, divert, and convey water for diverse and often competing uses of 
water; and 
 
WHEREAS, any efforts to fulfill the federal trust responsibility to protect tribal reserved rights related to 
water resources, using a regulatory framework to be implemented by states, have clear federalism implications as 
contemplated by Executive Order 13132; and 
 
WHEREAS, promulgation of nationwide baseline water quality standards for tribes has the potential to 
create a more complicated regulatory environment for state water quality and water resources managers and users, 
and at this time may raise more questions and conflicts than they will resolve, particularly in western states where 
a complex mix of state and tribal lands may be present. 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Westerns States Water Council supports the 
establishment of a searchable database of all tribal treaties and tools for analysis as described in the 17-agency 
MOU. 
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Western States Water Council opposes shifting federal trustee 
responsibilities to the states by imposing the burden of determining the nature and extent of tribal reserved rights 
over to states. 
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Western States Water Council supports timing any tribal-
federal consultation process to determine water quality needs for tribal reserved rights to take place prior to the 
subsequent triennial review of state water quality standards, in order to better inform the state process in a timely 
and efficient manner. 
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that federal regulations intended to protect tribal reserved rights should 
not harm state-tribal relations or place states in the middle of tribal treaty disputes that may not be appropriate for 
States to attempt to resolve. 
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that steps must be taken to ensure that any tribal reserved rights that 
require specific quantities of water in Western States have a corresponding water right. 
 

 
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Western States Water Council urges EPA to fully consider 
legal and administrative issues associated with promulgating nationwide tribal baseline water quality standards, 
including addressing (1) how EPA would implement such a rule and under what authorities, particularly with  
regard to non-jurisdictional waters and unquantified reserved water rights; (2) how the baseline WQS would 
impact existing state jurisdictions and water quality programs, particularly where the outer reservation boundaries 
do not reflect current regulatory jurisdictions and/or non-tribal lands within reservation boundaries; and (3) how 
EPA would resolve any differences between states and tribal standards, as well as states’ standards and EPA’s 
baseline standards for tribes without treatment as states (TAS) authority. 
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Western States Water Council supports meaningful and 
substantive consultation with States as co-regulators, seeking input from states beyond mere information-sharing, 
prior to publication of any proposed or final rules with federalism implications. 
 
 
 

                           WESTERN STATES WATER COUNCIL 
682 East Vine Street, Suite 7 / Murray, Utah 84107 / (801) 685-2555 / FAX (801) 685-2559 
                                               Web Page: www.westernstateswater.org 
 
 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Proposed rulemaking on baseline water quality standards for Indian reservations 
Docket ID: HQ-OW-2016-0405 
 
The Western States Water Council represents 18 Western states, many of which have a large tribal 
presence within their state boundaries. We appreciate the efforts EPA has made to provide 
information to the states in advance of this rulemaking effort.  However, promulgation of 
nationwide baseline water quality standards (WQS) have the potential to create a more 
complicated regulatory environment for state water quality and water resources managers and 
users, and at this time may raise more questions and conflicts that they will resolve. 
 
The proposed rulemaking has raised questions and concerns about: (1) how EPA would implement 
such a rule and under what authorities, particularly with regard to non-jurisdictional waters and 
unquantified reserved water rights; (2) how the baseline WQS would impact existing state 
jurisdictions and water quality programs, particularly where the outer reservation boundaries do 
not reflect current regulatory jurisdictions and/or non-tribal lands within reservation boundaries; 
and (3) how EPA would resolve any differences between states and tribal standards, as well as 
states’ standards and EPA’s baseline standards for tribes without treatment as states (TAS) 
authority. 
 
Legal Authority and Administrative Issues 
 
A fundamental question is whether or not any waters for which EPA proposes standards and 
regulations are waters of the United States and/or trust waters specifically reserved by the 
Congress for reservation purposes and duly quantified as part of a general state adjudication or 
otherwise decreed.  If not, what if any authority does EPA have to promulgate standards? 
 
Other related questions also arise.  Does EPA have the requisite Congressional statutory authority 
to promulgate baseline WQS on reservations, or trust lands outside the boundaries of reservations, 
for tribes that lack TAS authority? What authority is there to recognize tribal designations to 
protect “cultural,” “ceremonial,” and other traditional uses not mentioned in the Clean Water Act?  
What, if any, authority does EPA have over intrastate waters that do not cross state boundaries and 
therefore may not be jurisdictional waters of the United States? While the federal government 
holds land in trust for the tribes, that does not necessarily mean that it also holds the local waters 
in trust.  Many reserved water rights currently remain unquantified by the federal government and 
inaccessible to tribes. How will EPA determine to which waters the baseline WQS apply? 
 
Will these baseline WQS be directly enforceable by EPA? How will these standards be used where 
there is no point source in the area? Will these baseline WQS go through a CWA §303(c) triennial 

RE: WSWC Comments on proposed WQS rulemaking 
Page 2 of 3 
 
review to modify and improve the standards, with public hearings and opportunities for public 
participation, as the states and tribes with TAS are required to do?  
 
Will EPA consider the potentially less disruptive alternative of allowing existing state standards to 
become the baseline WQS for tribes where appropriate?  Further, where there are differences 
between the state or states and tribes, should they not first be allowed to negotiate and develop 
cooperative standards, or seek mediation before EPA promulgates standards? 
 
Boundaries of Tribal Lands and Jurisdiction 
 
Uncertainty surrounds the legal boundaries of many tribal lands in the West. How will EPA 
determine the boundaries of reservations and trust lands, particularly where those boundaries are 
subject to ongoing dispute? Additionally, non-tribal ownership of lands within reservation 
boundaries are often subject to state rather than tribal laws. How will EPA develop and enforce 
WQS standards across lands that alternate between tribal and non-tribal ownership? 
 
For example, several of our states have raised concerns in previous comments to EPA’s recent 
rulemaking efforts regarding tribes. In Idaho, there are significant outstanding issues regarding the 
borders of Indian reservations, as well as issues of land patents and rights-of-way running through 
reservations. Additionally, there are concerns about how the baseline WQS will impact Idaho’s 
ability to apply state water quality laws to non-tribal members on tribal lands. South Dakota has 
similar concerns, with disputed reservation boundaries and lands within reservations owned by 
non-tribal members currently subject to state regulation. In North Dakota, there are many private 
landowners engaged in agricultural production on tribal lands who are subject to state regulation. 
While North Dakota supports and acknowledges the importance of clean water, it wants to ensure 
that private landowners are not unnecessarily subject to overlapping or uncertain authority under 
the Clean Water Act.  
 
Utah’s eastern Uncompahgre reservation’s historic boundary includes nearly 2 million acres, only a 
small portion of which contains tribal lands. Thousands of acres of private and state trust lands 
within the historic boundary are currently subject to Utah jurisdiction and multiple Clean Water 
Act programs. In Colorado, land within the Southern Ute reservation boundary has a checkerboard 
pattern, with half of the land owned in fee by Colorado citizens, and the other half owned by the 
federal government, partly in trust for the Southern Ute Tribe. The complex boundaries and 
jurisdictional authority are governed by P.L. 98-290.  In Oklahoma, the tribes have allotments 
rather than reservations with boundaries. Although EPA has provided initial assurances that 
allotments would not be included in the baseline WQS, Oklahoma also has several trust lands with 
boundaries that may be in dispute. 
 
Dispute Resolution 
 
EPA’s regulations under 40 CFR §131.7 provide a mechanism for resolving disputes between States 
and Indian tribes with TAS status that arise as a result of differing water quality standards on 
common bodies of water.1 Eligibility for EPA’s §131.7 dispute resolution depends on six criteria, 
                                                             
1 EPA’s dispute resolution mechanism has only arisen in two instances to our knowledge: (1) Arkansas v. Oklahoma, 503 U.S. 91 (1992); (2) City of 
Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 415 (10th Cir. 1996) (over EPA’s approval of the Isleta Pueblo’s numeric and narrative WQS for ceremonial, recreational, 
fishery, agricultural and industrial water supply uses). 

RE: WSWC Comments on proposed WQS rulemaking 
Page 3 of 3 
 
including §131.7(b)(2) which requires the tribe to be “eligible to the same extent as a state for 
purposes of water quality standards,” and §131.7(b)(5) which requires the WQS to not only be 
approved by EPA, but also to be adopted pursuant to the respective state and tribal laws. Tribes 
without TAS authority as required under (b)(2), and tribes that have not adopted EPA’s proposed 
baseline WQS pursuant to that tribe’s laws as required under (b)(5) would appear to fall outside 
the 40 CFR §131.7 dispute mechanism.  Will there  still be an available avenue to resolve 
prospective state-tribal differences in WQS that result in unreasonable consequences? If not, does 
EPA have the necessary authority to develop appropriate regulations to address disputes over 
baseline WQS? 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on EPA’s advanced notice of proposed rulemaking 
regarding baseline water quality standards (WQS) for tribes. We look forward to EPA providing 
answers to our questions.  Until such questions can be answered, it would appear unwise to rush 
into the promulgation of any regulation, the result of which may very well be more confusion and 
conflict. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Tony Willardson 
Executive Director 
Western States Water Council

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0269 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
ENDING THE INTERMINABLE GAP IN INDIAN
COUNTRY WATER QUALITY PROTECTION
James M. Grijalva*
Tribal self-determination in modern environmental law holds the tantalizing prospect of
translating indigenous environmental value judgments into legally enforceable requirements of
federal regulatory programs. Congress authorized this approach three decades ago, but few
tribes have sought primacy even for foundational programs like Clean Water Act water qual-
ity standards, contributing to potentially serious environmental injustices. This Article ana-
lyzes in detail  EPA’s recent attempt at reducing tribal barriers—reinterpreting the Act as a
congressional delegation of tribal jurisdiction over non-Indians—and the early indications its
results are insignificant. The Article then proposes an unconventional solution ostensibly at
odds with tribal self-determination: promulgation of national, federal water quality standards
for Indian country. EPA’s Indian Program actually began this way, as an interim step await-
ing tribes’ assumption of federal regulatory programs. Thirty years later, the seemingly inter-
minable regulatory gap in Indian country water quality protection remains, and EPA has a
legal and moral responsibility to close it.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
I.
Background on the Significance of Water Quality Standards . . . . . . . .
4
II.
Tribal Water Quality Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
A.
Background on EPA’s Indian Program. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
B.
EPA’s First Interpretation of the CWA TAS Provision . . . . . . . .
11
C.
A Legal Challenge to EPA’s Operating Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
D. Why Aren’t There More Tribal Water Quality Standards? . . . . .
20
III.
The Clean Water Act’s Delegation to Tribes of Jurisdiction over Non-
Indian Water Polluters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
A.
EPA’s 2016 Reinterpretation Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
B.
Judicial Developments Supporting Delegation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
C.
Contemporary Delegation in the Clean Air Act TAS Provision .
31
D. EPA and Tribal Experience with the TAS requirement for
Inherent Tribal Jurisdiction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
IV.
Continued Litigation Risk Despite Delegation Fix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
*
Friedman Professor of Law and Director of the Northern Plains Indian Law Center and the
Tribal Environmental Law Project, University of North Dakota (UND) School of Law. My
thanks to David Haberman, UND Faculty Services Librarian for his unfailing assistance,
and to Tori Molyneaux, Noah Star, and all the staff at the Harvard Environmental Law
Review for their diligent work in helping make this piece more cogent and accurate. This
work was also supported by a summer research stipend from the UND School of Law. This
Article is dedicated to the memory of Dean B. Suagee, who walked on in 2019. Dean was
Of Counsel at Hobbs Strauss Dean & Walker, LLP, an exceptional lawyer and scholar, and
a good friend and mentor for over two decades. He dedicated his professional career to
serving indigenous peoples and tribal sovereignty, especially in the areas of environmental
law and cultural resource protection.

2
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
A.
Judicial Diminishment of Indian Reservations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
B.
EPA’s Programmatic Actions Implicating Diminishment Issues . .
41
C.
EPA’s Program Losses from Diminishment Claims . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
D. New Opportunities for Local Government Diminishment
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
E.
A New Light at the End of the Diminishment Tunnel? . . . . . . .
55
V.
Developing Federal Water Quality Standards for Indian Country . . .
58
A.
Foundations of Federal Water Quality Standards in Indian
Country . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
B.
Challenges for Federal Water Quality Standards in Indian
Country . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
From an indigenous perspective, the “self” of the right to self-determina-
tion can be conceptualized as not just the people but also the territory, the
web of life, the flora and fauna, and the natural resources upon which life
depends. An Indian tribe, in exercising its right to protect the environ-
ment, may understand the “self” in this way: the reservation is the place
where the tribe’s way of life exists, and its way of life includes much more
than the people.
Dean B. Suagee1
INTRODUCTION
The Clean Water Act (“CWA”)2 is built on the model of cooperative fed-
eralism used in nearly all modern U.S. environmental laws.3 In the context of
this Article, that federal-local partnership might be best typified by the general
requirement that permits for water pollution discharges contain two kinds of
legally enforceable conditions. The first permit conditions are technology-based
standards, set by EPA for categories of industry and uniform across the coun-
try.4 The second kind of permit conditions are water quality–based standards,
1.
Dean B. Suagee, A Human Rights–Based Environmental Remedy for the Legacy of the Allot-
ment Era in Indian Country, 29 NAT. RES. & ENV’T 3, 4 (2014).
2.
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Pub. L. No. 92-500, 86 Stat.
816 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 33 U.S.C.).
3.
See EPA DRAFT POLICY ON FEDERAL OVERSIGHT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS
DELEGATED TO STATES (Nov. 25, 1983), 14 ENV’T REP. 1449, 1449–50 (Dec. 16, 1983)
(“EPA and the states have been given joint responsibility by Congress for national environ-
mental programs [and] must develop a workable partnership in which each performs differ-
ent activities that are based on the partner’s unique strengths.”).
4.
See 33 U.S.C. § 1342(a)(1)(A); 40 C.F.R. § 122.44(a)(1) (2019).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection
3
set by the state (or qualified Indian tribe) representing site-specific value judg-
ments about the water receiving the pollution.5
Site-specific water quality standards (“WQS”) are critically important for
Indian tribes as indigenous peoples face similar but not identical health risks
that non-Indians do. Tribal welfare concerns are often quite different because
environmental quality is inextricably entwined with indigenous culture based on
ancient relations with the natural environment.6 Hence, water pollution permits
that do not account for indigenous cultural uses of water risk environmental
injustice in a manner reminiscent of early colonial attempts at assimilation.
The national policy of tribal self-determination held obvious possibilities
for incorporating cultural values into the water pollution permitting process,
and although the policy’s origin coincided with the birth of the modern envi-
ronmental era in 1970, Congress initially overlooked tribes in providing local
roles to state governments in the CWA. The newly created EPA7 recognized
the opportunity first, adopting a policy acknowledging tribes as the appropriate
local governments for making site-specific environmental value judgments that
would animate federal programs. Congress followed suit, amending the CWA
to authorize tribal “treatment as a state” (“TAS”) for a number of programs
including WQS.8
Tribal TAS status effectively embraced self-determination by placing the
responsibility for articulating tribal uses of reservation waters and the criteria for
protecting them on tribes. Those tribal value judgments were then to be trans-
lated into pollution permit conditions ensuring protection of tribal health and
welfare. A handful of Indian tribes developed WQS with great success, but the
overwhelming majority of tribes have not taken advantage of the opportunity.9
A number of reasons may explain their hesitation, but fear of litigation chal-
lenging tribal sovereignty and the status of their lands are likely key factors.
EPA used its administrative environmental expertise to limit some litigation
risks at the outset, and when that resulted in few tribal TAS programs, it exer-
cised that discretion to do so again recently.
5.
See 33 U.S.C. § 1342; 40 C.F.R. § 122.44(d)(1).
6.
See Dean B. Suagee et al., Environmental Justice and Indian Country, 30 HUM. RTS. 16
(2003) (noting different disproportionate impacts stemming from the ways in which tribal
cultures are rooted in the environment materially through hunting, fishing, gathering, crafts;
religiously through ceremonies and other practices, including oral traditions; and through
their identity perception, creating “a unique type of suffering” when sacred places are dam-
aged or destroyed).
7.
See EXEC. OFF. OF THE PRESIDENT, REORGANIZATION PLAN NO. 3 OF 1970 (1970),
https://perma.cc/P86V-GYHY.
8.
Clean Water Act Amendments of 1987, Pub. L. No. 100-4, § 506, 101 Stat. 76 (codified at
33 U.S.C. § 1377(e)).
9.
See EPA Actions on Tribal Water Quality Standards and Contacts, EPA, https://perma.cc/
685W-642M.

4
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
This Article addresses in detail EPA’s efforts to reduce litigation risks for
tribes establishing WQS under the CWA, but concludes that EPA can no
longer justify its tolerance of the significant regulatory gap that exists in Indian
country water quality protection. Part I briefly describes the central role WQS
play in the implementation of the CWA’s main programs. Part II explores the
complex legal context EPA confronted in implementing Congress’ TAS au-
thorization for tribes in protecting water quality. Part III analyzes EPA’s recent
reinterpretation of the Act after decades of tribal inaction raised the question of
whether tribes desire self-determination over reservation water quality protec-
tion. Part IV raises a continuing litigation risk for tribal environmental imple-
mentation as well as EPA’s Indian Program. Part V proposes EPA promulgate
federal WQS (“FWQS”) for Indian country, closing the three-decades-old reg-
ulatory gap in nationwide protection, addressing the environmental injustice it
created, and perhaps spurring tribal action tailoring the federal standards to
site-specific values or finally developing tribal WQS ensuring indigenous water
uses are legally recognized and protected.
I.
BACKGROUND ON THE SIGNIFICANCE OF WATER
QUALITY STANDARDS
Enacted in 1972 as amendments to the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act,10 the statute now commonly known as the Clean Water Act relied heavily
on the modern cooperative federalism model first set out in the federal Clean
Air Act11 (“CAA”) amended just two years earlier. Congress clearly intended
the CWA’s main program—NPDES12 permits for water pollution discharged
from point sources—to be implemented by states under EPA’s supervision.13
States were not required to do so, and Congress authorized EPA’s direct imple-
mentation if states did not,14 but most states did seek and receive NPDES per-
mit program delegation from EPA.15 Whichever government issued the
permits, the federal-state partnership was built into the two fundamental kinds
of permit conditions: those based on technological pollution control options
10.
Pub. L. No. 92-500, 86 Stat. 816 (amending the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, ch.
758, 62 Stat. 1155 (1948) (codified as amended in scattered sections of 33 U.S.C.)).
11.
Pub. L. No. 91-604, 84 Stat. 1676 (1970) (codified as amended in scattered sections of 42
U.S.C.).
12.
Environmental law is rife with acronyms. NPDES is the commonly used reference for per-
mits issued under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System. See 33 U.S.C.
§ 1342.
13.
See id. § 1342(b).
14.
Id. § 1342(a)(1).
15.
EPA currently reports forty-seven states have been delegated permit authority. See About
NPDES, EPA,  https://perma.cc/S38Y-XKAS.

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection
5
identified by EPA,16 and those based on water quality at the point of discharge
as determined by the state.17
The starting point for NPDES permits is compliance with national efflu-
ent limits based on technological pollution control techniques identified by
EPA for categories and subcategories of industry.18 Technology-based permit
conditions are uniform across the nation and do not take account of site-spe-
cific circumstances or needs. In contrast, the other fundamental condition of
NPDES permits is premised on site-specific conditions. If the uniform tech-
nology-based standards cannot achieve the level of water quality needed for the
uses designated at the point of discharge, then additional permit conditions are
required19 to ensure progress toward the CWA’s goal of restoring and main-
taining the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the nation’s waters.20
That progress is measured primarily by WQS.21 For each body (or seg-
ment) of surface water (rivers, lakes, streams, etc.) within its territory, the state
first designates the uses of the water.22 At a minimum, states must designate
protection and propagation of aquatic species, and human recreation,23 often
called the fishable/swimmable standards. The state then sets water quality crite-
ria to protect the minimum and any additionally designated uses. These criteria
are typically stated in numeric terms,24 but they can also be narrative descrip-
tions of water quality protective of the designated uses.25 EPA issues guidance
on water quality criteria that states may adopt,26 or states may use alternate
means to set criteria so long as they show the criteria are protective of the
designated uses and are attainable.27 While each state’s criteria must ensure pro-
tection of the CWA’s minimum fishable/swimmable uses, states are free to set
16.
33 U.S.C. § 1342(a)(1)(A).
17.
Id. § 1311(b)(1)(C).
18.
Id. § 1342(a)(1)(A); 40 C.F.R. § 122.44(a)(1) (2019).
19.
33 U.S.C. § 1342(a)(1)(B); 40 C.F.R. § 122.44(d)(1).
20.
33 U.S.C. § 1251(a).
21.
Id. § 1313.
22.
Id. § 1313(c)(2)(A).
23.
See id. § 1251(a)(2) (stating “it is the national goal that wherever attainable . . . water quality
which provides for the protection and propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and pro-
vides for recreation in and on the water”).
24.
See 40 C.F.R. § 131.11(b)(1). For example, maximum levels of selenium in fish tissue might
be “8.5 mg/kg dw or 11.3 mg/kg dw muscle (skinless, boneless filet).” See EPA’S MODEL
WATER QUALITY STANDARDS TEMPLATE FOR WATERS ON INDIAN RESERVATIONS 30
(2016) [hereinafter MODEL WQS TEMPLATE], https://perma.cc/2KGU-QAAL.
25.
See 40 C.F.R. § 131.11(b)(2). For example, “[a]ll waters . . . shall be free from toxic, radioac-
tive, conventional, non-conventional, deleterious or other polluting substances in amounts
that will prevent attainment of the designated uses specified.” MODEL WQS TEMPLATE,
supra note 24, at 8.
26.
See 33 U.S.C. § 1314.
27.
See 40 C.F.R. § 131.11(b)(1)(ii) (criteria based on EPA guidance but modified to reflect
site-specific conditions); id. § 131.11(b)(1)(iii) (criteria based on other scientifically defensi-
ble methods).

6
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
criteria more stringent than those recommended by EPA.28 Together, the
state’s designated uses and criteria constitute WQS.29
Each state’s WQS represents value judgments made by the state in balanc-
ing its citizens’ environmental, economic, social, and cultural interests. Those
value judgments are animated legally by discharge permit conditions. If the
uniform national technology-based standards do not ensure a proposed pollu-
tion discharge will comply with site-specific WQS, then additional permit con-
ditions are required to ensure compliance.30 Where the state issues the permit,
it presumably includes conditions protective of its waters. Consistency with the
CWA is ensured by requiring draft permits be sent to EPA for review of appli-
cable WQS.31 For states where EPA issues NPDES permits, and for the vari-
ous other permits and licenses issued by other federal agencies for discharges
into a state’s waters, CWA section 401 requires certification by the state that
proposed conditions in the permit or license comply with the state’s WQS.32
Legally permitted pollution discharged in one state sometimes flows into a
downstream state. As with the other federal environmental laws, Congress of
course sought nationwide protection in the CWA. All states’ WQS must en-
sure protection of the CWA’s minimum uses, and if all states simply adopted
minimum criteria then transboundary pollution would be sufficiently controlled
by conditions imposed at the point of discharge. However, not all states select
minimum standards. Congress accommodated states’ police powers for protect-
ing the public’s health and welfare by authorizing state standards more strin-
gent than minimum federal ones.33 EPA lacks authority to second-guess the
state’s judgment for a more stringent standard; EPA ensures only that WQS
protects the CWA’s minimum uses and is attainable.34 Two key approaches
preserve the integrity of a downstream state’s more stringent criteria. One is the
requirement that upstream states’ WQS ensure attainment and maintenance of
downstream jurisdictions’ WQS.35 The other requirement is that state-issued
NPDES permits contain conditions ensuring pollution discharges do not vio-
late WQS of downstream states.36
28.
33 U.S.C. § 1370.
29.
Id. § 1313(c)(2)(A). EPA also requires states to establish antidegradation requirements so
that waters of exceptionally high quality are maintained. See 40 C.F.R. § 131.12.
30.
33 U.S.C. § 1342(a)(1)(B); 40 C.F.R. § 122.44(d)(1) (2019).
31.
See 33 U.S.C. § 1342(d)(1).
32.
See id. § 1341(a).
33.
See id. § 1370.
34.
Compare 40 C.F.R. § 131.4(a) (state authority to set WQS more stringent than federal mini-
mum standards) with id. § 131.5(b) (EPA approves state WQS that meet minimum federal
requirements).
35.
Id. § 131.10(b).
36.
Id. § 122.4(d); see also Arkansas v. Oklahoma, 503 U.S. 91, 105–07 (1992).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection
7
II.
TRIBAL WATER QUALITY STANDARDS
Of all federal agencies not directly charged with regulating Indian country,
EPA indisputably has the most robust Indian program, which coincidentally
began in the context of the CWA’s NPDES program. Congress’ 1972 version
of the CWA was silent on Indian country implementation.37 As EPA devel-
oped its CWA regulations for state primacy in 1973, the Supreme Court
echoed a longstanding federal Indian law theme: states generally lack regulatory
authority over Indians in Indian country unless clearly authorized by Con-
gress.38 Nothing in the CWA reflected such congressional authorization, so
EPA’s 1973 regulations said an otherwise satisfactory state program would not
be approved for Indian activities on Indian lands within the state.39
A.
Background on EPA’s Indian Program
That legally correct conclusion and logical result revealed Congress’ signif-
icant oversight in building the cooperative federalism model into modern envi-
ronmental law: EPA’s state partners could not achieve nationwide
environmental protection because of their limited authority in Indian country.
In other words, Congress had (inadvertently) created a regulatory gap in na-
tional environmental protection with serious ramifications:
[W]ithout some modification, our programs, as designed, often fail
to function adequately on Indian lands. This raises the serious possi-
bility that, in the absence of some special alternative response by
EPA, the environment of Indian reservations will be less effectively
protected than the environment elsewhere. Such a result is unaccept-
able. “The spirit of our Federal trust responsibility and the clear intent
of Congress demand full and equal protection of the environment of
the entire nation without exceptions or gaps under the programs for
which EPA is responsible.”40
37.
Despite its silence, EPA assumed the CWA applied to Indian country. Cf. Davis v. Morton,
469 F.2d 593, 597 (10th Cir. 1972) (applying the National Environmental Policy Act’s re-
quirement for an environmental impact statement to an Indian pueblo despite the law’s si-
lence on its application, in the first reported Indian country environmental law case in the
modern era, decided the same year the CWA was enacted).
38.
See McClanahan v. Ariz. State Tax Comm’n, 411 U.S. 164, 170–71 (1973); see also Rice v.
Olson, 324 U.S. 786, 789 (1945) (“The policy of leaving Indians free from state jurisdiction
and control is deeply rooted in the Nation’s history.”).
39.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, 38 Fed. Reg. 13,528, 13,530 (May 22,
1973) (codified at 40 C.F.R. § 125.3).
40.
Memorandum from Barbara Blum, Deputy Adm’r, EPA, to Reg’l Adm’rs et al., EPA at-
tach. at 3 (Dec. 19, 1980) (on file with author) [hereinafter 1980 INDIAN POLICY].

8
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
EPA’s recognition that American Indians potentially faced disproportion-
ate health and welfare risks because of the regulatory gap preceded the environ-
mental justice (“EJ”) movement by more than a decade. EPA’s 1973 NPDES
regulations and other actions taken in the mid-1970s, discussed below, were
arguably the agency’s first programmatic EJ actions. The “special alternative
response” selected for the CWA in 1973 was that EPA would directly imple-
ment the NPDES program for Indian facilities rather than delegate it to
states.41 Direct implementation accounted for states’ limited authority in Indian
country, and gave some substance to the federal government’s trust responsibil-
ity to tribes. The 1973 rule thus set the foundation of the agency’s nascent
Indian Program: EPA would directly implement federal environmental pro-
grams rather than delegate them to states.
The natural next step in the spirit of cooperative federalism was finding an
alternate local partner. Within just a few years, Congress affirmed state-like
environmental regulatory roles for tribes in two specific programs,42 generating
momentum for an administrative cross-program effort. In 1980, EPA became
the first federal agency with an official Indian Policy.43 The “heart” of the Pol-
icy was EPA’s view that tribal governments should play “a key role in imple-
menting pollution control programs affecting their reservations.”44 EPA refined
and reissued its Indian Policy in 1984, which continues to guide the agency
today.45 The 1984 Indian Policy’s “cornerstones” were respect for tribal self-
determination and a commitment to working with tribes on a government-to-
government basis, implemented by “including Tribal Governments as partners
in decision-making and program management on reservation lands, much as we
do with State Governments off-reservation.”46 More specifically, the Policy
said: “The Agency will recognize Tribal Governments as the primary parties for
41.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, 38 Fed. Reg. at 13,530.
42.
See Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977, Pub. L. No. 95-95, § 127(a), 91 Stat. 685 (codi-
fied at 42 U.S.C. § 7474(c)) (authorizing reservation airshed redesignations by Indian gov-
erning bodies); Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act Amendments, Pub. L.
No. 95-396, 92 Stat. 819, 834 (1978) (codified at 7 U.S.C. § 136u(a)) (providing federal
assistance to tribes to train and certify applicators pursuant to EPA regulations requiring
tribal certification of non-Indian commercial applicators, see 40 C.F.R. § 171.307).
43.
In 1980 and 1981, the national organization Americans for Indian Opportunity surveyed
three federal departments and over twenty-five federal agencies with statutory responsibili-
ties affecting Indian country health. Its report listed EPA as the sole federal agency with an
official Indian policy, citing the 1980 Indian Policy. See AMS. FOR INDIAN OPPORTUNITY,
HANDBOOK OF FEDERAL RESPONSIBILITY TO INDIAN COMMUNITIES IN AREAS OF ENVI-
RONMENTAL PROTECTION AND INDIVIDUAL HEALTH AND SAFETY 85 (1981).
44.
Memorandum from Barbara Blum, Deputy Adm’r, EPA, to Reg’l Adm’rs et al., EPA (Dec.
19, 1980) (on file with author) (transmitting the 1980 INDIAN POLICY supra note 40).
45.
EPA POLICY FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS ON INDIAN
RESERVATIONS (1984),  https://perma.cc/R26B-KFHX [hereinafter 1984 INDIAN POLICY].
46.
OFF. OF EXTERNAL AFFS., EPA Cover Memorandum on the 1984 INDIAN POLICY (on file
with author).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection
9
setting standards, making environmental policy decisions and managing pro-
grams for reservations, consistent with Agency standards and regulations.”47
Knowing it had very limited statutory authority to realize that goal, EPA
included a Policy Principle that it would take steps “to remove existing legal
and procedural impediments to working directly and effectively with tribal gov-
ernments on reservation programs.”48 EPA’s Indian Policy implementation
strategy set a primary objective of identifying statutory constraints and amend-
ing the laws where appropriate.49 With the help of interested tribes, EPA
quickly obtained state-like tribal regulatory roles in three key environmental
regulatory statutes.50 In 1986, Congress amended the Safe Drinking Water Act
(“SDWA”) authorizing EPA to “treat Indian Tribes as States” for groundwater
and public drinking water protection programs.51 In 1987, Congress authorized
EPA to “treat an Indian tribe as a State” for the CWA’s surface water protec-
tion programs,52 and in 1990 to “treat Indian tribes as States” for the CAA’s air
quality management programs.53 While the language varied slightly among the
statutes, all explicitly authorized EPA’s treatment of tribes in the same manner
as states for key environmental program roles and so became known generally
as tribal “treatment as a state” or TAS provisions.54
47.
1984 INDIAN POLICY, supra note 45, at 2.
48.
Id. at 3.
49.
OFF. OF FED. ACTIVITIES, EPA, INTERIM STRATEGY FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
EPA INDIAN POLICY 2–3 (1985).
50.
Congress also authorized TAS for the nonregulatory programs addressing cleanup of haz-
ardous substances and restoration of natural resource damages under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, also known as Superfund.
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-499, § 207(e),
100 Stat. 1613 (codified at 42 U.S.C. § 9626). One important regulatory statute lacking a
TAS provision is the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”) that manages
solid and hazardous waste. 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901–6986. RCRA has not been substantially
amended since EPA adopted its Indian Policy and so no TAS provision has been proposed.
EPA attempted to extend state-like RCRA program roles to tribes administratively but was
rebuffed. See Backcountry Against Dumps v. EPA, 100 F.3d 147, 151 (D.C. Cir. 1996)
(finding RCRA’s definition of tribes as municipalities precluded EPA from treating tribes as
states).
51.
Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-339, § 302(c), 100 Stat.
665 (codified at 42 U.S.C. § 300j-11(a)).
52.
Water Quality Act of 1987, Pub. L. No. 100-4, § 506, 101 Stat. 76 (codified at 33 U.S.C.
§ 1377(e)).
53.
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-549, § 107(d), 104 Stat. 2464 (codi-
fied at 42 U.S.C. § 7601(d)).
54.
The practice of equating tribes with states for environmental program roles originated nearly
a decade earlier. In the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977, Pub. L. No. 95-95, § 127(a),
91 Stat. 733 (codified at 42 U.S.C. § 7474), Congress authorized tribes, like states, to redes-
ignate the default air quality classification set for the CAA Prevention of Significant Deteri-
oration program. Thus, “Indian tribes are given the same powers as States.” S. REP. NO. 95-
127, at 35 (1977), as reprinted in 1977 U.S.C.C.A.N. 1077, 1113. Congress’ first official use

10
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
Each TAS provision had nearly the same eligibility requirements. TAS
roles were only available to a federally recognized tribe55 with a governing body
carrying out substantial governmental duties and powers.56 Some variation in
the requirements was necessary because they applied to different programs. The
tribe had to be capable, or be reasonably expected to be capable, of carrying out
the particular environmental program functions sought, consistent with the rel-
evant statute and regulations.57 The last eligibility requirement focused on the
tribe’s authority or jurisdiction to implement the environmental program
functions.
The CWA authorized TAS only if:
The [environmental] functions to be exercised by the Indian
tribe pertain to the management and protection of water resources
which are held by an Indian tribe, held by the United States in trust
for Indians, held by a member of an Indian tribe if such property
interest is subject to a trust restriction on alienation, or otherwise
within the borders of an Indian reservation.58
The phrase “held by” in the first three categories of water resources denoted
ownership, which is odd since the legislative history is clear that Congress had
no intent to address water quantity or water rights;59 its sole concern was with
water quality.60 In contrast, the final category of waters encompassed all reserva-
of the “treatment as a state” formulation wasn’t in the environmental context. See Indian
Tribal Governmental Tax Status Act of 1982, Pub. L. No. 97-473, § 202, 96 Stat. 2608
(providing “[a]n Indian tribal government shall be treated as a State” for deductions for
money transfers to and for tribal governmental use).
55.
Curiously, only the SDWA’s TAS eligibility provision requires tribes to be federally recog-
nized. EPA included that eligibility requirement in all TAS programs because each of the
other statutes define Indian tribes as those recognized by the Department of the Interior. See
33 U.S.C. § 1377(h)(2) (1987) (CWA); 42 U.S.C. § 7602(r) (1990) (CAA); id. § 9601(36)
(1986) (CERCLA); id. § 300j-11(b)(1)(A) (1996) (SDWA).
56.
See 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e)(1) (2014); 42 U.S.C. § 7601(d)(2)(A) (1963).
57.
See 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e)(3) (2014); 42 U.S.C. § 300j-11(b)(1)(C) (1996); id. § 7601(d)(2)
(C) (1990).
58.
33 U.S.C. § 1377(e)(2) (2014).
59.
See, e.g., Revised Interpretation of CWA Tribal Provision, 80 Fed. Reg. 47,430, 47,434
(proposed Aug. 7, 2015) [hereinafter 2015 Proposed TAS Reinterpretation] (noting the
“bulk of [section 518’s] legislative history relates to the entirely separate issue of whether
section 518(e) pertains to non-Indian water quantity rights, which it does not”); Amend-
ments to the WQS Regulations that Pertain to Standards on Indian Reservations, 56 Fed.
Reg. 64,876, 64,880 (Dec. 12, 1991) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 131) [hereinafter 1991
WQS Rule] (noting statements in the legislative record clarifying the CWA TAS provision
were not intended “to affect existing water quantity rights”).
60.
Compare 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a) (stating the policy of the CWA “is to restore and maintain the
chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the Nation’s waters”) with id. § 1251(g) (stat-
ing the policy of Congress that the CWA not supersede or abrogate rights to quantities of
water established by States).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 11
tion surface waters without regard to ownership (tribal, Indian or non-Indian).
Congress made that even clearer by defining Indian reservation in the CWA
using the archetypal definition of Indian country: “all land within the limits of
any Indian reservation under the jurisdiction of the United States Government,
notwithstanding the issuance of any [non-Indian] patent, and including rights-
of-way running through the reservation.”61
B.
EPA’s First Interpretation of the CWA TAS Provision
That same definition produced United States v. Mazurie,62 the only Su-
preme Court decision on congressional delegation to tribes of jurisdiction over
non-Indians. Mazurie held that a federal statute authorizing tribal regulation of
liquor sales by non-Indians on Indian reservations meant the tribe need not
prove its inherent sovereignty to regulate them.63 The CWA TAS provision
used the same Indian reservation definition, implying a similar congressional
delegation for tribes to implement water quality programs over non-Indians
without showing independent, inherent authority.
Curiously, a plurality opinion in an unrelated Supreme Court case cited
the CWA TAS provision as an example of an express congressional delega-
tion.64 That case, Brendale v. Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakima Indian
Nation,65 concerned tribal zoning authority over non-Indian fee lands. The
Court split into three camps with no majority opinion on the scope of the
Tribe’s inherent authority.66 In noting the Tribe made no claim of congressional
delegation, Justice White’s plurality opinion (for four Justices) cited the CWA
TAS provision as a comparative example of delegation.67
When EPA proposed its first CWA TAS regulation in 1989—coinciden-
tally, for WQS and section 401 certification programs—it did not examine
Mazurie or Brendale.68 Perhaps because it did not do so, EPA rejected delega-
tion in a single unanalyzed assertion: “The Clean Water Act authorizes use of
existing Tribal regulatory authority for managing EPA programs, but it does not
grant additional authority to Tribes.”69 Thus, the agency said a tribe could receive
TAS status “only where the tribe already possesses and can adequately demon-
61.
Id. § 1377(h)(1) (emphasis added).
62.
419 U.S. 544 (1975).
63.
Id. at 557.
64.
492 U.S. 408, 428 (1989) (White, J., plurality opinion).
65.
Id.
66.
Id.
67.
Id. at 428 (White, J., plurality opinion).
68.
Amendments to the WQS Regulations that Pertain to Standards on Indian Reservations, 54
Fed. Reg. 39,098, 39,101 (proposed Sept. 22, 1989) [hereinafter 1989 Proposed WQS
Rule].
69.
Id. (emphasis added).

12
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
strate [legal] authority to manage and protect water resources within the borders
of the reservation.”70
EPA’s analysis supporting this new requirement was a single paragraph
that strangely did not analyze the CWA TAS statutory text.71 Instead, the
agency referred to its 1988 SDWA TAS rulemaking rejecting a presumption of
tribal jurisdiction over reservation groundwater polluters, and requiring instead
that each tribal applicant demonstrate its inherent jurisdiction.72 EPA neglected
to mention a critical distinction: the SDWA TAS provision explicitly required
tribes show their regulatory functions “are within the area of the Tribal Govern-
ment’s jurisdiction.”73 The CWA, by contrast, did not mention tribal jurisdic-
tion. It required only that the regulatory functions “pertain to the management
and protection of water resources . . . within the borders of an Indian
reservation.”74
EPA’s proposed regulation generated a modest thirty-four written com-
ments.75 Two targeted EPA’s implicit rejection of congressional delegation.
One letter submitted by two senators and a congressman agreed with EPA that
the CWA TAS provision was not intended to enlarge tribal jurisdiction (and
was thus apparently not a delegation).76 Making an otherwise relatively dry ad-
ministrative process more dramatic, three other senators took the opposite view,
70.
Id. (emphasis added). It is odd that EPA treated jurisdiction as relevant to this proposal
because WQS are not regulatory in the traditional control and command context of environ-
mental law. WQS define levels that serve as goals for designated uses of particular waters
and measures for assessing their impairment. See Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards
for Indian Reservations, 81 Fed. Reg. 66,900, 66,902–03 (advance notice of proposed
rulemaking Sept. 29, 2016) [hereinafter 2016 Baseline WQS Proposal]. WQS have legal
effect only through a secondary vehicle, most commonly an NPDES discharge permit that
bases legally enforceable conditions on WQS at the point of discharge or downstream. Id. at
66,902. Similarly, section 401 certification is a tribe’s (or state’s) confirmation that a permit
proposed by a federal agency will attain applicable WQS. Id. at 66,903.  Because the 1991
WQS Rule did not offer any permit authority to tribes, their jurisdiction over polluters was
irrelevant.
71.
1989 Proposed WQS Rule, supra note 68, at 39,101.
72.
SDWA—National Drinking Water Regulations, Underground Injection Control Regula-
tions; Indian Lands, 53 Fed. Reg. 37,396, 37,399 (Sept. 26, 1988) (codified at 40 C.F.R.
pts. 35, 124, 141–46).
73.
42 U.S.C. § 300j-11(b)(1)(B) (emphasis added).
74.
33 U.S.C. § 1377(e)(2) (emphasis added).
75.
1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, at 64,876. Twenty-five people also made oral comments at
three regional hearings. Id. EPA did not indicate how many of the oral comments were
readings of written comments, as is common in administrative hearings. EPA suggested the
“relatively few comments” submitted were due to pre-proposal tribal consultations where
“many of the difficult issues were resolved.” Id.
76.
Id. at 64,879–80 (comments of Senator Alan Simpson, R-WY, Senator Max Baucus, D-
MT, and Representative Bruce Morrison, D-CT).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 13
arguing Congress intended the TAS provision as a delegation of jurisdiction to
tribes over non-Indian water polluters.77
EPA was unmoved. The D.C. Circuit had just that year cautioned EPA
about relying on post-enactment statements by congressional members to inter-
pret statutory provisions.78 The actual legislative history, not surprisingly, was
“somewhat confusing” and “inconclusive.”79 Justice White’s Brendale opinion
was largely dismissed as it did not analyze the CWA’s legislative history, was
not a majority opinion, and was not about water quality regulation.80 EPA still
did not consider Mazurie’s holding that the same Indian reservation definition
found in the CAA TAS provision constituted a congressional delegation.81
Ultimately, EPA concluded that “expansion” of tribal authority over non-
Indians was of such importance that, had Congress desired delegation, it “prob-
ably” would have drafted appropriate statutory language.82 EPA thus opted not
to interpret the TAS provision as a congressional delegation, at least “pending
further judicial or Congressional guidance.”83 That did not mean tribes could
not receive CWA primacy like states; rather, the rule required tribes demon-
strate their inherent sovereignty over non-Indian water polluters.84
77.
Id. (comments of Senators Daniel Inouye, D-HI, John McCain, R-AZ, and Quentin Bur-
dick, D-ND). Adding more intrigue, Senator Inouye, Chairman of the Senate Select Com-
mittee on Indian Affairs, called a historic first oversight hearing three months earlier on the
implementation of EPA’s 1984 Indian Policy. Administration of Indian Programs by the En-
vironmental Protection Agency: Hearing Before the Sen. Select Comm. on Indian Affs., 101st
Cong. 101-412 (1989). Inouye’s introductory remarks said he convened the hearing because
“of deep concerns expressed throughout Indian country about . . . the widely-held perception
that not enough is being done to address environmental problems on Indian lands.” Id. at 1.
Senator McCain, Vice-Chair of the Committee, praised Inouye for convening the hearing as
“[n]o committee of the Congress has ever inquired into these matters.” Id. at 3 (emphasis
added). McCain noted numerous complaints by tribes that federal agencies like EPA, the
Bureau of Indian Affairs (“BIA”) and the Indian Health Service (“IHS”) were not addressing
serious environmental threats to reservation environments, and that many tribal governments
had indicated a need for federal assistance in developing tribal capacity for building and
operating effective environmental regulatory programs. Id. at 2. At the end of the hearing,
Inouye concluded there was “ample justification to be critical of EPA and BIA and IHS on
matters of [Indian country] environmental quality.” Id. at 21.
78.
1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, at 64,880 (citing Hazardous Waste Treatment Council v.
EPA, 886 F.2d 355 (D.C. Cir. 1989)).
79.
Id. at 64,880.
80.
Id.
81.
Id.
82.
Id. EPA did not say what statutory language it wanted to see. Again, Mazurie would have
provided a quick example.
83.
Id. at 64,877–78.
84.
Several commentators criticized that decision. See, e.g., Jessica Owley, Tribal Sovereignty
Over Water Quality, 20 J. LAND USE & ENV’T L. 61, 62–63 (2004) (arguing the CWA TAS
provision is a clear congressional delegation); Regina Cutler, To Clear the Muddy Waters:
Tribal Regulatory Authority Under Section 518 of the Clean Water Act, 29 ENV’T L. 721, 738

14
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
Determining the scope of tribal inherent sovereignty is a legal puzzle
fraught with the risk of indeterminate tests and analyses. The majority of com-
ments on the proposed rule, and therefore EPA’s attention, focused on two
Supreme Court decisions. One was Montana v. United States,85 a relatively con-
temporaneous case that announced a new “general proposition” that tribes lack
civil regulatory jurisdiction over nonmembers on fee land within Indian coun-
try.86 One of two exceptions to the new rule seemed perfectly suited to environ-
mental management: a tribe can regulate the “conduct of non-Indians on fee
lands within its reservation when that conduct threatens or has some direct effect
on the . . . health or welfare of the tribe.”87
The Court is typically quite deferential to states’ decisions on these sub-
jects, accepting, for example, a state’s assertion at the turn of the century that its
bird-hunting laws were rationally related to preserving the public’s general wel-
fare.88 The Montana Court, however, offered no deference to the Crow Tribe
who enacted similar game management laws and sought to apply them to non-
Indians on fee lands within the Crow Reservation. The Court rejected the
Tribe’s asserted jurisdiction, criticizing the United States, who sued on behalf
of the Tribe, because it “did not allege that non-Indian hunting and fishing on
fee lands imperil the subsistence or welfare of the Tribe.”89
Brendale was the other Supreme Court decision most commenters focused
on. It was the first Supreme Court case after Montana directly addressing in-
herent tribal regulatory authority, this time over the proposed development of
two non-Indian fee parcels. Decided just months before EPA proposed the
CWA TAS regulation, Brendale could have provided clarity on Montana’s
health and welfare exception. Instead, the Court split on approaches to the two
land parcels. Six justices denied tribal jurisdiction over fee land in the developed
non-Indian community where tribal interests were arguably more tenuous.90
(1999) (arguing the first court addressing EPA’s interpretation should have held the provi-
sion a clear congressional delegation). Professor Alex Tallchief Skibine made the intriguing
argument that EPA should have resolved the CWA’s ambiguity by invoking the Indian
canon of construction to find congressional delegation. See Alex Tallchief Skibine, The
Chevron Doctrine in Federal Indian Law and the Agencies’ Duty to Interpret Legislation in
Favor of Indians: Did the EPA Reconcile the Two in Interpreting the “Tribes as States” Section of
the Clean Water Act, 11 ST. THOMAS L. REV. 15, 53–54 (1998).
85.
450 U.S. 544 (1981).
86.
Id. at 565.
87.
Id. at 566 (emphasis added).
88.
Geer v. Connecticut, 161 U.S. 519, 534 (1896), overruled on other grounds by Hughes v.
Oklahoma, 441 U.S. 322, 327 (1979).
89.
Montana, 450 U.S. at 566 (emphasis added).
90.
Brendale v. Confederated Tribes & Bands of the Yakima Indian Nation, 492 U.S. 408,
430–31 (1989) (White, J., plurality opinion); id. at 446–47 (Stevens, J., concurring).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 15
Five justices upheld tribal jurisdiction over fee land in the Tribe’s undeveloped
forested area where its welfare interests were most at stake.91
Those results offered little precedential guidance for EPA other than con-
firming Brendale had not significantly undercut or even overruled Montana’s
exceptions.92 There were, though, some scattered tea leaves. One Brendale opin-
ion suggested Montana’s health and welfare effects must be “demonstrably seri-
ous.”93 Another opinion said the non-Indian activities should implicate “a
significant” tribal interest.94 And dicta from a contemporaneous criminal law
decision said that tribes could possess civil authority over non-Indians when its
exercise was “vital” to tribal self-determination.95 EPA took note of the adjec-
tives, and sensed the Court’s trend toward requiring the tribal impacts be “more
than de minimis.”96 EPA’s final WQS rule thus included “an interim operating
rule”97 requiring tribes seeking TAS show the potential impacts of non-Indian
water pollution were “serious and substantial.”98
EPA would evaluate each tribe’s TAS application individually, with EPA’s
expertise and experience forming a backdrop for evaluation. First, EPA explic-
itly recognized that clean water and critical habitat are “absolutely crucial to the
survival of many Indian reservations.”99 Second, EPA made certain “generalized
findings”100: the CWA constituted a legislative determination that water pollu-
tion presents serious and substantial impacts on public health and welfare; the
high mobility of water pollutants makes identifying water quality impairment
caused by non-Indian pollution discharges (as compared to Indian pollution)
difficult if not impossible; water movement increases the possibility tribal citi-
zens will be exposed to pollutants released from non-Indian lands; and Con-
gress clearly preferred tribal water quality regulation on Indian reservations.
Finally, EPA stated its obvious conclusion: “water quality management serves
the purpose of protecting public health and safety, which is a core governmental
function, whose exercise is critical to self-government.”101
91.
Id. at 450 (Blackmun, J., concurring); id. at 443–44 (Stevens, J., concurring).
92.
Id.
93.
Id. at 431 (White, J., plurality opinion).
94.
Id. at 450 (Blackmun, J., concurring).
95.
See Duro v. Reina, 495 U.S. 676, 688 (1990) (citing Brendale, 492 U.S. 408).
96.
1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, at 64,878.
97.
EPA did not explain why it labeled this eligibility requirement as an “interim operating rule.”
Its discussion of the cases characterized the Supreme Court as “exploring” options for the
Montana test, having not yet settled on one. Id. at 64,878. The agency said it adopted the
rule “solely as a matter of prudence in light of judicial uncertainty and [that it did] not reflect
an Agency endorsement of [the] standard per se.” Id. That comment clearly foreshadowed
the agency’s reinterpretation of the TAS provision in 2016, discussed below in Part III.
98.
Id. (emphasis added).
99.
Id.
100. See id. at 64,879.
101. Id..

16
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
Supplemented by these findings, EPA said it would presume a tribal ap-
plicant’s legal analysis met EPA’s Montana test if it made:
[A] relatively simple showing of facts that there are waters within the
reservation used by the Tribe or tribal members, (and thus that the
Tribe or tribal members could be subject to exposure to pollutants
present in, or introduced into, those waters) and that the waters and
critical habitat are subject to protection under the Clean Water Act.
The Tribe must also explicitly assert that impairment of such waters
by the activities of non-Indians, would have a serious and substantial
effect on the health and welfare of the Tribe.102
EPA said the presumption of tribal jurisdiction was rebuttable. The regulation
created a new notice and comment process for adjacent states and tribes who
could lodge a jurisdictional objection by proving that non-Indian water pollu-
tion did not present serious and substantial threats to tribal health and
welfare.103
C.
A Legal Challenge to EPA’s Operating Rule
The agency’s translation of the Montana test into the CWA context clearly
favored tribal primacy for CWA programs. Still, it was unusually honest for a
federal agency to state so baldly the regulation’s most controversial conclusion:
“EPA believes . . . there are substantial legal and factual reasons to assume that
Tribes ordinarily have the legal authority to regulate surface water quality
within a reservation.”104 That was surely a step further than EPA had taken the
year before in its SDWA regulations when it “recognize[d] . . . substantial
support” for tribal jurisdiction across reservations.105 But like the SDWA regu-
lation that declined to “automatically assume” such tribal authority,106 the final
CWA regulation said EPA would not make a “conclusive statement” that tribes
possessed jurisdiction over non-Indian fee lands.107 Each tribal application
would be scrutinized to ensure it met the interim operating rule’s heightened
standard of showing serious and substantial impacts from non-Indian pollution.
102. Id.
103. See id. at 64,898 (codified at 40 C.F.R. § 131.8(c)(2)(ii)).
104. Id.
105. SDWA—National Drinking Water Regulations, Underground Injection Control Regula-
tions; Indian Lands, 53 Fed. Reg. 37,396, 37,399 (Sept. 26, 1988) (codified at 40 C.F.R.
pts. 35, 124, 141–46).
106. Id.
107. 1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, at 68,878. EPA ostensibly buttressed its CWA approach by
noting it was “consistent” with its SDWA approach. Id. Again, however, the agency did not
acknowledge the two statutes were not consistent on this key element: the SDWA TAS
provision explicitly required a showing of tribal jurisdiction whereas the CWA TAS provi-
sion did not.

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 17
The ostensible rigor of that standard was thrown into question by EPA’s
explanation of the burden the interim operating rule put on tribes, and their
opponents. States were certainly not fooled. In later litigation over a particular
tribal TAS application, eleven states filed an amicus brief proclaiming “EPA
has concocted a simplistic, wooden formula under which no tribe could ever fail
to receive state status under the Clean Water Act.”108 The states accused EPA
of shifting the burden of proof established by the Supreme Court: instead of
making tribes show jurisdiction over nonmembers, EPA allegedly required
states prove the absence of tribal jurisdiction, a burden the states complained was
impossible to meet.109 Oddly, though, no state or non-Indian organization chal-
lenged the final regulation when it became effective.
Instead, the regulation’s legal validity was implicated nearly five years later
when EPA approved the WQS of the Salish and Kootenai Tribes for the Flat-
head Indian Reservation in western Montana. The Reservation’s distinguishing
feature is Flathead Lake, the largest natural freshwater lake in the contiguous
United States west of the Mississippi River.110 The State of Montana operates a
research facility on the Reservation that discharges pollutants into the Lake.
Two Montana towns operate wastewater facilities on the Reservation that dis-
charge pollutants into creeks downstream. Although the State’s research facility
and both towns are on the Reservation, and EPA had not authorized State
implementation of the NPDES permit program there, all three facilities oper-
ated under state-issued permits.111 Once the Tribes’ WQS were approved, the
State sued EPA because it feared these facilities would need federally issued
108. Brief of Amici Curiae States of Arizona et al. in Support of Petition for Writ of Certiorari at
11, Montana v. EPA, 137 F.3d 1135 (9th Cir. 1998) (No. 97-1929).
109. See id. at 15–16.
110. Archeology Program, State Submerged Resources: Montana, NAT’L PARK SERV., https://
perma.cc/JUF3-X2A5.
111. See Montana v. EPA, 941 F. Supp. 945, 947 (D. Mont. 1996) [hereinafter Montana v. EPA
I], aff’d 137 F.3d 1135, 1140 (9th Cir. 1998) [hereinafter Montana v. EPA II].

18
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
NPDES permits,112 and the State believed that EPA’s approval trenched on
state sovereignty.113
The main thrust of the case was on EPA’s application of the Montana test
to the Salish and Kootenai Tribes’ WQS application. The State argued EPA
got the test wrong.114 The Tribes argued the State was challenging EPA’s in-
terim operating rule five years too late.115 EPA let that issue go, presumably
content to rest in the comfort of administrative law’s judicial deference.
EPA conceded it was not entitled to deference in analyzing the Supreme
Court’s federal common law for Indians.116 How EPA applied the CWA TAS
provision to the Tribal WQS application in light of Montana and Brendale was
a different matter. The district court would not review that decision de novo,
but would simply ensure the decision was not arbitrary or capricious.117 The
court concluded EPA’s factual findings that non-Indian pollution could have
serious and substantial impacts on tribal health and welfare were “entitled to
112. See id. The case was decided on summary judgment, so there was no evidence offered that
EPA demanded the facilities apply for federal permits. EPA’s answer did allege compliance
with the CWA required the facilities obtain federally-issued NPDES permits. See id. at 948.
That seemingly contradicts the agency’s acknowledgment two years earlier that some states
were issuing water discharge permits in Indian country without authorization, and pledging
EPA “will, whenever possible, assume, without deciding” they contained enforceable limita-
tions. See Treatment of Indian Tribes as States for Purposes of Sections 308, 309, 401, 402,
and 405 of the Clean Water Act, 58 Fed. Reg. 67,966, 67,974 (Dec. 22, 1993) (codified at
40 C.F.R. pts. 122, 123, 124, 501). On the other hand, Montana lies within EPA’s Region
VIII that was then led by William Yellowtail, the Nation’s first Indigenous Regional Ad-
ministrator, whose informal policy was to replace state-issued NPDES permits on Indian
reservations with federal ones upon the request of the tribe. Personal communication from
William Yellowtail to author (1997). EPA’s response to the State’s complaint apparently
made no reference to a tribal request, nor a federal one. See Montana v. EPA I, 941 F. Supp.
at 948.
113. The State argued EPA’s approval subjected the State to Tribal regulation and infringed on
the State’s 401 certification authority. Montana v. EPA I, 941 F. Supp. at 947–48. These
arguments were illustrative of the reflexive, baseless objections often made by states (and
non-Indians) in the face of exercises of tribal sovereignty. As described in note 68 above,
WQS are value judgments on the desired quality of water; they are not regulatory and had
no direct impact on the State. WQS are implemented primarily by NPDES permits, which
are regulatory. Id. But the Tribes had not applied for NPDES program delegation. The
facilities’ permits would either remain issued by the State itself or would be issued by EPA,
see supra text accompanying notes 107–09, not the Tribes. Similarly, the State’s 401 certifica-
tion authority for federal permits outside the Reservation was unaffected by EPA’s approval.
Since the State had never been approved for 401 certification on the Reservation, it was not
possible to lose it.
114. See Montana v. EPA I, 941 F. Supp. at 947.
115. Id. at 948.
116. Id. On review, the Ninth Circuit explained “the scope of inherent tribal authority is a ques-
tion of law for which EPA is entitled to no deference. . . . [Federal Indian law] has nothing
to do with [EPA’s] own expertise . . . .” Montana v. EPA II, 137 F.3d at 1140.
117. Montana v. EPA I, 941 F. Supp. at 956 (citing 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A)).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 19
substantial deference.”118 EPA’s experience and expertise in making the genera-
lized findings about the serious nature of water pollution were “not to be
treated lightly,”119 and the agency’s reconciliation of environmental law with its
Indian Policy by avoiding checkerboarding between Indian trust land and non-
Indian fee land was entitled to deference.120 The district court upheld EPA’s
approval and the Tribes’ water quality-related value judgments became legally
enforceable.121
Montana fared no better in its appeal to the Ninth Circuit.122 Unlike the
district court, the Ninth Circuit recognized the State’s claim for what it was: “a
facial challenge to regulations the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
promulgated pursuant to § 518(e) [the TAS provision] of the Clean Water
Act.”123 Like the district court, the Ninth Circuit addressed the untimely claim
anyway. The State’s substantive argument was a convoluted effort to extract
from Brendale’s split opinions a binding impact that either overruled or signifi-
cantly revised Montana.124 Unfortunately for the State, an intervening unani-
mous Supreme Court decision made clear Montana was still good law.125
The Ninth Circuit was unpersuaded by the State’s attempt to convert into
a rule Justice Steven’s Brendale opinion insisting tribal inherent sovereignty over
non-Indians existed only where state or federal remedies were inadequate to
alleviate threats to tribal welfare.126 Two related Federal Circuit cases supported
EPA’s view of tribal sovereignty over reservation water pollution discharged by
any source.127 Finally, EPA’s decision to adopt inherent tribal authority as the
118. Id. at 957.
119. Id. at 958.
120. Id. (citing Wash. Dep’t of Ecology v. EPA, 752 F.2d 1465, 1469 (9th Cir. 1985)).
121. Id. The dispositive impact of administrative law on the Tribes’ WQS program here shows
clearly the beneficial impact of partnering with EPA as compared to proceeding on inherent
tribal sovereignty alone. See generally JAMES M. GRIJALVA, CLOSING THE CIRCLE: ENVI-
RONMENTAL JUSTICE IN INDIAN COUNTRY (2008) (analyzing Indian country environmen-
tal law court cases and arguing the confluence of administrative law with environmental and
Indian law presents the best opportunity for achieving environmental justice in Indian
country).
122. Montana v. EPA II, 137 F.3d at 1138.
123. Id. at 1137–38.
124. Id. at 1140.
125. Id. (stating Strate v. A-1 Contractors, 520 U.S. 438, 445 (1997), “reaffirmed the vitality of
Montana”).
126. Id. at 1140–41.
127. Id. at 1141 (citing Confederated Colville Tribes v. Walton, 647 F.2d 42, 52 (9th Cir. 1981)
(noting waters are unitary resources where actions by one user have immediate and direct
effects on others) and Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 415 (10th Cir. 1996) (affirming the
authority of tribes to set more stringent WQS than adjacent states under the CWA)).

20
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
standard intended by Congress implicated judicial deference because the
CWA’s language and legislative history were not entirely clear.128
D.
Why Aren’t There More Tribal Water Quality Standards?
Of the 573 federally-recognized tribes,129 EPA estimates about three hun-
dred have formal or informal reservations making them eligible for WQS
TAS.130 EPA’s WQS TAS regulation became effective in 1992.131 Almost
thirty years later, there are forty-five tribes with approved WQS,132 a mere fif-
teen percent of eligible tribes. Sixteen more tribes have been approved “as
states,” but have not submitted WQS for EPA review.133 Another ten have
applications for basic CWA TAS status under review.134 History suggests it is
unlikely those twenty-six tribes will develop and submit WQS to EPA for ap-
proval anytime soon, but if they did, and if EPA approved them, then only
twenty-four percent of eligible tribes would have legally enforceable tribal water
quality value judgments under the CWA, nearly thirty years after the opportu-
nity to establish them arose.
Why, for tribes who view the environment as central to their cultural iden-
tity135 and know particularly that “water is life,”136 have so few developed WQS
during those thirty years? To my knowledge, no formal survey has asked this
128. Id. at 1140 (citing Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Nat. Res. Def. Council, 467 U.S. 837, 843–44
(1984) (holding where a statute is silent or ambiguous on the disputed issue, the court’s role
is to determine whether the agency’s answer is based on a permissible construction of the
statute, and not to substitute the court’s view for the agency’s)).
129. Indian Entities Recognized by and Eligible to Receive Services from the BIA, 84 Fed. Reg.
1200 (Feb. 1, 2019).
130. See 2016 Baseline WQS Proposal, supra note 70, at 66,902 (advance notice of proposed
rulemaking Sept. 29, 2016) (including formal reservations, pueblos, and informal reserva-
tions, which are lands held in trust by the United States for tribes that are not officially
designated as reservations). The main reason for the disparity with the overall number of 573
federally recognized tribes is the Supreme Court’s misguided decision in Alaska v. Native
Village of Venetie Tribal Government, 522 U.S. 520 (1998), which held that, with one excep-
tion, the lands of the 229 Alaskan tribes are not reservations. See Bureau of Indian Affs.,
Dep’t of the Interior, Alaska Region, https://perma.cc/4AW8-8LRM (noting BIA serves 229
federally recognized tribes).
131. 1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, at 64,878.
132. See EPA Actions on Tribal Water Quality Standards and Contracts, EPA, https://perma.cc/
V2P5-CBR7 [hereinafter WQS TAS Table]. One tribe, the Confederated Tribes of the
Colville Reservation in Washington, has federally-promulgated WQS. See id.
133. Id. EPA’s WQS TAS Table contains some but not all tribal applications and EPA decision
documents. These give no indication of whether the tribes with TAS status are actively
developing WQS. Ten of these fifteen tribes received TAS status in the last few years, so
they may be developing their WQS now. Five of those tribes, though, were approved more
than eight years ago, and one was approved over twenty years ago.
134. Id.
135. See, e.g., AMS. FOR INDIAN OPPORTUNITY, supra note 44, at 4:

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 21
question. Tribes and commentators have made a number of fair but anecdotal
suggestions: historical suppression, resource constraints, possible incongruence
between western and indigenous models of environmental protection, and per-
haps most significantly, fear of litigation.
The historical reality of over two hundred years of genocide, relocation,
assimilation, pervasive federal control over all aspects of Indian life, and mis-
guided attempts to remake tribal governments in Euro-American models make
it plain that tribes face an incredible uphill struggle to realize self-determination
in any genuine sense.137 EPA’s Indian Policy essentially acknowledged all of
this, albeit generally:
It is important to emphasize that the implementation of regula-
tory programs which will realize these principles on Indian Reserva-
tions cannot be accomplished immediately. Effective implementation
will take careful and conscientious work by EPA, the Tribes and many
others. In many cases, it will require changes in applicable statutory
authorities and regulations. It will be necessary to proceed in a carefully
phased way, to learn from successes and failures, and to gain experi-
ence. Nonetheless, by beginning work on the priority problems that
Indian people not only have a special relationship with the Federal government, but
also with the environment. The land, the air, the water, the wildlife, the river and
sealife, and the plantlife—all are important to Indian people, not only for esthetic
values but also for religious reasons. Indian lands have diminished to a fraction of
what they originally were, and these remaining reservations are the only ones for
the future. The quality of the environment, then, is extremely important. Indian
people cannot sell these lands once they become polluted and move elsewhere. The
importance of the environment cannot be thought of in terms of singular issues and
actions, but rather as a “whole.” This “whole” defines Indian people. Consequently,
separation of one ingredient; culture, religion, environment, and development can-
not be successfully achieved without adversely affecting reservation and community
life.
136. See Comment of Ken Norton, Chairman, Nat’l Tribal Water Council, to Danielle Ander-
son, EPA at 2 (2015) (quoting a Water Prayer from the East: “We give thanks to all the
waters of the world for quenching our thirst and providing our strength. Water is Life.”). In
2016, “water is life” became a rallying cry for some ten thousand indigenous and other people
nonviolently opposing the construction of an oil pipeline just upstream of the Standing Rock
Indian Reservation in North Dakota. The protest, and the parallel litigation by two Sioux
tribes against the Army Corps of Engineers is briefly described in Robert T. Anderson,
Indigenous Rights to Water & Environmental Protection, 53 HARV. C.R.–C.L. L. REV. 337,
367–75 (2018). See also Elizabeth Ann Kronk Warner, Environmental Justice: A Necessary
Lens to Effectively View Environmental Threats to Indigenous Survival, 26 TRANSNAT’L L. &
CONTEMP. PROBS. 343, 355–65 (2017) (using the controversy as a case study that demon-
strates how specific environmental challenges indigenous communities face may be viewed
through an EJ lens).
137. Against that backdrop, it is amazing the programmatic successes many tribes have achieved
in a broad variety of areas like housing, education, health, economic development, criminal
enforcement, judicial systems, utilities, and a host of others.

22
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
exist now and continuing in the direction established under these
principles, over time we can significantly enhance environmental
quality on reservation lands.138
Many tribes simply lack the financial and human resources required to
manage environmental programs,139 and EPA offers insufficient financial and
technical resources to build tribal capacity.140 In light of longstanding and varied
federal efforts dismantling traditional indigenous governance systems, many
tribes today lack a foundation of governmental infrastructure for building effec-
tive environmental programs. One basic example of that is the lack of adminis-
trative procedure laws guiding tribal agencies as they implement their various
programs.141 Compounding that gap is the frequent turnover of tribal council
members, resulting in a parade of leaders unfamiliar with the significant bene-
fits (and challenges) of TAS, and technical staff who seem to leave or move to
other positions just as they become knowledgeable about environmental
programs.
Occasionally a commenter will suggest generally that Western environ-
mental law is simply inconsistent with indigenous cultural values,142 or that tri-
bal state-like roles are arguably just another extension of colonialism.143 These
138. 1984 INDIAN POLICY, supra note 45, at 1 (emphasis added). Relevant to this discussion is
the reality it took EPA eleven years from its 1973 CWA rule for Indian country implemen-
tation just to adopt its official 1984 cross-program, agency-wide policy promising respect for
tribal self-determination, see James M. Grijalva, The Origins of EPA’s Indian Program, 15
KAN. J.L. & PUB. POL’Y 191, 205–77 (2006) [hereinafter Grijalva, Origins], and another ten
years to begin implementing it in earnest, see Memorandum from Carol M. Browner, Adm’r,
EPA, to Asst. Adm’rs et al., EPA (July 14, 1994) (on file with author) (Announcement of
Actions for Strengthening EPA’s Tribal Operations).
139. 2016 Baseline WQS Proposal, supra note 70, at 66,902 (noting some tribes have not devel-
oped WQS for lack of resources).
140. See, e.g., Tom Goldtooth, Indigenous Nations: Summary of Sovereignty and Its Implications for
Environmental Protection, in ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE: ISSUES, POLICIES, AND SOLU-
TIONS 138, 146 (Bunyan Bryant ed., 1995) (implying EPA’s underfunding of tribes is a key
factor in environmental injustice).
141. See generally Dean B. Suagee & John P. Lowndes, Due Process and Public Participation in
Tribal Environmental Programs, 13 TUL. ENV’T L.J. 1 (1999) (discussing reasons why tribes
that become involved in American environmental federalism should adopt administrative
public participation rules and due process mechanisms, and considering ways tribes might
incorporate culturally important interests in such rules).
142. See, e.g., Robert Williams, Jr., Large Binocular Telescopes, Red Squirrel Pi˜natas, and Apache
Sacred Mountains: Decolonizing Environmental Law in a Multicultural World, 96 W. VA. L.
REV. 1133 (1994) (arguing that western environmental law is incapable of accounting for
Indigenous visions of EJ).
143. See, e.g., Anna Fleder & Darren J. Ranco, Tribal Environmental Sovereignty: Culturally Ap-
propriate Protection or Paternalism?, 19 J. NAT. RESOURCES & ENV’T L. 35 (2004–2005)
(questioning whether a court decision upholding stringent conditions imposed by EPA on
an upstream, off-reservation pollution source on the basis of federally-approved tribal WQS
designed to protect cultural interests promoted or eroded tribal sovereignty); Darren J.

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 23
are fair positions, although the former is typically expressed in the limited con-
text of the shortcomings of environmental impact statements under the Na-
tional Environmental Policy Act, and the latter often generalizes tribal TAS
roles in ways that do not fully capture the complex nature of environmental
federalism. Contrary positions are also offered, suggesting perhaps an imperfect
but functional blending of ancient traditions and duties with modern limita-
tions on true sovereignty.144
Rarely stated explicitly, but exceptionally clear to tribal environmental and
EPA attorneys, fear of litigation consistently gives tribes and EPA pause.145
After two hundred years, some states still resent the presence of Indian country
within their borders and the limits imposed on state authority there, and they
robotically react to tribal exercises of governmental authority with taxpayer-
funded lawsuits. Non-Indian industry presumably cares little for the integrity of
state sovereignty, but perhaps its comfort with state politicians and their ten-
dency to favor economic development over environmental protection immedi-
ately causes disquiet at the first hint of federal or tribal regulation.
Tribal and EPA fear of litigation is thus well-founded against a long his-
tory of legal challenges to tribal jurisdiction over non-Indians.146 Yet, on the
narrow question of tribal jurisdiction under the CWA WQS and section 401
certification programs, Montana v. EPA II147 should have significantly assuaged
Ranco, Models of Tribal Environmental Regulation: In Pursuit of a Culturally Relevant Form of
Tribal Sovereignty, FED. LAW., Mar.–Apr. 2009, at 46, 48 (asserting “TAS status . . . ap-
pears to augment the authority of tribes but, in fact, diminishes tribal sovereignty”).
144. See, e.g., Dean B. Suagee, Tribal Self-Determination and Environmental Federalism: Cultural
Values as a Force for Sustainability, 3 WIDENER L. SYMP. J. 229, 233–34 (1998) (noting
when tribes “become engaged in environmental federalism, they do not act exactly like state
governments [because] protecting the land and its biological communities tends to be a pre-
requisite for cultural survival”); Rebecca Tsosie, Tribal Environmental Policy in an Era of
Self-Determination: The Role of Ethics, Economics, and Traditional Ecological Knowledge, 21
VT. L. REV. 225, 226 (1996) (“[B]ecause of the Indian nations’ status as ‘domestic depen-
dent nations,’ tribal environmental policy is to some extent contingent upon Anglo-Ameri-
can norms . . . Yet the traditional systems of decision-making and normative frameworks for
determining appropriate human conduct toward the environment remain.”).
145. See Dean B. Suagee, The Tribal Right to Protect the Environment, 27 NAT. RES. & ENV’T 52,
53 (2012) (suggesting a main reason so few tribes have sought TAS status is the trend in the
Supreme Court of restricting tribal sovereignty through the “implicit divestiture” concept
articulated by Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe, 435 U.S. 191 (1978), which allows the
Court to decide whether a particular governmental power is appropriate or should be implic-
itly divested). My experience over thirty years working with some seventy tribes as an attor-
ney, consultant and collaborator in a variety of settings addressing a wide spectrum of
environmental issues confirms anecdotally many of the foregoing reasons, especially anxiety
over provoking litigation.
146. Of particular concern is the risk of judicial diminishment discussed in Part IV.A.
147. 137 F.3d 1135 (9th Cir. 1998)

24
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
that fear.148 EPA’s interim operating rule offered tribes the safest jurisdictional
harbor available short of congressional delegation. The unique combination of
administrative, environmental and Indian law convinced the Ninth Circuit that
the operating rule reasonably applied the Supreme Court’s Montana test in the
context of CWA regulation. This was of course only one decision in one federal
appellate circuit, but the Ninth Circuit is an important one for Indian law,149
and the Supreme Court denied certiorari for the case.150
Also relevant for tribes who partner with EPA in the cooperative federal-
ism mode for environmental management is the reality that state and non-
Indian lawsuits name EPA as the sole or lead defendant, not the tribe.151 These
legal challenges are most commonly federal administrative law claims alleging
EPA wrongly treated the tribe as a state for some program, for instance, ap-
proving a particular tribe’s WQS or air quality redesignation.152 Thus, EPA
bears the burden of funding and staffing those cases.153 The suit might focus on
EPA’s process completely apart from the tribe’s substantive program,154 or it
148. A more pressing fear, indirectly aimed at tribal sovereignty, is the legal claim that a particular
reservation had been diminished by turn-of-the-century allotment programs. See infra Part
IV.
149. Both by geographic expanse and by number of states, the Ninth Circuit is the largest circuit
in the country. In addition to Montana, it encompasses most of the western continental
states—Washington, Oregon, California, Arizona, Nevada, and Idaho—as well as Alaska
and Hawaii. With large populations of indigenous peoples in each of those states, Ninth
Circuit cases account for a significant portion of federal Indian law decisions. Ninth Circuit
panels previously decided the first two Indian country environmental regulatory cases. See
Nance v. EPA, 645 F.2d 701 (9th Cir. 1981) (upholding EPA’s approval of a tribal air
quality redesignation for its reservation); Wash. Dep’t of Ecology v. EPA, 752 F.2d 1465,
1469 (9th Cir. 1985) (upholding EPA’s refusal to delegate Indian country hazardous waste
management primacy under RCRA to a state). The results of both cases were consistent
with the Ninth Circuit’s reputation for favorable treatment of Indian claims.
150. See Montana v. EPA, 525 U.S. 921 (1998) (mem). Yet, the Ninth Circuit has a history of its
Indian cases being overturned by the Supreme Court: the tribes’ key losses in Oliphant v.
Suquamish Tribe, 435 U.S. 191 (1978) (judicially divesting tribal sovereignty over non-Indian
criminal actions), Montana v. United States, 450 U.S. 544 (1981) (judicially divesting tribal
sovereignty over non-Indian hunting and fishing on reservation fee lands), and Brendale v.
Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakima Indian Nation, 492 U.S. 408 (1989) (judicially
divesting tribal sovereignty over non-Indian land development on certain reservation fee
lands) had been victories in the Ninth Circuit.
151. See, e.g., Nance v. EPA, 645 F.2d 701; Wash. Dep’t of Ecology v. EPA, 752 F.2d 1465.
152. See, e.g., Montana v. EPA II, 137 F.3d 1135; Arizona v. EPA, 151 F.3d 1205 (9th Cir.
1998).
153. Tribes are sometimes named as additional defendants, see, e.g., Montana v. EPA II, 137
F.3d 1135, or intervene as defendants representing their programs, see, e.g., Wisconsin v.
EPA, 266 F.3d 741 (7th Cir. 2001). In either case, the substantive burden and cost of these
roles is nowhere near that borne by EPA.
154. See, e.g., Arizona v. EPA, 151 F.3d at 1212–13 (addressing use of a federal implementation
plan to make a tribal redesignation effective).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 25
might implicate directly the tribe’s process155 or substantive program.156 Regard-
less, losing the suit primarily means the tribe’s program would no longer be
approved—perpetuating exactly the Indian country regulatory gap status that
existed before the tribe sought primacy.157
When EPA wins TAS-related suits, as it has done a significant majority
of the time, the tribe’s program then has the same legal consequences as similar
state programs. For example, EPA’s win in Montana v. EPA II made the Salish
& Kootenai Tribes’ water quality value judgments enforceable under federal
law.158 Every federal license and permit issued on the Flathead Reservation by a
federal agency must now contain conditions ensuring compliance with the
Tribes’ WQS.159 The Tribes’ section 401 certification authority ensures that
result as it rests upon the Tribes’, not EPA’s, assessment of each discharge’s
impact on the Tribes’ WQS.160 The permit conditions required for compliance
with the Tribes’ WQS also rest in the Tribes’ discretion; EPA has no authority
to reject or revise them161 even if the agency believes the conditions are more
stringent than necessary for WQS compliance.162 Discharges in violation of
water quality conditions in permits are subject to enforcement by EPA163 as well
155. See, e.g., id. (addressing a tribe’s analysis supporting redesignation).
156. See, e.g., Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 415 (10th Cir. 1996) (addressing whether a
tribe’s stringent WQS were attainable).
157. A critical exception to the result that tribes will simply return to where they were before
seeking primacy is the serious risk a diminishment claim will reduce their territory, discussed
in Part IV.
158. EPA approval is presumably irrelevant to whether tribal WQS would be enforceable under
tribal law. Depending upon a particular tribe’s water quality program and background tribal
law, tribal WQS could be enforced through a tribal permit condition or other mechanism
without EPA involvement. There should be no question the tribe’s inherent sovereignty
would apply to an individual tribal citizen’s or tribal facility’s water polluting activities. This
is arguably reason enough why even tribes with heavily checkerboarded reservations might
consider developing WQS apart from the question of using them via EPA approval and
involvement to control non-Indian water polluting activities.
159. 33 U.S.C. § 1341(a)(1).
160. Id.; 40 C.F.R. § 124.51(c) (2019). EPA also has an independent duty to ensure such compli-
ance. See 33 U.S.C. § 131(b)(1)(C) (permitted discharges must achieve any more stringent
standard necessary to attain WQS adopted under state law pursuant to section 510); 40
C.F.R. § 122.4(a), (d) (NPDES permits must ensure the attainment of applicable WQS of
all affected states). Tribal TAS approval, of course, means the tribe is a state, whose WQS
must then be protected by permit conditions.
161. See, e.g., Lake Erie All. for Prot. of Coastal Corridor v. U.S. Army Corps of Eng’rs, 526 F.
Supp. 1063, 1074 (W.D. Pa. 1981) (holding certification is the state’s exclusive prerogative);
Mobil Oil Corp. v. Kelley, 426 F. Supp. 230, 234–35 (S.D. Ala. 1976) (determining Con-
gress intended states play a paramount role in certification).
162. See, e.g., Roosevelt Campobello Int’l Park Comm’n v. EPA, 684 F.2d 1041, 1056–57 (1st
Cir. 1982) (finding EPA has no authority to determine if state levels are more stringent than
necessary).
163. 33 U.S.C. § 1319(a)(1).

26
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
as by affected citizens.164 Also potentially impactful for some tribes, the
Superfund statute165 requires EPA to ensure any remedial cleanup that leaves
hazardous substances onsite attains tribal WQS.166
Even more critically for some tribes, EPA’s approval of tribal WQS cre-
ates a buffer of sorts protecting tribal waters from upstream, off-reservation
pollution sources. Like states, tribes with WQS more stringent than the up-
stream jurisdiction are protected by EPA’s insistence that NPDES permits
contain conditions attaining the downstream standards.167 Because of judicial
deference to EPA’s environmental expertise, courts are hesitant to second-guess
its approval of standards even when they appear extremely stringent.168 And the
possibility such WQS might impact economic development in the upstream
jurisdiction is not a legal basis for EPA to disapprove of the standards or for a
court to vacate EPA’s approval of them.169
III.
THE CLEAN WATER ACT’S DELEGATION TO TRIBES OF
JURISDICTION OVER NON-INDIAN WATER POLLUTERS
The various issues and possible explanations in Part II.D for why more
tribes have not developed WQS mask a fundamental, pressing reality: “Waters
164. Id. § 1365(a)(1). Such “citizen suits” against violators on and near reservations hold
programmatic potential for tribes beyond the direct impact of halting illegal water dis-
charges. See James M. Grijalva, The Tribal Sovereign as Citizen: Protecting Indian Country
Health and Welfare Through Federal Environmental Citizen Suits, 12 MICH. J. RACE & L. 33
(2006) (arguing tribal environmental citizen suits are sovereign actions protecting tribal
health and welfare without risking adverse judicial decisions, and provide opportunities for
building regulatory capacity).
165. Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C.
§§ 9601–9675.
166. 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d)(2)(A) (treating CWA WQS as “legally applicable or relevant and ap-
propriate standard[s]” (“ARARs”) for determining the level of cleanup for remedial actions
that leave hazardous substances onsite). Tribal environmental capacity is important here in
ensuring EPA has notice of tribal WQS that should or could be considered ARARs. See
EPA, OLEM DIRECTIVE 9200.2-187, BEST PRACTICE PROCESS FOR IDENTIFYING AND
DETERMINING STATE APPLICABLE OR RELEVANT AND APPROPRIATE REQUIREMENTS
STATUS PILOT 1 (2017) (stating “the state [or tribe treated as a state] is responsible for
identifying state [or tribal] ARARs and communicating them to EPA in a timely manner”).
167. See, e.g., Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 415 (10th Cir. 1996). A similar situation can
occur in the CAA. See Nance v. EPA, 645 F.2d 701 (9th Cir. 1981) (upholding EPA’s
approval of a tribe’s reclassification of its airshed, leading to new permit conditions imposed
on an upwind facility off-reservation).
168. See, e.g., Albuquerque v. Browner, 865 F. Supp. 733, 741–42 (D.N.M. 1993) (upholding
EPA approval of tribal WQS the court found “troubling” because of its extreme stringency),
aff’d, 97 F.3d 415 (10th Cir. 1996).
169. See Wisconsin v. EPA, 266 F.3d 741 (7th Cir. 2001) (affirming EPA’s approval of the
Sokaogon Chippewa Community’s WQS despite the possibility of upstream, off-reservation
impacts on state-approved mining).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 27
on the majority of Indian reservations do not have water quality standards . . . to
protect human health and the environment.”170 EPA made that striking admis-
sion in proposing a new interpretation of the CWA TAS provision designed to
increase the number of tribal WQS. What EPA did not admit was that the
abject lack of enforceable standards for water quality protection in Indian coun-
try was an EJ issue of the highest magnitude. Not all tribes face serious risks
from hazardous waste or air pollution or underground injection of toxic wastes.
But all tribes use surface waters in a variety of ways indispensable to tribal
citizens’ health, culture, and spirituality. Only a tiny portion of those uses are
protected by specifically designed WQS.
A.
EPA’s 2016 Reinterpretation Rule
The Indian country water quality inequity was obvious to Lisa Jackson, the
only EPA Administrator to date who has seriously addressed EJ. In 2011, she
announced the agency would consider interpreting the CWA TAS provision as
a congressional delegation.171 If Congress had delegated authority over non-
Indian water polluters, then tribes would not face the TAS hurdles of showing
inherent jurisdiction over non-Indians, nor would they (or EPA) risk litigation
on that contentious issue.
In 2013, the National Tribal Water Council (“NTWC”)172 threw its
weight behind congressional delegation, pointedly noting tribes were not being
treated the same as states because of the jurisdictional requirement, which the
Council asserted was preventing tribes from developing WQS.173 One year
later, EPA notified tribes it was initiating consultation procedures on a possible
reinterpretation of the CWA TAS provision.174 In 2015, EPA proposed a rule
170. 2015 Proposed TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 59, at 47,430 (emphasis added).
171. See OFF. OF GEN. COUNSEL, EPA, PLAN EJ 2014 LEGAL TOOLS 79 (2011), https://
perma.cc/L8GL-U4Q7. This document was unprecedented in publicizing legal tools availa-
ble for communities seeking EJ. It appropriately addressed the unique legal context of Indian
country separately, but the accompanying strategic plan was also unprecedented in its inclu-
sion of tribal communities throughout the agency’s priorities, plans and initiatives. See EPA,
PLAN EJ 2014 (2011), https://perma.cc/YDM8-T8QJ.
172. The Council is a technical, scientific body created to assist EPA, tribes, and tribal organiza-
tions with research and information for decision-making on water-related issues and con-
cerns impacting Indian communities. See NATIONAL TRIBAL WATER COUNCIL, https://
perma.cc/WD3G-7EKU.
173. EQUAL TREATMENT FOR TRIBES IN SEEKING ELIGIBILITY UNDER EPA REGULATORY
PROGRAMS 1–2 [hereinafter EQUAL TREATMENT FOR TRIBES]. This document is unat-
tributed and undated. EPA reports receiving it from the National Tribal Water Council in
2013. See Revised Interpretation of CWA Tribal Provision, 80 Fed. Reg. 47,436 (proposed
Aug. 7, 2015).
174. Letter from Elizabeth Southerland, Dir., Off. of Sci. & Tech., to Tribal Leaders 1 (Apr. 18,
2014) (on file with author) (stating EPA’s reconsideration would focus on whether the
CWA TAS provision was a congressional delegation to tribes of jurisdiction over non-Indi-

28
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
interpreting the CWA TAS provision as a congressional delegation to tribes of
water quality jurisdiction over non-Indians.175
The proposal was titled a “Revised Interpretation” of the CWA TAS pro-
vision, but its text repeatedly used the term reinterpretation.176 EPA reprised its
1991 reasoning for not initially interpreting the provision as a congressional
delegation, although with a distinct tone suggesting more substantive support
for delegation than the agency perhaps admitted in its 1991 rule. EPA said its
reliance then on tribal inherent sovereignty instead of delegation was a “cau-
tious approach”177 taken while awaiting “further congressional or judicial gui-
dance” on whether a delegation interpretation would be proper.178  The bulk of
its announcement described several “significant developments” as well as addi-
tional material supporting delegation, and invited comments on its proposed
reinterpretation of the CWA TAS provision.179
The apparent lack of interest was quite surprising. Tribal jurisdiction gen-
erally, and tribal environmental regulatory jurisdiction specifically, directly im-
plicates the governmental authority of over three hundred tribes with
reservation lands eligible for CWA TAS status180 and thirty-two states with
Indian reservations.181 It has the potential to influence control of thousands of
industry firms and businesses, most non-Indian owned, and thousands if not
ans, and if so, such reinterpretation of the Act would replace the existing requirement that
tribes show inherent jurisdiction over non-Indians, which “could reduce some of the time
and effort for tribes submitting TAS for regulatory programs under” the CWA).
175. 2015 Proposed TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 59, at 47,430.
176. Id. at 47,430–32, 47,434, 47,436, 47,438–39, 47,441. Even the proposal’s electronic contact
address reflected this perspective: TASreinterpretationepa.gov.
177. Id. at 47,433.
178. Id. at 47,431. Apart from the alleged significant developments, EPA also noted it had since
1991 prevailed in five cases under the inherent sovereignty approach. See Wisconsin v. EPA,
266 F.3d 741 (7th Cir. 2001) (affirming EPA’s approval of the Sokaogon Chippewa Com-
munity’s WQS despite the possibility of upstream, off-reservation impacts on state-approved
mining); Montana v. EPA I, 941 F. Supp. 945 (D. Mont. 1996) (affirming EPA’s approval
of the Confederated Salish & Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reservation’s WQS in face of
possible impacts on facilities of the state and its subdivision); Montana v. EPA II, 137 F.3d
1135 (9th Cir. 1998) (same); Montana v. EPA, 141 F. Supp. 2d 1259 (D. Mont. 1998)
(affirming EPA’s approval of the Assiniboine & Sioux Tribes of the WQS of the Fort Peck
Reservation); Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 415 (10th Cir. 1996) (affirming EPA’s ap-
proval of the Isleta Pueblo’s extremely stringent WQS in context of EPA using them to
apply new permit conditions to off-reservation city).
179. 2015 Proposed TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 59, at 47,434.
180. EPA says there are “over 300 tribes” with reservation lands eligible for CWA TAS. See 2016
Baseline WQS Proposal, supra note 70, at 66,902 (advance notice of proposed rulemaking
Sept. 29, 2016) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 131) (including formal reservations, pueblos,
and informal reservations, which are lands held in trust by the United States for tribes that
are not officially designated as reservations).
181. See Indian Lands in the United States, BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFS., https://perma.cc/6LMZ-
AJ6P.

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 29
tens of thousands of individual Indian and non-Indian people. And the extent
of tribal jurisdiction, particularly over non-Indians, is a matter of interest for
dozens of non-governmental organizations supporting tribes, states, and indus-
try. But the proposed rule generated only forty-four comments.182
The majority of commenters—including eighteen tribes, three tribal orga-
nizations, some members of the public, and two states183—strongly supported
the agency’s interpretation.184 The minority—six states,185 several local govern-
ments, industry, and one member of the public—argued against delegation.
The negative comments did not sway EPA. The agency addressed them di-
rectly, laying out its strongest responses, and finalized its interpretation of the
CWA TAS provision as a congressional delegation to tribes of jurisdiction over
reservations including non-Indian fee lands.186
182. See Revised Interpretation of Clean Water Act Tribal Provision, 81 Fed. Reg. 30,183,
30,184 (May 16, 2016) (codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 123, 131, 233, 501) [hereinafter 2016
TAS Reinterpretation]. In 2014, EPA conducted tribal “consultation” under Executive Or-
der 13175 via distance webinars. Id. at 30,197–98. Interestingly, EPA met in person with ten
national and regional state associations and held “additional informational meetings” with
state associations and some individual states. Id. The final rule reported twenty-one tribal
comments. Id.
183. Not all states have a knee-jerk reaction to assertions of tribal sovereignty. Of the thirty-two
states with Indian reservations, twenty-four did not comment on EPA’s proposed reinterpre-
tation. See EPA, RULEMAKING DOCKET EPA-HQ-OW-2014-0461, REVISED INTERPRE-
TATION OF CWA TRIBAL PROVISION, https://perma.cc/36NG-6V3X. Of the eight states
that did comment, two were supportive of the delegation’s reinterpretation. See Larry Wolk,
Exec. Dir., Colo. Dep’t of Pub. Health and Env’t, Comment Letter on Revised Interpreta-
tion of CWA Tribal Act Provision 1 (Oct. 1, 2015), https://perma.cc/UX8Y-MRFP (indi-
cating Colorado is “generally in favor of tribes obtaining treatment as a state under the Clean
Water Act and therefore supportive of the reinterpretation” and also noting a specific federal
law addressing state and tribal jurisdiction on the Southern Ute Reservation); John Linc
Stine, Comm’r, Minn. Pollution Control Agency, Comment Letter on Revised Interpreta-
tion of CWA Tribal Act Provision 1 (Oct. 2, 2015), https://perma.cc/9ZQM-GXAA (stat-
ing “[h]istorically the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency has supported Minnesota tribes
when they apply to EPA for treatment as a state (TAS) approval” and that when disagree-
ments have arisen the State agency has worked with EPA and the tribe to find a cooperative
resolution).
184. 2016 TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 182, 81 Fed. Reg. at 30,184.
185. Two of the six states did not attack EPA’s legal basis for its reinterpretation. Their com-
ments focused on ensuring the new approach did not trench on special federal laws specifi-
cally addressing state and tribal environmental jurisdiction in those states. See Janet T. Mills,
Me. Att’y Gen., Comment Letter on Revised Interpretation of CWA Tribal Provision 1–6
(Sept. 8, 2015), https://perma.cc/L2Y5-L9KK (asserting the Maine Indian Land Claims
Settlement Act, 25 U.S.C. §§ 1721–1735, provided the state with environmental authority
over all lands in the state including Indian reservations), and comment of Scott Thompson,
Executive Director, Okla. Dep’t of Env’t Quality 1–2 (Sept. 6, 2015), https://perma.cc/
B2HX-T2CX (noting the miscellaneous provision of a federal transportation law providing
for joint tribal-state water quality regulation in Oklahoma).
186. 2016 TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 182, 81 Fed. Reg. at 30,183.

30
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
B.
Judicial Developments Supporting Delegation
Perhaps the agency’s strongest claim for “guidance” on delegation came
from the 1996 decision in Montana v. EPA I.187 There, the federal district court
held EPA rationally applied its operating rule to determine the Salish and Koo-
tenai Tribes had showed inherent jurisdiction over non-Indian water pol-
luters.188 Since the case turned on tribal inherent sovereignty, congressional
delegation was irrelevant. And yet the court’s attention to that topic was piqued
by an amicus argument offered by the Assiniboine & Sioux Tribes of the Fort
Reservation, also in Montana, whose WQS TAS application was then
pending.189
The court’s analysis of that extraneous issue was appropriately succinct; a
closer look reveals its conclusion is fully supportable. The court noted the Su-
preme Court decision EPA had overlooked in the 1991 rule, Mazurie, and its
holding that Congress may delegate to tribal governments regulatory jurisdic-
tion over non-Indians.190 The federal law there authorized tribal regulation of
liquor sales in Indian country.191 Mazurie upheld federal convictions of non-
Indians who sold liquor on-reservation without a tribal license.192 The fact the
defendants’ bar was on fee land did not protect them because the archetypal
Indian country definition encompassed “all land within the limits of any Indian
reservation . . . notwithstanding the issuance of any [non-Indian] patent.”193
The Montana court found plain evidence of a congressional delegation
over non-Indians in the statutory language of two CWA provisions. One was
the CWA’s definition of Indian country, a nearly verbatim recitation of the
statute used in Mazurie, including its “notwithstanding” proviso that encom-
passed non-Indian fee lands.194 The other provision was the TAS eligibility
criterion that authorized tribal regulatory authority over “water resources which
are . . . otherwise within the borders of an Indian reservation.”195
187. Montana v. EPA I, 941 F. Supp. 945 (1996) (upholding EPA’s approval of the Salish &
Kootenai Tribes’ WQS).
188. Id.
189. Id. at 951.
190. 419 U.S. 544, 556–58 (1975). Rice v. Rehner, 463 U.S. 713 (1983), is often cited for the
same proposition. See, e.g., Ariz. Pub. Serv. Co. v. EPA, 211 F.3d 1280, 1301–02 (D.C. Cir.
2000) (Ginsburg, J., dissenting in part). It is true that Rehner said as much, see 463 U.S. at
716, 729, 734, but it did so not by analyzing the question (which was not before the court)
but in using Mazurie’s holding on that issue to find the federal Indian country liquor statute
had not preempted the state from concurrently regulating on-reservation liquor sales. See id.
at 726–34.
191. Mazurie, 419 U.S. at 547 (citing 18 U.S.C. § 1161).
192. Id. at 546.
193. Montana v. EPA I, 941 F. Supp. at 951 (citing 33 U.S.C. § 1377(h)).
194. Id.
195. 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e)(2).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 31
The Montana court noted that Justice White (and three other Justices)
cited the CWA TAS provision as an express congressional delegation in
Brendale v. Yakima Indian Nation.196 The issue in Brendale was whether a tribe
had zoning authority over development of non-Indian fee land on reservation.
In noting the tribe did not contend Congress had delegated such zoning power,
Justice White cited the archetype Indian country definition, the liquor delega-
tion statute from Mazurie, and the CWA TAS provision.
Finally, the Montana court recognized delegation “comports with com-
mon-sense for it seems highly unlikely” Congress intended tribal WQS apply
only to water segments appurtenant to Indian lands while state WQS applied
to adjacent segments next to non-Indian lands on the reservation.197
C.
Contemporary Delegation in the Clean Air Act TAS Provision
EPA found additional congressional and judicial guidance on delegation
from a sister statute. Congress added a TAS provision to the CAA three years
after enacting the CWA TAS provision.198 The two were similar but not iden-
tical. The CWA provision offered tribes regulatory functions over “water re-
sources . . . otherwise within the borders of an Indian reservation.”199 The CAA
provision offered tribes regulatory functions over “air resources within the exte-
rior boundaries of the reservation or other areas within the tribe’s jurisdiction.”200
And the CWA provision defined reservation (as including non-Indian lands);201
the CAA provision did not define reservation.202 Despite these subtle differ-
ences, EPA determined “[b]y their plain terms, both statutes thus treat reserva-
196. 941 F. Supp. at 951–52 (citing Justice White’s decision for the Court in Brendale v. Confed-
erated Tribes & Bands of the Yakima Indian Nation, 492 U.S. 408, 428 (1989)).
197. Id. at 952; accord 1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, at 64,878 (“EPA believes that a ‘checker-
board’ system of regulation, whereby the Tribe and State split up regulation of surface water
quality on the reservation, would ignore the difficulties of assuring compliance with water
quality standards when two different sovereign entities are establishing standards for the
same small stream segments.”).
198. Clean Air Act Amendments, Pub. L. No. 101-549, §§ 107(d), 108(i), 104 Stat. 2464, 2467
(1990) (codified at 42 U.S.C. § 7601(d)).
199. 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e)(2).
200. 42 U.S.C. § 7601(d)(2)(B) (emphasis added).
201. 33 U.S.C. § 1377(h)(1).
202. It seems inevitable that complex legislation contains internal inconsistencies created inadver-
tently rather than by design. The CAA’s legislative history contains no explanation for why
section 301(d) that authorizes tribal treatment as a state for nearly every air program lacks a
definition of reservation, see 42 U.S.C. § 7601(d)(2), whereas section 110(o) that focuses
only on Tribal Implementation Plans does, see id. § 7410(o). And section 164(c), the coun-
try’s first tribal state-like role, adopted administratively by EPA in 1974 and codified by
Congress in 1977, provides that the default air quality classification set for the Prevention of
Significant Deterioration program may be redesignated by the tribe “within the exterior
boundaries of reservations” without defining the latter term. See id. § 7474(c).

32
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
tion lands and resources the same way and set such areas aside for tribal
programs.”203 But, whereas EPA declined to interpret the CWA TAS provision
as a delegation in 1991, seven years later EPA’s Tribal Air Rule announced the
CAA TAS provision was a congressional delegation of jurisdiction over non-
Indian air polluters.204
The inevitable legal challenge—brought by a menagerie of thirteen non-
Indian business and utility groups whose operations and profit margins could be
greatly affected by effective air pollution management in Indian country205—
was soundly rejected in Arizona Public Service Co. v. EPA.206 The court found
EPA’s interpretation of delegation comported with the statute’s text, structure,
purpose, and legislative history.207  The TAS provision’s disjunctive text regard-
ing reservation air resources and other areas within a tribe’s jurisdiction was a
“clear distinction” implying Congress considered all reservation areas “to be per
se within the tribe’s jurisdiction.”208 In other words, Congress had delegated
jurisdiction over all reservation air pollution sources.
That conclusion complemented EPA’s expert view that a fragmented par-
cel-by-parcel checkerboard approach would not serve the CAA’s purpose of
effective air quality management. Air pollutants are highly mobile, disperse
widely, and present significant health and welfare risks.209 “[A] territorial ap-
proach to air quality regulation best advances rational, sound air quality
management.”210
And finally, the court noted Congress had rejected language limiting tribes
to management functions “within the area of the tribal government’s jurisdic-
tion.”211 That “strongly suggested” Congress viewed all areas within reservations
203. 2015 Proposed TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 59, 80 Fed. Reg. at 47,435.
204. Indian Tribes: Air Quality Planning and Management, 63 Fed. Reg. 7254, 7254–58 (Feb.
12, 1998) (codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 9, 35, 49, 50, 81) [hereinafter Tribal Air Rule].
205. Claims that EPA’s view impinged on states’ sovereignty peppered the suit, but curiously, no
state or state environmental agency lodged a petition. The State of Michigan did intervene,
and when it later sought Supreme Court review three other states—South Dakota, Nevada
and New Mexico—submitted an amicus brief. Four Indian tribes with emerging air pro-
grams—Gila River Indian Community, Navajo Nation, Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian
Community, and Shoshone-Bannock Tribes—intervened on EPA’s side.
206. 211 F.3d 1280 (D.C. Cir. 2000).
207. See id. at 1288.
208. Id..
209. Id. (citing Indian Tribes: Air Quality Planning and Management, 59 Fed. Reg. 43,956,
43,959 (Aug. 25, 1994)).
210. Indian Tribes: Air Quality Planning and Management, 59 Fed. Reg. at 43,959.
211. 211 F.3d at 1289 (quoting S. 1630, 101st Cong. § 113(a) (1990)).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 33
as subject to tribal jurisdiction, and also showed Congress knew how to draft
language requiring tribes show jurisdiction to qualify for TAS.212
One judge dissented, arguing that it seemed reasonable that Congress
would be clear when delegating tribal authority over non-Indians.213  Delega-
tion intent was clear, for example, in section 110(o) that authorized Tribal Im-
plementation Plans over “all areas . . . located within the exterior boundaries of
the reservation, notwithstanding the issuance of any patent, and including
rights-of-way running through the reservation.”214 There is the archetype In-
dian country definition again: something everyone seems to interpret as con-
gressional delegation language, just as EPA has done with the CWA TAS
provision. The Arizona Public Service Co. dissent thus characterized the not-
withstanding proviso as the “gold standard” for tribal delegations, and found its
omission from the CAA TAS provision fatal to EPA’s conclusion.215
The majority rejected the dissent’s asserted gold standard.216 Mazurie did
turn on the notwithstanding proviso, but since that was the statutory language
before the Court it had no occasion to consider other possible formulations.217
That Congress used different language in the 1990 CAA amendments was thus
not dispositive.218  Indeed, the court suggested (wrongly) the difference might
have been motivated by EPA’s hesitation in 1989 to read the CWA’s notwith-
standing proviso as a delegation.219 EPA had exercised caution there because of
212. Ariz. Pub. Serv. Co., 211 F.3d at 1289. Compare the SDWA TAS eligibility criterion: “the
functions to be exercised by the Indian Tribe are within the area of the Tribal Government’s
jurisdiction.” 42 U.S.C. § 300j-11(b)(1)(B).
213. Ariz. Pub. Serv. Co., 211 F.3d at 1300 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting).
214. 42 U.S.C. § 7410(o) (emphasis added).
215. Ariz. Pub. Serv. Co., 211 F.3d at 1303 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting). A key case missed by the
dissent, the majority, and EPA might have buttressed that conclusion. Montana v. United
States also explicitly referenced the notwithstanding proviso: “If Congress had wished to ex-
tend tribal jurisdiction to lands owned by non-Indians, it could easily have done so by incor-
porating . . . the definition of ‘Indian country [notwithstanding proviso].’” 450 U.S. 544, 562
(1981).
216. Ariz. Pub. Serv. Co., 211 F.3d at 1289.
217. Id. at 1290.
218. Id. at 1289. Indeed, the court noted the CWA WQS provision contained the dissent’s “gold
standard” and yet EPA declined to find a delegation from it. Id. An option different than
delegation arose shortly thereafter. In United States v. Lara, 541 U.S. 193, 198–200 (2004),
the Court held Congress had constitutionally “adjust[ed]” the status of tribal inherent sover-
eignty by “recogniz[ing] and affirm[ing]” it included criminal prosecution of nonmember
Indians. Although the CWA had no similar language, tribal attorney and professor Ann
Tweedy used Lara’s analysis to argue the TAS provision should be read as a congressional
delegation. See Ann E. Tweedy, Using Plenary Power as a Sword: Tribal Civil Regulatory
Jurisdiction Under the Clean Water Act After United States v. Lara, 35 ENV’T L. 471, 486
(2005).
219. Ariz. Pub. Serv. Co., 211 F.3d at 1289 (“We can assume that Congress was aware of EPA’s
contemporaneous interpretation of the Clean Water Act, first proposed in 1989 (while Con-
gress contemplated the 1990 Amendments) . . . . Thus, Congress’ failure to use the same

34
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
the CWA’s ambiguous and inconclusive legislative history, which the court
found was not true for the subsequent CAA amendments.220 The court thus
upheld the Tribal Authority Rule’s provision for approving tribes’ reservation
air programs based on congressional delegation (without requiring a showing of
inherent jurisdiction over non-Indians).221
In addition to adding a significant win in its long streak of judicial suc-
cesses for its Indian Program,222 EPA viewed Arizona Public Service Co. as “use-
ful guidance from Congress regarding its similar intent in 1987 [in the CWA
language in [the CAA TAS provision] does not at all imply that it meant to avoid delegation
to the tribes; rather, it may suggest just the opposite.”). This ostensibly logical assumption is
belied by the actual timing of the CAA TAS provision. It first appeared, in the same form as
the enacted provision, on May 11, 1989, more than four months before the 1989 Proposed
WQS Rule was issued on September 22, 1989. See Clean Air Restoration Act of 1989, H.R.
2323, 101st Cong. § 604 (1989).
220. Ariz. Pub. Serv. Co., 211 F.3d at 1291.
221. Id. at 1284. The court also endorsed EPA’s treatment of tribal trust lands and pueblos as
informal reservations entitled to the benefit of the CAA delegation, see id. at 1292–94, and
by extension, lent support for EPA’s long held similar view for TAS primacy under the
CWA, see 1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, 56 Fed. Reg. at 64,881.
222. See, e.g., Nance v. EPA, 645 F.2d 701 (9th Cir. 1981) (upholding EPA’s approval of the
Northern Cheyenne’s prevention of significant deterioration (PSD) redesignation); Wash.
Dep’t of Ecology v. EPA, 752 F.2d 1465 (9th Cir. 1985) (upholding EPA’s refusal to dele-
gate RCRA hazardous waste in Indian country programs to state); Phillips Petrol. Co. v.
EPA, 803 F.2d 545 (10th Cir. 1986) (upholding EPA’s direct implementation of the
SDWA underground injection program in Indian country); Albuquerque v. Browner, 97
F.3d 415 (10th Cir. 1996) (upholding EPA’s approval of the Isleta Pueblo’s WQS); Mon-
tana v. EPA I, 941 F. Supp. 945 (D. Mont. 1996) (upholding EPA’s approval of the Salish
& Kootenai Tribes’ WQS); Montana v. EPA II, 137 F.3d 1135 (9th Cir. 1998) (upholding
EPA’s approval of the Salish and Kootenai Tribes’ WQS); Montana v. EPA, 141 F. Supp.
2d 1259 (D. Mont. 1998) (upholding EPA’s approval of the Assiniboine & Sioux Tribes’
WQS); Arizona v. EPA, 151 F.3d 1205 (9th Cir. 1998) (upholding EPA’s approval of the
Yavapai Apache’s PSD redesignation), modified, 170 F.3d 870 (9th Cir. 1999); Hydro Res.,
Inc. v. EPA, 198 F.3d 1224 (10th Cir. 2000) (upholding EPA’s direct implementation of
the SDWA underground injection program on lands whose Indian country status was in
dispute); Ariz. Pub. Serv. Co., 211 F.3d at 1288 (upholding EPA’s interpretation of the
CAA TAS provision as a congressional delegation to tribes of jurisdiction over on-reserva-
tion non-Indians); Wisconsin v. EPA, 266 F.3d 741 (7th Cir. 2001) (upholding EPA’s
approval of the Sokaogon Chippewa Community’s WQS).
EPA’s Indian program has suffered some losses. See, e.g., South Dakota v. Yankton Sioux
Tribe, 522 U.S. 329 (1998) (rejecting EPA direct implementation of the RCRA solid waste
program on the Yankton Reservation); Wyoming v. EPA, 875 F.3d 505, 511 (10th Cir.
2017) (vacating EPA’s approval of the Northern Arapahoe & Eastern Shoshone Tribes’
CAA program); Backcountry Against Dumps v. EPA, 100 F.3d 147 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (va-
cating EPA’s approval of the Campo Band of Mission Indians’ RCRA solid waste program);
Arizona v. EPA, 151 F.3d at 1212–13 (invalidating EPA’s attempt to make the Yavapai
Apache’s PSD redesignation effective through a Federal Implementation Plan); Michigan v.
EPA, 268 F.3d 1075 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (invalidating EPA’s rule for direct implementation of
the federal operating permit program on lands whose Indian country status was in question).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 35
TAS] to provide for uniform tribal regulation of mobile environmental pollu-
tants within reservations.”223
D.
EPA and Tribal Experience with the TAS Requirement for Inherent Tribal
Jurisdiction
EPA found additional support for its delegation interpretation in tribes’
and EPA’s experience in developing and processing CWA TAS applications.224
It noted TAS Tribes have “repeatedly” expressed concern that demonstrating
inherent jurisdiction “is challenging, time consuming and costly,” and “many
tribes” have said it constituted “the single greatest administrative burden” of the
TAS application process.225 Unfortunately, the clearly intended broad impact of
those facially significant generalizations in the Federal Register was eroded
somewhat by the proposal’s underlying and uncited documentation showing
they were based on input from just eight tribes.226 That tiny sample size also
weakened the agency’s claim that this “general experience confirm[ed]” the ju-
risdiction requirement imposed unintended administrative hurdles on tribes
and required substantial commitments of limited tribal resources.227
The dataset for EPA’s work in reviewing tribal applications was somewhat
larger. The agency reviewed twenty-nine tribes whose TAS applications were
approved after enhanced TAS review procedures were adopted in 1998.228 Of
those, fourteen had reservations with non-Indian fee lands, twelve had no non-
223. 2016 TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 182, 81 Fed. Reg. at 30,186.
224. 2015 Proposed TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 59, 80 Fed. Reg. at 47,436.
225. Id.
226. See EPA, EPA ICR NO. 2515.02, INFORMATION COLLECTION REQUEST FOR REVISED
INTERPRETATION OF CLEAN WATER ACT TRIBAL PROVISION (FINAL INTERPRETIVE
RULE) 3 (2016), https://perma.cc/Y4CE-SQV9. This analysis focused on the anticipated
administrative burden and cost of proposed federal actions on other governments and private
actors. EPA’s conclusions were based on methodological analysis of data from those eight
tribes, although commonsense and long experience with administrative agencies suggests
EPA’s conclusions were also influenced by unquantified, and perhaps extensive, interactions
with tribes since 1991 when the original WQS rule became effective. That assumption is,
perhaps, partially corroborated by the National Tribal Water Council’s 2013 assertion that
the inherent jurisdictional showing “has prevented many tribes from establishing federally
approved [WQS].” EQUAL TREATMENT FOR TRIBES, supra note 173, at 1.
227. 2015 Proposed TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 59, 80 Fed. Reg. at 47,436. EPA correctly
noted that eliminating unintended administrative burdens is not a legal justification for its
reinterpretation, but said it offered a strong policy basis for reconsideration especially in light
of the reinterpretation’s consistency with agency and executive branch policy favoring tribal
self-determination. Id.
228. See Memorandum from Robert Perciasepe, Asst. Adm’r, Nat’l Indian Program, and
Jonathan Z. Cannon, Gen. Counsel, EPA, (March 19, 1998) (Adoption of the Recommen-
dations from the EPA Workgroup on Tribal Eligibility Determinations). This document is
no longer available on EPA’s website, but it is summarized in the 2015 Proposed TAS
Reinterpretation, supra note 59, 80 Fed. Reg. at 47,439 n.15.

36
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
Indian fee lands and three lacked information.229 EPA’s analysis of the twenty-
six applications indicated the agency took an average of 1.6 years longer to
approve tribes with non-Indian fee lands on their reservations than those with-
out such lands.230 This reality no doubt contributed to the NTWC’s 2013 asser-
tion that the inherent jurisdictional showing “has prevented many tribes from
establishing federally approved [WQS].”231
Without questioning the bona fides of the tribes or EPA, their assertions
are puzzling in light of the 1991 WQS Rule’s operating rule’s “relatively simple
showing” to demonstrate tribal inherent jurisdiction.232 The rule asked only that
tribes (1) show their reservation had surface waters used by tribal members and
subject to protection under the CWA, and (2) assert that non-Indian water
pollution would have a serious and substantial effect on tribal health and wel-
fare.233 Except for delegation, showing jurisdiction can get no easier. States cer-
tainly felt that way. When the State of Montana (unsuccessfully) sought
Supreme Court review of Montana v. EPA II, eleven states filed an amicus brief
complaining about EPA’s operating rule: “In place of careful, fact-intensive his-
torical inquiry into the status of a reservation, EPA has concocted a simplistic,
wooden formula under which no tribe could ever fail to receive state status under the
229. EPA, ANALYSIS OF TAS PROCESSING TIMES 1 (2015), https://perma.cc/Z4BG-UFVE.
230. 2016 TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 182, 81 Fed. Reg. at 47,436. The finding did include
time tribes spent refining the application and providing additional materials EPA requested
after application submission but did not attempt any assessment of the time it took tribes to
complete the TAS application before submission.
231. EQUAL TREATMENT FOR TRIBES, supra note 173, at 1. The most logical reading of the
Council’s assertion (it offered no data or anecdotal information) is that most tribes have
consciously decided not to develop WQS programs. It could also have meant tribes whose
submitted programs languished in EPA’s bureaucracy for years. See, e.g., Chaitna Sinha, Off.
of the Reservation Att’y, Confed. Tribes of the Colville Reservation, Comment Letter on
Proposed Rule Revised Interpretation of Clean Water Act Tribal Provision 3 (Oct. 6, 2015),
https://perma.cc/2RMZ-E9KN (reporting the Tribes’ preparation of its CWA TAS appli-
cation took “a period of years” before submission in 2013 and still had not been approved by
October 2015). EPA did approve the Colville Tribes’ WQS three years later in 2018 (about
4.4 years after submission). See EPA Actions on Tribal Water Quality Standards and Contacts,
EPA, https://perma.cc/5EUP-JZ2D. This is historically interesting in that Colville was the
first and only Indian reservation for which EPA issued federal WQS, some twenty-nine
years earlier. See WQS for the Colville Indian Reservation in the State of Washington, 54
Fed. Reg. 28,622 (July 6, 1989). The Tribes had developed their own WQS program in
1984 before Congress added the TAS provision in 1987, see 53 Fed. Reg. 26,968, 26,970
(proposed July 15, 1988), and pressed EPA in 1986 to issue them as federal WQS legally
enforceable across CWA programs, see 54 Fed. Reg. at 28,622. EPA did so just two months
before proposing CWA TAS regulations for approving tribal WQS. Id. EPA made clear the
Colville approach was not “a model” or “a precedent” for the future since EPA now had
congressional authorization for approving tribal WQS. Id.
232. 1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, 56 Fed. Reg. at 64,879.
233. Id.

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 37
Clean Water Act.”234 Perhaps, but tribes had to apply first. In 2015, EPA can-
didly acknowledged its prior expectation that the operating rule’s simple burden
would spur more tribal applications had not been realized.235
IV.
CONTINUED LITIGATION RISK DESPITE DELEGATION FIX
A third category of comments submitted on EPA’s 2015 reinterpretation
proposal was arguably the most pernicious and raised a different kind of litiga-
tion risk for tribes and EPA. The comments did not challenge the extent of
tribal sovereignty directly. Instead, they argued the geographic extent of some
Indian reservations had contracted to contain only Indian lands, and by exten-
sion, tribal sovereignty (and EPA’s Indian Program) was similarly limited.
These comments were based on the so-called Diminishment Doctrine, created
by the Supreme Court to address disputes arising from an historical reality
based on outmoded policies with significant, modern consequences.
A.
Judicial Diminishment of Indian Reservations
The historical reality from which Diminishment Doctrine arose was the
misguided, turn-of the-century Assimilation and Allotment Era. From roughly
1887–1932, Congress passed dozens of laws authorizing conveyances of private
“allotments” to individual Indians from formerly communal tribal land. Once
each individual male member of the tribe received an allotment, the federal
government frequently treated the remaining reservation lands as “surplus” be-
cause presumably they were no longer needed by the tribe. Thus, those surplus
lands were often opened to non-Indian ownership.236
The congressionally-introduced presence of non-Indians in Indian reser-
vations was ostensibly for the benefit of indigenous peoples. A Senate Report
for one such act suggested in the accepted ethnocentric tone of the time: “The
occupation of the land released by [the Indians] by actual settlers under the
homestead law bringing [the Indians] in close contact with the frugal, moral,
and industrious people who will settle there will stimulate individual effort and
make [the Indians’ assimilative] progress much more rapid than heretofore.”237
Perhaps some Euro-Americans truly believed that notion and the legitimacy of
its purported goal. History suggests a more likely, and less altruistic, congres-
sional motivation: simply making more land available for the continuing tide of
234. Brief of Amici Curiae States of Arizona, et al., in Support of Petition for Writ of Certiorari
at 11, Montana v. EPA II, 137 F.3d 1135 (9th Cir. 1998) (No. 97-1929) (emphasis added).
235. 2015 Proposed TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 59, 80 Fed. Reg. at 47,436.
236. 1 FELIX S. COHEN, COHEN’S HANDBOOK OF FEDERAL INDIAN LAW § 1.04 (Nell Jessup
Newton et al. eds., 2019).
237. Yankton Sioux Tribe v. S. Mo. Waste Mgmt. Dist., 890 F. Supp. 878, 884 (D.S.D. 1995)
(quoting S. REP. NO. 196, 53d Cong., 2d Sess., 1 (1894)).

38
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
European immigrants.238 Indeed, Indian tribes lost some ninety million acres or
more in the allotment process.239
In the middle of the Allotment Era the Court unleashed Congress’ so-
called “plenary” authority over Indian affairs, legitimizing a flood of Indian land
takings in violation of solemn treaty promises.240 Yet two years later, the Court
said “when Congress has once established a reservation all tracts included
within it remain a part of the reservation until separated therefrom by Con-
gress.”241 Such action was clear, for example, from statutes that “restored” por-
tions of Indian reservations to the public domain.242
The more difficult question was whether the Allotment Acts, which made
way for non-Indian ownership of lands within reservations not explicitly re-
stored to the public domain, also diminished reservations. The Court consist-
ently rejected arguments that the mere purchase of reservation lands by non-
Indians meant the reservation had been diminished as to those lands.243 Instead,
the Court repeatedly framed the question with a well settled canon of construc-
tion: statutory ambiguities are to be interpreted in favor of tribes.244 Reservation
238. See, e.g., D.S. OTIS, THE DAWES ACT AND THE ALLOTMENT OF INDIAN LANDS 18–19
(1973) (quoting Colorado Senator Henry M. Teller that “the real aim [of allotment] was to
get at the Indian lands and open them up to settlement. The provisions for the apparent
benefit of the Native Americans are but the pretext to get at his lands and occupy them. . . .
If this were done in the name of Greed, it would be bad enough; but to do it in the name of
Humanity . . . is infinitely worse.”); cf. DeCoteau v. Dist. County Ct., 420 U.S. 425, 431
(1975) (“But familiar forces soon began to work upon the Lake Traverse Reservation. A
nearby and growing population of white farmers, merchants, and railroad men began urging
authorities in Washington to open the reservation to general settlement.”). See generally
Judith V. Royster, The Legacy of Allotment, 27 ARIZ. STATE L.J. 1 (1995).
239. See COHEN, supra note 236, § 1.04.
240. Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock, 187 U.S. 553 (1903).
241. United States v. Celestine, 215 U.S. 278, 285 (1909); accord Solem v. Bartlett, 465 U.S. 463,
470 (1984) (“[O]nly Congress can divest a reservation of its land and diminish its
boundaries.”).
242. See, e.g., United States v. Pelican, 232 U.S. 442, 445–46 (1914) (explaining that a specified
portion of the reservation was “vacated and restored to the public domain”); Sioux Tribe of
Indians v. United States, 316 U.S. 317, 323 (1942) (explicating that the President ordered
lands previously reserved for Indian use “restored to the public domain . . . the same being no
longer needed for the purpose for which they were withdrawn from sale and settlement”);
Seymour v. Superintendent, 368 U.S. 351, 354 (1962) (saying that the Act which “vacated
and restored to the public domain” certain reservation lands diminished the reservation as to
those lands).
243. Seymour, 368 U.S. at 357 (noting that the issue had “been squarely put to rest” by the statu-
tory definition of Indian country including lands within reservations “notwithstanding the
issuance of any patent” to non-Indians (quoting 18 U.S.C. § 1151(a)).
244. See, e.g., Choate v. Trapp, 224 U.S. 665, 675 (1912) (saying that “doubtful expressions” (in
an allotment act) are to be resolved in favor of the tribe); Rosebud Sioux Tribe v. Kneip, 430
U.S. 584, 586 (1977) (“In determining [congressional diminishment] intent, we are cau-
tioned to follow ‘the general rule that ‘(d)oubtful expressions are to be resolved in favor of the
weak and defenseless people who are the wards of the nation, dependent upon its protection

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 39
diminishment, then, required a clear expression of congressional intent in the
particular allotment and surplus land act(s).245
That apparently straightforward statutory inquiry was, however, signifi-
cantly complicated by the political realities of the past:
Another reason why Congress did not concern itself with the
effect of surplus land acts on reservation boundaries was the turn-of-
the-century assumption that Indian reservations were a thing of the
past. Consistent with prevailing wisdom, members of Congress vot-
ing on the surplus land acts believed to a man that within a short
time—within a generation at most—the Indian tribes would enter
traditional American society and the reservation system would cease
to exist. Given this expectation, Congress naturally failed to be meticu-
lous in clarifying whether a particular piece of legislation formally sliced a
certain parcel of land off one reservation.246
Nonetheless, the Court states it has “never been willing to extrapolate from this
expectation a specific congressional purpose of diminishing reservations with
the passage of every surplus land act.”247 Rather, “it is settled law that some
surplus land acts diminished reservations and other surplus land acts did not.”248
In making that determination, of course, all courts focused primarily on
the statutory language, which is the “most probative evidence of congressional
intent.”249 That analysis was often problematic, however, not only because of
Congress’ alleged belief Indian country would wither away, but also because the
idea that reservation status “might not be coextensive with Indian land owner-
ship was unfamiliar” at that time.250
Legislation that made “[e]xplicit reference to cession” or an “unconditional
commitment . . . to compensate the Indian tribe for its opened land” is com-
and good faith’” (quoting McClanahan v. Ariz. State Tax Comm’n, 441 U.S. 163, 174
(1973))); Hagen v. Utah, 510 U.S. 399, 410 (1994) (“Throughout the [diminishment] in-
quiry, we resolve any ambiguities in favor of the Indians.”) (citing Solem, 465 U.S. at 470).
245. See, e.g., Seymour, 368 U.S. at 355 (finding no congressional language “expressly vacating” a
portion of the reservation); Mattz v. Arnett, 412 U.S. 481, 504 n.22 (1973) (“Congress has
used clear language of express termination when that result is desired.”); Solem, 465 U.S. at
470 (“Diminishment . . . will not be lightly inferred.”); South Dakota v. Yankton Sioux
Tribe, 522 U.S. 329, 343 (1998) (explaining that Congress’ intent to diminish treaty terms
establishing an Indian reservation must be “clear and plain”) (quoting United States v. Dion,
476 U.S. 734, 738–39 (1986)); Nebraska v. Parker, 136 S. Ct. 1072, 1079 (2016) (explaining
that Congress’ intent to diminish the reservation “must be clear”) (quoting Solem, 465 U.S. at
470).
246. Solem, 465 U.S. at 468 (emphasis added) (footnote omitted).
247. Id. at 468–69.
248. Id. at 469 (citations omitted).
249. Id. at 470.
250. Id. at 468.

40
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
monly viewed as diminishing the reservation.251 Congressional references that
tribal lands shall be “‘restored’ to the public domain” generally extinguish the
former use as an Indian reservation.252 Or Congress might speak of a reserva-
tion as being “discontinued,” “abolished,” or “vacated.”253
Ambiguities in the statutory language were not uncommon, and so courts
attempting to resolve them often looked at the historical context surrounding
passage of the act(s). This was not a question of legislative history: the inquiry
was whether the historical context revealed “a widely held, contemporaneous
understanding the affected reservation would shrink . . . , [in which case] we
have been willing to infer Congress shared [that] understanding.”254
That questionable logic was stretched nearly to the breaking point by a
third area of inquiry: the subsequent settlement and governmental treatment of
the area in question. These facts were sometimes used by courts to help “deci-
pher” Congress’s intent in enacting the original statute.255 The Court claims it
“has never relied solely” on that third area of inquiry.256 Yet state regulatory
incursions in disputed areas frequently raise exaggerated judicial concern for
upsetting assertedly “justifiable expectations” of non-Indians, and disrupting
the administration of state and local government programs, which often be-
come compelling justifications for finding diminishment.257
251. Id. at 470.
252. Hagen v. Utah, 510 U.S. 399, 412 (1994) (citing Sioux Tribe v. United States, 316 U.S. 317,
323 (1942)).
253. Mattz v. Arnett, 412 U.S. 481, 504 n.22 (1973) (citations omitted).
254. Solem, 465 U.S. at 471.
255. Id. The Court admitted (in a footnote) that using subsequent demographic history as a
method of statutory interpretation “is, of course, . . . unorthodox and potentially unreliable,”
but since Congress was generally unfocused on diminishment in the surplus land acts, “the
technique is a necessary expedient.” Id. at 472 n.13. For one pointed criticism of this claim,
see Philip P. Frickey, A Common Law for Our Age of Colonialism: The Judicial Divestiture of
Indian Tribal Authority over Nonmembers, 109 YALE L.J. 1, 19 (1999) (“The conceptual
problem with this approach, of course, is that post enactment developments reveal nothing
about original congressional intent, much less intent sufficiently clear to satisfy the canon
[requiring ambiguous statutes to be construed in favor of tribal interests].”).
256. Nebraska v. Parker, 136 S. Ct. 1072, 1081 (2016) (emphasis added).
257. See, e.g., DeCoteau v. Dist. County Ct., 420 U.S. 425, 449 (1975) (speculating that ending
state jurisdiction after 80 years “would be calamitous for all the residents of the area”) (em-
phasis added); Rosebud Sioux Tribe v. Kneip, 430 U.S. 584, 604–05 (1977) (claiming “the
single most salient fact is the unquestioned actual assumption of state jurisdiction” for sev-
enty years that “has created justifiable expectations which should not be upset”); Solem, 465
U.S. at 471 n.13 (asserting that finding an area predominantly populated by non-Indians
remains Indian country “seriously burdens the administration of State and local governments”
(emphasis added)); Hagen, 510 U.S. at 421 (citing Rosebud, 430 U.S. at 604–05) (suggesting,
in light of long-exercised state jurisdiction, that finding no diminishment “would seriously
disrupt the justifiable expectations of the people living in the area” (emphasis added)); South
Dakota v. Yankton Sioux Tribe, 522 U.S. 329, 357 (1998) (finding support for a diminish-

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 41
B.
EPA’s Programmatic Actions Implicating Diminishment Issues
Nothing in the historical development of EPA’s Indian program258 sug-
gests a goal of curbing diminishment claims by limiting state environmental
regulatory incursions into Indian country. For the most part, as discussed be-
low, EPA’s programmatic actions were aimed at helping tribes achieve environ-
mental self-determination and directly or indirectly limited state environmental
roles. EPA made two notable exceptions in the 1990s, both relating to water
quality regulation, when practical considerations induced the agency to depart
from the program norm of tribal self-determination.259 EPA’s most recent ac-
tion—the 2016 CWA TAS reinterpretation—gave limited weight to state and
local governments’ diminishment comments, returning apparently to its core
approach of preserving tribal (and federal) regulatory authority in Indian
country.
EPA’s first Indian program action—its 1973 CWA regulations—made
clear the agency would not delegate water quality programs to states for imple-
mentation over Indian activities on Indian lands.260 The presumed bar on state
delegation quickly expanded to the agency’s other key regulatory programs in
1980 regulations indicating that EPA will assume a state lacked authority over
Indian lands “unless the state affirmatively asserts authority and supports its
assertion with an analysis from the state’s attorney general.”261
EPA immediately rejected one state’s bare assertion that a federal environ-
mental law’s provisions for state regulation in lieu of EPA implementation con-
stituted congressional authorization for state authority in Indian country, and
prevailed in the Ninth Circuit.262 That court also accepted EPA’s clarification
of its early references to Indian lands as meaning Indian country,263 which fed-
ment conclusion from the “State’s assumption of jurisdiction over the territory, almost im-
mediately after the 1894 Act and continuing virtually unchallenged to the present day”).
258. See Grijalva, Origins, supra note 138 (examining the historical development of EPA’s Indian
program from the agency’s creation in 1970 through the adoption of its 1984 Indian Policy
and 1985 Implementation Guidance).
259. See infra text accompanying note 268 (describing EPA’s assumption that state WQS apply
to reservations without TWQS), and note 273 (describing EPA’s assumption that state-
issued water pollution permits apply to reservations lacking a tribal permit program).
260. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, 38 Fed. Reg. 13,528, 13,530 (May 22,
1973) (codified at 40 C.F.R. § 125.2(b)). EPA noted that for the few states with specific
congressional authorization for Indian country implementation, it would address those pro-
grams on a case-by-case basis. Id.
261. Consolidated Permit Regulations: RCRA Hazardous Waste; SDWA Underground Injec-
tion Control; CWA NPDES; CWA Section 404 Dredge or Fill Programs; and CAA PSD,
45 Fed. Reg. 33,290, 33,378 (May 19, 1980) (codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 122–25).
262. Wash. Dep’t of Ecology v. EPA, 752 F.2d 1465, 1469–71 (9th Cir. 1985) (holding that
“EPA reasonably interpreted [the RCRA hazardous waste management programs] not to
grant state jurisdiction over the activities of Indians in Indian country.”).
263. Id. at 1467 n.1.

42
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
eral Indian law defines as including non-Indian fee land.264 One year later a
different court upheld EPA’s direct implementation of another regulatory pro-
gram in Indian country,265 accepting the parties’ concessions the state had no
implementation authority.266 Indeed, EPA has said on multiple occasions that
but for a very few states with unique congressional authorizations, it has never
approved a state water quality regulatory program for Indian country.267
On their face, these consistent actions precluded states from developing a
history of exercising environmental jurisdiction in Indian country. Yet EPA has
departed twice from its foundational approach and taken the opposite view, and
both departures were in the specific context of Indian country water quality
protection. In both its 1989 proposal and the 1991 final WQS TAS rule, the
agency said “if States have established [water quality] standards that purport to
apply to Indian reservations, EPA will assume without deciding that those stan-
dards remain applicable until a Tribe is authorized to establish its own stan-
dards.”268 This seemingly significant departure from EPA’s Indian Policy was
“not an assertion that State standards do necessarily apply as a matter of law” to
reservation waters, but that “fully implementing a role for Tribes under the
CWA will require a transition period” and ignoring developed state WQS
would create “a regulatory void” unbeneficial to reservation water quality.269
EPA thus asserted that defaulting to “previously developed State standards in
the interim period . . . was the best approach to an intractable problem” of
protecting the reservation environment and thus “fully consistent” with its In-
dian Policy.270
Similar practical concerns were offered as justification for the agency’s sec-
ond clear departure from its foundational approach of keeping states out of
Indian country just two years later. In 1993, EPA issued TAS regulations for a
broader array of CWA programs, including the section 402 program for issuing
264. Id. (citing 18 U.S.C. § 1151).
265. Phillips Petrol. Co. v. EPA, 803 F.2d 545, 563 (10th Cir. 1986) (“EPA is empowered by
[SDWA] to implement underground injection control programs on Indian lands.”).
266. See id. at 549.
267. See, e.g., 2016 TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 182, 81 Fed. Reg. at 30,195; 2016 Baseline
WQS Proposal, supra note 70, 81 Fed. Reg. at 66,902; Memorandum from Cynthia C.
Dougherty, Dir., Permits Div., to Water Mgmt. Div. Dirs., Regions I, II, IV–X at 1 n.1
(Nov. 16, 1993) [hereinafter Dougherty Memorandum].
268. 1989 Proposed WQS Rule, supra note 68, 54 Fed. Reg. at 39,104 (emphasis added) (quoting
a letter from Lawrence Jensen, Gen. Counsel, EPA, to Dave Frohnmayer, Or. Att’y Gen.
(Sept. 9, 1988)); see also 1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, 56 Fed. Reg. at 64,890–91 (citing
the same letter).
269. 1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, 56 Fed. Reg. at 64,891.
270. Id.

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 43
NPDES permits to point source water pollution dischargers.271 EPA candidly
acknowledged some states were issuing NPDES permits in Indian country
without agency authorization.272 Without EPA authorization it seemed clear
those permits lacked legal effect, yet EPA again said it “assume[d], without
deciding,” that existing permits on Indian reservations issued by States without
specific authorization contained enforceable limits.273 With no legal analysis,
EPA simply repeated its reason from the WQS rule: until tribes (or EPA)
assumed permit-issuing responsibility, there would be a regulatory gap in In-
dian country if existing state permits were not valid.274
More than two decades later, there have not been further dramatic
programmatic departures from the Indian Policy. More common are efforts
aimed at decreasing state environmental incursions into Indian country. A per-
tinent example is EPA’s treatment of state and local government comments in
the 2016 CWA TAS reinterpretation that implicitly or explicitly raised dimin-
ishment in the context of challenging EPA’s reinterpretation.275
One state said EPA’s revised interpretation would not foreclose debates
over reservation boundaries.276 Another asserted states would continue to assert
authority over “disputed reservations” regardless of EPA’s TAS interpreta-
tions.277 And a third state described a reservation almost wholly owned in fee by
non-Indians that still was not found to be disestablished.278 Three counties in
one state jointly submitted a comment describing decades of diminishment liti-
gation over two reservations, noting its success in the Supreme Court in one
case, apparently in support of their suggestion EPA adopt a bright line rule
excluding fee lands settled by non-Indians within Indian reservations pursuant
271. See Treatment of Indian Tribes as States for Purposes of Sections 308, 309, 401, 402, and
405 of the CWA, 58 Fed. Reg. 67,966 (Dec. 22, 1993) (codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 122, 123,
124, 501).
272. See id. at 67,974 (quoting letter from Lawrence Jensen, supra note 268); see also Dougherty
Memorandum, supra note 267, at 3 (noting there are no known EPA approvals of state
section 402 programs in Indian country but that some states are acting as “the de facto
NPDES permitting authority” on reservations).
273. Treatment of Indian Tribes as States for Purposes of Sections 308, 309, 401, 402, and 405 of
the CWA, 58 Fed. Reg. at 67,974.
274. Id. EPA spoke directly to existing state-issued permits (and existing state WQS). It did not
say whether its policy allowed states to assert new WQS or issue new 402 permits, although
the obvious logical answer was yes.
275. See EPA, supra note 183.
276. Idaho Dep’t of Env’t Quality, Barry N. Burnell, Water Quality Division Administrator,
Comment Letter on Revised Interpretation of CWA Tribal Provision 2 (Oct. 6, 2015),
https://perma.cc/2MRF-WSVP.
277. Bill Schuette, Mich. Att’y Gen. & Dan Wyant, Dir., Mich. Dep’t of Env’t Quality, Com-
ment Letter on Proposed Rule Revised Interpretation of CWA Tribal Provision 9–10 (Oct.
6, 2015), https://perma.cc/6CTT-4C5K.
278. Kathleen Clarke, Dir., Utah Pub. Lands Pol’y Coord. Off., Comment Letter on Revised
Interpretation of CWA Tribal Provision 4 (Oct. 6, 2015), https://perma.cc/T69Z-9MFH.

44
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
to surplus land acts.279 Three towns within those counties also commented, ex-
pressly incorporating by reference the counties’ comments, and then essentially
reiterated them anyway.280 A fourth town in a different state, but with even
more animosity to the reservation that overlaps its borders, listed extensive his-
torical events with no clear or logical connection to its assertion that the reser-
vation has been diminished or disestablished.281
All those comments were of course publicly available in the electronic
rulemaking docket for the 2016 reinterpretation. They are not, however, as
publicly prominent as the Federal Register announcement of the agency’s final
rule. Nowhere in the Federal Register response did the agency name the
Diminishment Doctrine or even use the term diminishment. Instead, EPA
blandly characterized comments from several local governments as “seeking
clarification of the geographic scope of [CWA] TAS.”282 The local govern-
ments, EPA reported, noted “the complex histories of congressional treatment”
of some reservations that were opened by statute to non-Indian settlement, and
that in certain situations courts found those surplus land acts resulted in fee
lands losing their reservation status.283 The agency said the local governments
urged EPA expressly exclude from its rule fee lands settled by non-Indians
within Indian reservations pursuant to surplus land acts.284
EPA’s response did not note that the local government’s bright line sug-
gestion directly conflicted with the federal definition of Indian country ex-
pressly including non-Indian fee lands within Indian reservations.285 Nor did
EPA observe that the Supreme Court has rejected that bright line.286 Instead,
the agency flipped the local governments’ logic on them: several had cited their
involvement in litigation over decades on these complex and intensely fact-spe-
cific issues, so EPA observed it would be “inappropriate [for EPA’s rule] to
establish a single one-size-fits-all approach.”287 Ultimately though, EPA simply
279. Ron Winterton, Chairman, Duchesne County, et al., Comment Letter on Revised Interpre-
tation of CWA Tribal Provision 1–11 (Oct. 6, 2015), https://perma.cc/58EJ-WGAN.
280. RoJean Rowley, Mayor, City of Duchesne, Vaun D. Ryan, Mayor, City of Roosevelt and
Kathleen Cooper, Mayor, City of Myton, Comment Letter on Revised Interpretation of
CWA Tribal Provision 1–10 (Oct. 6, 2015), https://perma.cc/7G9X-JTWD.
281. Andrew J. Vickers, Hobart Vill. Adm’r, Comment Letter on Revised Interpretation of
CWA Tribal Provision 4–8 (Sept. 8, 2015), https://perma.cc/T7XM-GQCP. Hobart’s
long-standing claim the Oneida Reservation was diminished or disestablished was recently
rejected by the Seventh Circuit. See Oneida Tribe of Indians v. Village of Hobart, 732 F.3d
837 (7th Cir. 2020).
282. 2016 TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 182, 81 Fed. Reg. at 30,191.
283. Id.
284. Id.
285. See 18 U.S.C. § 1151.
286. See Solem v. Bartlett, 465 U.S. 463, 469 (1984) (“[S]ome surplus land acts diminished reser-
vations, and other surplus land acts did not.”).
287. 2016 TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 182, 81 Fed. Reg. at 30,192.

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 45
said the geographic scope of CWA TAS was not at issue, as the rule did not
change the agency’s prior approach of limiting TAS to reservation waters.288
C.
EPA’s Program Losses from Diminishment Claims
EPA’s avoidance of the term diminishment was surely intentional. Dimin-
ishment claims threaten the absolute loss of tribal homelands. The Diminish-
ment Doctrine is also a poignant anamnesis of the history of indigenous
relations with colonizing nations. That story is fundamentally about land loss,
and land appropriation, and it is not equitable. New law students learn in stud-
ying property law that all American land titles trace their roots directly to the
Doctrine of Discovery, an “extravagant . . . pretension” that the arrival of Chris-
tian colonizers on lands occupied by “heathens” constituted “discovery” vesting
absolute legal title in the former and reducing the first possessor’s rights to mere
occupancy.289
For most tribes, the story of land loss did not end there. The Standing
Rock and Cheyenne River Sioux Tribes of the Dakotas, for example, have suf-
fered chronic land-related trauma for generations. That experience shed re-
vealing light on their objections to the Dakota Access oil pipeline, installed
immediately upstream from their reservations. An amicus brief educated the
court (and the public): the Great Sioux Nation’s traditional territory was dra-
matically reduced to a reservation in 1851;290 the reservation was further re-
duced in 1868;291 after the illegal discovery of gold and the Tribes’ refusal to sell
more land, the government unilaterally took the Black Hills in 1877;292 in 1889,
the reservation was split into six small ones;293 and, from the 1940s to 1960s,
the same federal agency now authorizing the oil pipeline built dams that
288. Id. at 30,191. As required by the 1991 WQS Rule, the applicant tribe would still submit a
map or legal description of the area over which the Indian Tribe asserted authority to regu-
late surface water quality, see 40 C.F.R. § 131.8(b)(3)(i) (2019), and identify the surface
waters for which the Tribe proposed to establish water quality standards, see id.
§ 131.8(b)(3)(iii).
289. Johnson v. M’Intosh, 21 U.S. 543, 591, 577 (1823).
290. Brief for Great Plains Tribal Chairmen’s Ass’n as Amicus Curiae Supporting Intervenor-
Plaintiff at 9–10, Standing Rock Sioux Tribe v. U.S. Army Corps of Eng’rs, 239 F. Supp. 3d
77 (2017) (No. 16-1534) [hereinafter Great Plains Chairmen’s Brief] (citing EDWARD LAZ-
ARUS, BLACK HILLS/WHITE JUSTICE: THE SIOUX NATION VERSUS THE UNITED STATES,
1775 TO THE PRESENT 5 (1991)); see Treaty of Fort Laramie with Sioux, 11 Stat. 749
(1851).
291. Great Plains Chairmen’s Brief, supra note 290, at 11 (citing Treaty with the Sioux and
Arapaho, 15 Stat. 635 (1868)).
292. Act of Feb. 28, 1877, 19 Stat. 254 (1877); United States v. Sioux Nation of Indians, 448
U.S. 371, 423 (1980) (finding this an unconstitutional taking and ordering payment of just
compensation).
293. Act of Mar. 2, 1889, ch. 405, 25 Stat. 889.

46
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
flooded the fertile bottomlands, ancestral villages, and burial grounds of the
remaining reservations.294
During the international attention over the Dakota Access Pipeline, the
American Psychological Association explained that historic trauma of this sort
has been linked to significant health disparities, and urged alternative pipeline
action.295 The association’s president reported that “chronic, systemic loss and
mistreatment [like that of many American Indians] may lead to historical
trauma in which the pain experienced by one generation is transferred to subse-
quent generations.”296
Decades before, EPA arguably recognized the intergenerational impact of
land loss in the specific context of environmental protection. The agency real-
ized environmental protection of Indian country is intrinsically related to pres-
ervation of indigenous homelands:
Indian tribes, for whom human welfare is tied closely to the land, see
protection of the reservation environment as essential to preservation
of the reservations themselves.  Environmental degradation is viewed as
a form of further destruction of the remaining reservation land base, and
pollution prevention is viewed as an act of tribal self-preservation that
cannot be entrusted to others.297
Lost diminishment cases mean of course the loss of the reservation land base,
giving pause to tribes when deciding whether to seek TAS status and EPA in
deciding whether to approve tribal applications. Nonetheless, environmental
values must be protected, and tribal self-determination must mean tribes decide
for themselves when and how they exercise their inherent sovereignty. A recent
case, Wyoming v. EPA,298 illustrated the risk diminishment poses for tribal envi-
ronmental self-determination.
In 2008, the Eastern Shoshone and Northern Arapahoe Tribes of the
Wind River Reservation in Wyoming applied to EPA for TAS for several
CAA programs.299 These varied programs are essentially entry-level and focus
on information access and capacity development. With TAS, the Tribes would
294. Great Plains Tribal Chairmen’s Brief, supra note 290, at 12–14.
295. Statement from Antonio E. Puente, President, Am. Psych. Ass’n (Jan. 26, 2017), https://
perma.cc/LZV6-2JT5.
296. Susan McDaniel, President, Am. Psych. Ass’n, Historical Trauma in the Present: Why APA
Cannot Remain Silent on the Dakota Access Pipeline (Nov. 16, 2016), https://perma.cc/
AX2M-EC4S.
297. Memorandum from William K. Reilly, Adm’r, EPA (July 10, 1991) (Federal, Tribal and
State Roles in the Protection and Regulation of Reservation Environments) (emphasis
added).
298. 875 F.3d 505 (10th Cir. 2017).
299. Approval of Application by Eastern Shoshone Tribe and Northern Arapaho Tribe for Treat-
ment as a State Under the CAA, 78 Fed. Reg. 76,829 (Dec. 19, 2013).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 47
be eligible for grants for air pollution-related planning activities.300 EPA would
notify them whether air quality on the Reservation that attains the National
Ambient Air Quality Standards indicates that the current air quality designa-
tion should be revised.301 The Tribes would gain access to risk management
plans submitted by stationary sources.302 As an “affected state,” they would re-
ceive notices from Wyoming and adjacent jurisdictions of permit applications
and proposed permits, and can recommend permit terms and conditions.303
They would also get notice of new, modified or existing major stationary
sources that may have cross-boundary impacts,304 and could participate in inter-
state air pollution and visibility transport regions and commissions.305
All of these programs are non-regulatory: they include no permit-issuing
authority or other direct regulatory powers over air pollution sources. Despite
that, and the limited powers at stake, after EPA’s Regional Administrator noti-
fied various governmental entities,306 the State of Wyoming and others submit-
ted comments asserting the Reservation had been diminished by a 1905 federal
act.307 EPA consulted with the Department of the Interior, which issued a So-
licitor’s Opinion (Oct. 26, 2011) concluding the 1905 Act did not diminish the
Wind River Indian Reservation.308 Based on the Solicitor’s Opinion, additional
information provided by the Tribes, and other information, EPA concluded the
Tribes’ map and descriptions accurately depicted the undiminished
Reservation.309
The State sued and a two-judge majority of the Tenth Circuit applied
Solem v. Bartlett’s310 three-factor test and decided Congress diminished the
Wind River Reservation in 1905.311 The majority’s analysis and conclusions
show how challenging it is for a tribe to assess its likelihood of success on a
diminishment claim. On Solem factor one, the statutory language of land ces-
sion was nearly identical to cases finding diminishment, but the guaranteed
payment central in those cases was missing.312 Seeking clear intent using Solem
300. 42 U.S.C. § 7405.
301. Id. § 7407(d)(3).
302. Id. § 7412(r)(7)(B)(iii).
303. Id. § 7661d(a)(2).
304. Id. § 7426.
305. Id. §§ 7492, 7506a, 7511c.
306. See 40 C.F.R. § 49.9(b) (2019).
307. See Decision Document, Approval of Application Submitted by the Eastern Shoshone Tribe
and the Northern Arapaho Tribe For Treatment in a Similar Manner as a State for Purposes
of Clean Air Act Sections 105, 505(a)(2), 107(d)(3), 112(r)(7)(B)(iii), 126, 169B, 176A and
184, at 8 (Dec. 6, 2013).
308. Id.
309. See id. at 13.
310. 465 U.S. 463 (1984).
311. Wyoming v. EPA, 875 F.3d 505, 525 (10th Cir. 2017).
312. Id. at 513–17.

48
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
factor two, the majority uncovered a predecessor bill from fourteen years earlier
that would have clearly changed the Reservation boundaries had it been enacted
(and also promised a full payment up front for the land),313 and claimed it had a
“continuity of purpose” with the 1904 bill lacking both express boundary
changes and a lump sum payment.314 Other unusual provisions in the 1905 Act
did not dissuade the majority from finding clear intent, but it did note on Solem
factor three that all parties had submitted “volumes of material” of subsequent
treatment of the area “so rife with contradictions and inconsistencies as to be of
no help to either side.”315
The dissent’s methodical explanation of the significant differences be-
tween the precedents used by the majority and the case facts was unable to
convince his colleagues.316 The majority vacated EPA’s approval of the Wind
River Tribes’ TAS as to the diminished lands,317 illustrating the risk diminish-
ment poses for tribal environmental self-determination. The opportunities
Congress explicitly provided for tribes in 1990 to build air pollution regulatory
capacity—by developing baseline air quality data, evaluating facility permits and
risk management plans, receiving information on cross-jurisdictional pollution,
and collaborating with adjacent air quality regions on transboundary issues—
were brushed aside318 by an eighty-five-year-old statute myopically focused on
land acquisition with no genuine attention to whether the Reservation territory
would change.
The insidious nature of the Diminishment Doctrine is not, however, lim-
ited to assertions of tribal sovereignty. EPA’s Indian Program actions apply
primarily in Indian country, which means that when a court finds that a reser-
313. Id. at 517–18.
314. Id. at 522.
315. Id. at 523 (quoting Solem, 465 U.S. at 478).
316. See id. at 525 (Lucero, J., dissenting).
317. Id. at 525.
318. The particular nature of the CAA provisions at issue, and EPA’s Indian Program special
adaptations, make this conclusion an overstatement in practice. First, the court’s vacatur did
not affect the Tribes’ TAS for the rest of the 2.2-million-acre Reservation, so there remains
plenty of tribal air quality authority and work to be done. Second, while stationary sources in
the diminished area are now subject to state rather than federal regulation, the CAA provi-
sions relating to cross-border air pollution transport are immediately applicable to regulated
actions there as the area directly abuts the remaining Reservation. Finally, EPA treats Indian
trust lands as “informal” reservations entitled to the same treatment as formal reservations,
see Tribal Air Rule, supra note 204, 63 Fed. Reg. at 7257–58, an Indian Policy approach
previously upheld by the D.C. Circuit, see Ariz. Pub. Serv. Co. v. EPA, 211 F.3d 1280,
1292–94 (D.C. Cir. 2000). Seventy-five percent of the area found diminished in Wyoming v.
EPA is trust land. So, following the vacatur, the agency revised its TAS approval to exclude
the twenty-five percent of fee lands, and approved tribal CAA authority over the remaining
seventy-five percent as an informal reservation. See Revision to Approval of Application by
Eastern Shoshone Tribe and Northern Arapaho Tribe for Treatment as a State Under the
CAA, 84 Fed. Reg. 7823 (Mar. 5, 2019).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 49
vation is diminished, the diminished portion of the reservation is no longer
Indian country over which EPA has authority. Despite the tribal self-determi-
nation preference intrinsic to EPA’s Indian Policy and the TAS provisions, the
reality is that what little environmental regulation actually occurs in Indian
country occurs primarily through direct implementation by EPA.319 The lesson
that EPA’s Indian country work is also at risk from diminishment claims was
made clear in the only Indian country environmental law case to make it to the
Supreme Court to date, South Dakota v. Yankton Sioux Tribe.320
EPA’s direct implementation authority in Yankton Sioux was somewhat
different than the typical command and control regulatory program. The pro-
gram at issue was the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act’s (“RCRA“)
requirements for municipal solid waste landfills. EPA’s programmatic role is to
prescribe criteria for sanitary landfills ensuring no reasonable probability of ad-
verse health or environmental effects from waste disposal.321 All landfills must
comply with the federal requirements unless EPA has approved an alternate
state plan,322 which may vary from the federal requirements so long as it meets
EPA’s performance requirements for health and environmental protection. One
federal requirement states often drop because of its expense is the mandate for a
composite plastic liner beneath the entire landfill to stop leachate from leaking
into groundwater.
Yankton Sioux arose when four South Dakota counties formed a waste
management district and purchased non-Indian fee land within the boundaries
of the Yankton Sioux Tribe’s Reservation for the construction of a new solid
waste landfill.323 The waste district sought from the state a construction permit,
and requested a variance from the federal requirement for a composite liner,
proposing instead an inexpensive bed of compacted clay.324 That action was
curious because at the time South Dakota did not have an EPA-approved alter-
nate solid waste plan. The state quickly submitted a plan, which EPA granted
319. See EPA, DIRECT IMPLEMENTATION OF FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS IN IN-
DIAN COUNTRY 1 (2016), https://perma.cc/J63Z-BGBZ (“EPA retains responsibility for
implementing the vast majority of federal environmental programs in Indian country.”).
320. 522 U.S. 329 (1998).
321. See 42 U.S.C. § 6944(a); 40 C.F.R. pt. 258 (2019) (prescribing extensive requirements for
the location, construction, operation and closure of solid waste landfills).
322. See Subtitle D Regulated Facilities; State/Tribal Permit Program Determination of Ade-
quacy; State/Tribal Implementation Rule (STIR), 61 Fed. Reg. 2584, 2585 (Jan. 26, 1996)
(explaining that the federal landfill requirements of 40 C.F.R. pt. 258 do not apply to states
that have approved alternate plans, providing flexibility in certain performance standards).
323. See Yankton Sioux Tribe v. S. Mo. Waste Mgmt. Dist., 890 F. Supp. 878, 888–89 (D.S.D.
1995), aff’d, 99 F.3d 1439 (8th Cir. 1996), rev’d sub nom. South Dakota v. Yankton Sioux
Tribe, 522 U.S. 329 (1998).
324. S. Mo. Waste Mgmt. Dist., 890 F. Supp. at 889.

50
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
except as to Indian reservations.325 The state amended its application asserting
the proposed landfill was in an area diminished by a federal act, and EPA ten-
tatively agreed.326
The Tribe sued EPA and the federal district court found no diminish-
ment,327 holding that until EPA approved either the state or Tribal328 program,
the landfill must comply with federal requirements including installation of a
composite liner.329 The State appealed the district court’s diminishment hold-
ing, and the Eighth Circuit affirmed.330 The Supreme Court accepted the
State’s petition for certiorari and as usual began its analysis with a perfunctory
recitation of the “rules” that facially support tribes331: only Congress can change
the boundaries of reservations, its intent to do so must be “clear and plain,” and
most emblematic of the Court’s claimed commitment to justice for indigenous
peoples, that all statutory ambiguities would be resolved in their favor and the
Court would thus “not lightly find diminishment.”332
Of course, Congress’ 1894 statute, which ratified the 1892 agreement be-
tween the Tribe and federal negotiators, said nothing of reservation diminish-
ment or changed boundaries.333 Instead, reflecting its principal function as a
property transaction, it employed property law terms commonly used for con-
veyances. The Tribe agreed to “cede, sell, relinquish, and convey to the United
States all their claim, right, title, and interest in and to all the unallotted lands
within the limits of the reservation.”334 Combined with a promised lump sum
payment of $600,000, that language created “an almost unsurmountable pre-
sumption of diminishment.”335
325. South Dakota; Final Determination of Adequacy of State/Tribal Municipal Solid Waste
Permit Program, 58 Fed. Reg. 52,486, 52,488 (Oct. 8, 1993).
326. South Dakota; Tentative Determination of Adequacy of State’s Municipal Solid Waste Per-
mit Program over Non-Indian Lands for the Former Lands of the Yankton Sioux, Lake
Traverse (Sisseton-Wahpeton) and Parts of the Rosebud Indian Reservations, 59 Fed. Reg.
16,647, 16,649 (Apr. 7, 1994).
327. S. Mo. Waste Mgmt. Dist., 890 F. Supp. at 888.
328. During the dispute, the Tribe submitted a solid waste management plan for EPA approval.
See id. at 890.
329. Id.
330. Yankton Sioux Tribe v. S. Mo. Waste Mgmt. Dist., 99 F.3d 1439, 1457 (8th Cir. 1996).
331. Professor David Getches made this point more generally four years earlier using in part the
then most recent Supreme Court diminishment case, Hagen v. Utah, 510 U.S. 399 (1994).
See David H. Getches, Conquering the Cultural Frontier: The New Subjectivism of the Supreme
Court in Indian Law, 84 CAL. L. REV. 1573, 1621 (1996) (“While the Court may continue
to cite the canons, it is difficult to attribute any significance to them in many recent cases.”)
332. South Dakota v. Yankton Sioux Tribe, 522 U.S. 329, 333–34 (1998).
333. Act of Aug. 15, 1894, ch. 290, 28 Stat. 286.
334. Yankton Sioux, 522 U.S. at 344.
335. Id. at 344 (quoting Solem v. Bartlett, 465 U.S. 463, 470 (1984)). While attributing disposi-
tive impact to the lump sum, the Court relegated to a footnote the Court of Claims’ later

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 51
The suggestion that a government’s sale of real property somehow also
surrenders its territorial sovereignty would be laughable in any other context.
[N]o one thinks [federal patents to homesteaders] diminished the
United States’s claim to sovereignty over any land. To accomplish
that would require an act of cession, the transfer of a sovereign claim
from one nation to another. And there is no reason why Congress
cannot reserve land for tribes in much the same way, allowing them
to continue to exercise governmental functions over land even if they
no longer own it communally.336
And yet in diminishment cases, despite the Indian law canons of construction,
the Court frequently accepts this patently illogical position. The Yankton Court
said its inquiry “was informed by” Solem’s unconsidered assertion that at the
turn of the century Congress did not view the distinction between Indian prop-
erty ownership and Indian country jurisdiction “as a critical one” because the
concept that reservation status might not be coextensive with tribal ownership
was “unfamiliar.”337 What seems patently obvious, and appropriate for analysis
rather than assertion, is that Congress had simply not yet considered the juris-
dictional consequences of sales to non-Indians of lands within undiminished
reservations.
Despite the asserted clarity of the allotment statute, the Yankton Court
rotely engaged Solem factor two, admitting without a hint of discomfort the
federal negotiators’ bareknuckle tactics for demanding further land cessions
from the Tribe. It quoted extensively their explicit threats to break prior treaty
commitments of food, clothing, and other resources, leaving the Tribe to starve
in the approaching Northern Plains winter if it did not agree to sell as contem-
porary evidence of Congress’ intent to diminish the Reservation.338 And on So-
lem factor three, over two-thirds of the area is populated by non-Indians and
the State immediately assumed jurisdiction over it and has continued to do so
to the present.339 Thus, finding diminishment, the Court overruled the Eighth
Circuit,340 leaving the landfill subject to the State’s more lenient alternate man-
agement plan instead of EPA’s minimum requirements.
Diminishment losses like Wyoming v. EPA and Yankton Sioux have nega-
tive impacts for programmatic environmental protection of Indian country, and
their risk chills potential assertions of authority by both tribes and EPA. The
resulting checkerboard of affected lands, and their varying jurisdictional respon-
conclusion the payment was “unconscionable and grossly inadequate.” Id. at 338 n.2 (quoting
Yankton Sioux Tribe v. United States, 224 Ct. Cl. 62, 98 (1980)).
336. McGirt v. Oklahoma, 140 S. Ct. 2452, 2464 (2020) (citation omitted).
337. Yankton Sioux, 522 U.S. at 343 (quoting Solem, 465 U.S. at 470).
338. Id. at 346–47.
339. Id. at 356–57.
340. Id. at 358.

52
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
sibilities, breeds confusion and inefficiency.341 Checkerboard regulation is anti-
thetical to the unitary management regime most effective at regulating mobile
media and pollutants342 because it intrinsically presents the complexities of
transboundary issues, as each jurisdiction has authority to make different value
judgments on applicable standards.343 That reality also increases the likelihood
of unreasonable consequences arising from differing standards, for example,
different WQS set for common bodies of water.344
Tribal cultural values suffer when reservations are diminished. The loss of
tribal sovereignty over those lands precludes tribally derived environmental
standards and programs designed specifically for preservation of cultural uses.
EPA’s Indian Policy promises special consideration of tribal interests like cul-
tural uses during federal direct implementation, but diminished lands are no
longer Indian country, so EPA lacks direct implementation authority there.
States have almost never shown interest in considering, let alone protecting, the
unique uses their indigenous residents make of the natural environment.
341. E.g., Moe v. Confed. Salish and Kootenai Tribes, 425 U.S. 463, 478 (1976) (noting checker-
board jurisdiction is impractical and contrary to the intent embodied in existing federal stat-
utory law of Indian jurisdiction); Seymour v. Superintendent, 368 U.S. 351, 358 (1962)
(rejecting an interpretation of the federal criminal Indian country statute that would base
jurisdiction on tract book search); accord 1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, 56 Fed. Reg. at
64,878 (“EPA believes that a ‘checkerboard’ system of regulation, whereby the Tribe and
State split up regulation of surface water quality on the reservation, would ignore the diffi-
culties of assuring compliance with WQS when two different sovereign entities are establish-
ing standards for the same small stream segments”).
342. See, e.g., Washington Department of Ecology; Underground Injection Control Program for
Indian Lands, 53 Fed. Reg. 43,080, 43,082 (Oct. 25, 1988) (codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 147)
(testimony by Alan Moomaw, Env’t Coord., Confed. Tribes of the Colville Reservation,
EPA Public Hearing, July 11, 1984) (“The need for unitary management of water sources on
Indian reservations is without question, as the dangers posed by [underground injection] activ-
ities to underground aquifers as well as to surface waters demand the imposition of a single
comprehensive management scheme by EPA.”) (emphasis added); Memorandum from William
K. Reilly, supra note 297, at 2.
343. See Administrator v. EPA, 151 F.3d 1205 (9th Cir. 1998) (addressing whether a very small
Indian reservation had sufficient air quality values to justify redesignation to Class I status
under CAA, which could potentially affect air pollution sources on adjacent lands designated
by the State as Class II).
344. See 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e) (directing EPA to develop mechanisms for resolving disputes over
such unreasonable consequences); see, e.g., Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 415, 428 (10th
Cir. 1996) (holding that a downstream tribe could establish water quality standards more
stringent than federal standards affecting proposed permit conditions for a city sewage plant
outfall).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 53
D.
New Opportunities for Local Government Diminishment Challenges
The Court’s Diminishment Doctrine was well established in 1991 when
EPA promulgated its original WQS rule.345 Nothing in the agency’s explana-
tion of the final 1991 rule hinted at concern for the risk diminishment posed to
EPA’s environmental authority in Indian country. Of course, that was several
years before Yankton Sioux, which illustrated the risk clearly. As noted above,346
the primary focus of commenters and EPA then was on discerning the Mon-
tana test for inherent tribal sovereignty over non-Indians and applying it to the
environmental context. Yet, EPA perhaps unwittingly opened the door for the
kind of non-Indian animosity that drives diminishment claims by creating a
new, semi-public comment process.
When a tribe submitted a TAS application, EPA would notify “appropri-
ate governmental entities”347 for a thirty-day comment period specifically on the
tribe’s assertion of authority.348 The stated purpose was ensuring the tribe had
adequate authority to administer the program, and not giving “veto power” to
neighboring governments.349 Ironically, EPA said the process was not intended
as a barrier to tribal program assumption.350 Some commenters asked for clarifi-
cation on appropriate governmental entities, which EPA then defined as states,
other tribes, and other federal entities.351 Local governments like cities and
counties were not included and EPA would not accept comments from them
directly.352 States were responsible for coordinating with their subdivisions, al-
though EPA said it would place notices in “appropriate” newspapers.353
Twenty-five years later, the several local governments commenting on the
2015 CWA delegation proposal renewed the call for local involvement in this
preliminary process.354 EPA fell back on the impact of promulgating an inter-
pretive rule; it did not (and could not) change the existing governmental notice
and comment process, so any suggestion for expanding “appropriate govern-
mental entities” was beyond the scope of the instant administrative action.355 At
any rate, EPA asserted the existing process (presumably posting notice in local
newspapers) provided “appropriate notice to potentially interested parties.”356
345. See, e.g., Seymour, 368 U.S. 351; Mattz v. Arnett, 412 U.S. 481 (1973).
346. See text accompanying supra note 84.
347. 40 C.F.R. § 131.8(c)(2)(ii) (2019).
348. Id. § 131.8(c)(3).
349. 1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, 56 Fed. Reg. at 64,884.
350. Id.
351. Id.
352. Id.
353. Id.
354. 2016 TAS Reinterpretation, supra note 182, 81 Fed. Reg. at 30,194–95.
355. Id. at 30,195.
356. Id.

54
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
In 2019, President Trump’s EPA quietly reversed course in a memoran-
dum labeled “for internal EPA use only” with the exhortation “do not distribute
outside of EPA.”357 The memorandum announced a new “focus” on ensuring
local governments within and contiguous to Indian country were notified of
and had an opportunity to comment on tribal TAS applications.358 EPA noted
the existing CWA and CAA regulations required notice to “appropriate gov-
ernmental entities,”359 defined as states, tribes, and other federal entities, but it
had also used its discretion to inform the public and local governments.360 Such
discretion no longer existed; Headquarters would henceforth “verify that the
regional office effectively reached out to local governments.”361 No comment was
made on how this extra process aligned with the goal of EPA’s Strategic Plan
to “streamline those processes by which EPA reviews and approves state and
tribal actions.”362
Since existing regulations limited the comment process to the tribe’s asser-
tion of authority, once EPA reinterpreted the CWA TAS provision as a con-
gressional delegation, the only jurisdiction-related issue left was diminishment.
The memorandum implicated diminishment in requiring the local notice to
“describe . . . the area covered.”363 As the city and county comments on the
2016 reinterpretation reflected, the real and perceived impacts of tribal jurisdic-
tion over non-Indians are often felt acutely at the local level, and those impacts
not infrequently foster an intense and visceral anti-Indian sentiment especially
among those unfamiliar with (or uninterested in) the complexities of Indian law
and history. So, regardless of whether local outreach might fan the flames lead-
ing to an actual diminishment suit, it is likely to provoke diminishment allega-
tions, forcing EPA analysis into that complex area and making the TAS
approval process even longer.
Increasing already long waiting times was the main theme of the NTWC’s
objection to EPA’s new focus of increased local outreach.364 Fifteen years ear-
lier, EPA’s lengthy delays in TAS review triggered pointed criticism from the
357. Memorandum from W.C. McIntosh, Asst. Adm’r, Off. of Int’l & Tribal Affs., to David
Ross, Asst. Adm’r, Off. of Water, et al., at 2 (Aug. 13, 2019) [hereinafter McIntosh Memo-
randum] (on file with author) (emphasis added).
358. Id.
359. See, e.g., 40 C.F.R. § 131.8(c) (2019) (CWA WQS); id. § 130.16(c) (CWA Impaired Water
Listing and Total Maximum Daily Load programs); id. § 49.9 (CAA).
360. McIntosh Memorandum, supra note 357, at 1–2.
361. Id. at 3.
362. See WORKING TOGETHER: FY 2018–2020 U.S. EPA STRATEGIC PLAN 27 (2019), https://
perma.cc/7HJX-2QPE (Goal 2: More Effective Partnerships).
363. McIntosh Memorandum, supra note 357, at 2. That requirement was redundant since tribal
TAS applications included maps and/or legal descriptions of the area covered. See 40 C.F.R.
§ 131.8(b)(3)(i).
364. See Letter from Ken Norton, Chairman, Nat’l Tribal Water Council, to W.C. McIntosh,
Asst. Adm’r, Off. of Int’l & Tribal Affs. (Jan. 9, 2019), https://perma.cc/J4BG-RTZY.

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 55
Government Accountability Office.365 EPA responded in 2008 with an exten-
sive strategy guidance for improving the timeliness and efficiency of TAS re-
view.366 The NTWC reminded EPA the strategy said it “should consult” with
tribal applicants on whether local outreach would be beneficial, and if so, “should
tailor” such outreach to the particular circumstances.367 More to the point, the
NTWC noted local governments already had opportunities to comment
through their states’ role in the process, and cited two cases where the outreach
process created needless delays.368 Like EPA, the NTWC either overlooked or
did not want to mention diminishment when it asserted there simply was no
point in soliciting local input on TAS applications for reservations since Con-
gress had delegated tribal authority there.369
E.
A New Light at the End of the Diminishment Tunnel?
In 1996, Professor David Getches, one of the most influential Indian law
scholars of the modern era, documented a disturbing “subjectivist trend” of the
Supreme Court abandoning foundational principles of Indian law in favor of
bending tribal sovereignty to fit the Court’s perceptions of non-Indian inter-
ests.370 Getches argued persuasively that the Court was “arrogat[ing] to itself”
the prerogative formerly attributed to the political branches of government,
redesigning the sovereignty of Indian tribes as a function of changing condi-
tions, primarily by weighing non-Indian interests and the expectations they cre-
ated in the minds of affected non-Indians.371 Getches methodically chronicled
the last fifteen years of decisions, including the then most recent diminishment
case.372 But his most damning evidence might have been a confidential deliber-
365. See GOV’T ACCOUNT. OFF., GAO-06-95, INDIAN TRIBES: EPA SHOULD REDUCE THE
REVIEW TIME FOR TRIBAL REQUESTS TO MANAGE ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS 5
(2005), https://perma.cc/C852-2Z8K.
366. See Memorandum from Marcus Peacock, Deputy Adm’r, EPA, to Asst. Adm’rs & Reg’l
Adm’rs, EPA, Strategy for Reviewing Tribal Eligibility Applications to Administer EPA
Regulatory Programs (Jan. 23, 2008), https://perma.cc/K5RY-3LJG.
367. Letter from Ken Norton to W.C. McIntosh, supra note 364, at 2 (quoting Memorandum
from Marcus Peacock to Asst. Adm’rs, supra note 366, at 2). NTWC did not comment on
EPA’s attempt to keep the “new focus” document private.
368. Id. at 2–3 (describing delays attributed to local outreach for approval of the Navajo Nation’s
TAS amendment and the still pending Seneca Nation TAS application).
369. Id. at 3.
370. Getches, supra note 331, at 1575.
371. Id.
372. Id. at 1622 (noting that Hagen v. Utah, 510 U.S. 300 (1994), dispensed with the canon of
construing ambiguous statutes in favor of tribes by finding Congress expressed clear intent to
disestablish the reservation in an unenacted allotment statute that was followed by a statute
enacted without the key disestablishment terms of the earlier one).

56
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
ation memorandum by Justice Scalia, explaining to a fellow Justice why in a
pending case he had flipped from his initial vote for tribal jurisdiction:
[O]pinions in [the Indian Law field] have not posited an original
state of affairs that can subsequently be altered only by explicit legis-
lation, but have rather sought to discern what the current state of affairs
ought to be by taking into account all legislation, and the congressional
“expectations” that it reflects, down to the present day.373
Getches said Scalia’s sense that the Court’s recent decisions adjusted tribal ju-
risdiction and sovereignty based on current conditions and the expectations of
nonmembers put the Court’s subjectivist trend “into sharp relief.”374 Getches’
article ended with an expressed hope that the newer members of the Court
might take the intellectual leadership to bring Indian law back in line with its
fundamental principles and stop the “rudderless exercise in judicial subjectiv-
ism.”375 Two years later, the unanimous decision in Yankton Sioux made that
hope look na¨ıve. Two decades later, the Court’s second-most junior Justice,
Neil M. Gorsuch, authored McGirt v. Oklahoma,376 just last term, taking the
tiller decisively and offering a hopeful light at the end of the diminishment
tunnel in a dramatic setting that cheered tribal advocates and surely made
Getches smile.377
On a 5–4 vote, McGirt held the Muscogee (Creek) Territory was a reser-
vation, and was not diminished by a turn-of-the-century allotment act, mean-
ing that three million acres of Oklahoma including its second largest city of Tulsa
are Indian country.378 Perhaps betraying frustration with the subjectivist ap-
proach taken by parties and prior court decisions, the Court began its analysis
with some painfully basic rules: the power to breach solemn promises and trea-
ties by diminishing reservations “belongs to Congress alone”; “States have no
authority to reduce federal reservations”; and “courts have no proper role in the
adjustment of reservation borders.”379
The historical record revealed a series of treaties that established and di-
minished the Muscogee Territory the Court treated as a reservation, and then,
373. Id. at 1575 (quoting Memorandum from Justice Antonin Scalia to Justice William J. Bren-
nan, Jr. (Apr. 4, 1990), in PAPERS OF JUSTICE THURGOOD MARSHALL (emphasis added)
(regarding Duro v. Reina, 495 U.S. 676 (1990))).
374. Getches, supra note 331, at 1575.
375. Id. at 1576.
376. 140 S. Ct. 2452 (2020).
377. Unfortunately for Indian country, Professor Getches walked on in 2011.
378. See 140 S. Ct. at 2482 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting). Apparently for dramatic effect, the dissent
suggested the Court’s reasoning means that four other tribes now have reservations that
“encompass the entire eastern half of the State—19 million acres that are home to 1.8 mil-
lion people, only 10%–15% of whom are Indians.” Id.
379. Id. at 2462.

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 57
with respect to the land at issue in the case, a failed federal effort to press the
Tribe to sell a third time.380 The sole result was an agreement to allot, but not
to sell, particular Tribal lands that Congress ratified by statute.381 With none of
the total land cession hallmarks of diminishment to rely on, the State pressed a
tired argument forcing the Court to say, again: “For years, States have sought to
suggest that allotments automatically ended reservations, and for years courts
have rejected the argument.”382
With no statutory basis for its diminishment claim, Oklahoma trolled for
the Court’s subjectivist tendencies by detailing historical State practices and
non-Indian demographics it asserted the Court was required to consider as So-
lem’s second and third “steps.”383 The Court’s response was unequivocal:
Oklahoma’s reading of Solem was “mistaken.”384 “[T]he only ‘step’ proper for a
court of law” was “to ascertain and follow the original meaning of the law
before us.”385 Sometimes contemporaneous usages, customs and practices shed
light on ambiguous statutory language, but Oklahoma could find none. Con-
temporary and later practices cannot drive decisions “instead of the laws Con-
gress passed.”386
Extratextual considerations cannot “supply the blank check” states desire
to rid themselves of Indian reservations.387 “Evidence of the subsequent treat-
ment of the disputed land . . . has ‘limited interpretive value’”388 because it is the
“least compelling” form of evidence.389
To avoid further confusion, we restate the point. There is no need to
consult extratextual sources when the meaning of a statute’s terms is
clear. Nor may extratextual sources overcome those terms. The only
role such materials can properly play is to help “clear up . . . not
create” ambiguity about a statute’s original meaning.390
380. Id. at 2460–63.
381. Id. at 2463.
382. Id. at 2464. That statement was supported with the statute defining Indian country as in-
cluding non-Indian patented land within reservations, 18 U.S.C. § 1151(a), and Seymour v.
Superintendent, 368 U.S. 351, 357–58 (1962), stating the Court “long ago rejected the notion
that the purchase of lands by non-Indians is inconsistent with reservation status[,]” McGirt,
140 S. Ct. at 2504 n.3.
383. McGirt, 140 S. Ct. at 2468.
384. Id.
385. Id.
386. Id.
387. Id. at 2469.
388. Parker v. Nebraska, 136 S. Ct. 1072, 1082 (2016) (quoting South Dakota v. Yankton Sioux
Tribe, 522 U.S. 329, 355 (1998)).
389. Yankton Sioux, 522 U.S. at 356.
390. McGirt, 140 S. Ct. at 2469.

58
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
To be sure, McGirt did not completely eliminate the risk of diminishment
claims for tribes. But it significantly undercut the litigation chill for many
tribes. No longer can states bootstrap their unjustified historical intrusions in
Indian country, when the federal government was stepping back from its re-
sponsibilities and tribes were fighting just to survive, into “evidence” that Con-
gress meant Indian country to disappear. For the time being at least, tribes
desiring TAS, and EPA considering direct implementation for protecting the
environmental interests of tribes without program primacy, can focus on capac-
ity-building and worry less about “the perils of [states] substituting stories for
statutes.”391
V.
DEVELOPING FEDERAL WATER QUALITY STANDARDS FOR
INDIAN COUNTRY
There has been movement since the 2016 reinterpretation: ten tribes re-
ceived basic CWA TAS status, and four tribes submitted TAS applications.392
Yet only two tribes developed WQS and received approval, bringing the total
to forty-five of three hundred tribes or just fifteen percent of eligible tribes.
Whether the failing falls on EPA, tribes, states, non-Indians, courts, or a com-
bination of them, nearly all of Indian country still lacks enforceable WQS. That
reality hinders effective implementation of many CWA programs, especially
the section 402 NPDES permit program. The most feasible and prompt solu-
tion consistent with the national policy of tribal self-determination and EPA’s
longstanding Indian Policy recognizing tribes as the primary governments re-
sponsible for Indian country environmental management is clear, although it
sounds incongruent: EPA should promulgate FWQS for all of Indian country
not already covered by tribal WQS.
Federal direct implementation has been a cornerstone of EPA’s Indian
Program since its inception in 1973 when the agency retained jurisdiction over
water pollution discharges “from any Indian activity on Indian lands under the
jurisdiction of the United States” rather than delegate program responsibility to
states.393 Both the 1980 and 1984 Indian Policies, however, viewed direct im-
plementation as an interim solution to the regulatory gap while tribes prepared
for and then assumed program primacy as an exercise of environmental self-
determination.394 The Indian Policies recognized that would take time, and
promised tribes assistance in that effort as well as invited their participation in
federal direct implementation. And even in the agency’s startling misstep in
assuming unauthorized state WQS were valid in Indian country,395 EPA said it
391. Id. at 2470.
392. See WQS TAS Table, supra note 132.
393. See Final Rules, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, 38 Fed. Reg. 13,528,
13,530 (May 22, 1973) (codified at 40 C.F.R. § 125.2(b)).
394. 1980 INDIAN POLICY, supra note 40, at 6; 1984 INDIAN POLICY, supra note 45, at 2.
395. 1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, 59 Fed. Reg. at 64,890–91.

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 59
would “give serious consideration to Federal promulgation of water quality
standards on Indian lands where it finds a particular need.”396 If it was not then,
the need today is particularly clear.
A.
Foundations of Federal Water Quality Standards in Indian Country
There is direct, relevant agency experience suggesting that this is a feasible
solution. Recall the first WQS in Indian country were federal standards for a
particular reservation in 1989.397  The idea for expanding the geographic scope
to all of Indian country came a decade or so later when only thirteen tribes had
approved WQS.398 EPA’s initial actions around 2000 were initiating discussions
among the federal and tribal members of EPA’s national Tribal Operations
Committee, leading EPA to propose a national “core framework” of FWQS
filling the “not insignificant” gap in Indian country water quality protection.399
Fifteen years later, with just fourteen percent of eligible tribes having approved
WQS,400 in 2016 EPA again raised the possibility of federal “baseline” WQS
applicable to Indian country nationwide.401
The nature and timing of these actions, however, created no additional
Indian country water quality protection. The first action was specific to the
Colville Indian Reservation, and because it occurred in 1987 just as Congress
authorized CWA TAS, EPA logically assumed that further FWQS would be
unnecessary.402 The core standards concept was issued as an “unofficial, pre-
publication” proposed rule in the final days of President Clinton’s administra-
tion.403 Within days of George W. Bush’s Presidential inauguration, EPA
withdrew the proposal “for additional review,”404 and thereafter the core stan-
dards simply disappeared. Something similar happened to the Baseline WQS
proposal. It was officially published as an “advance notice of proposed rulemak-
ing” just four months before the end of President Obama’s administration.405
Thirty-eight comments, mostly in favor of proposing federal WQS, arrived by
396. Id. at 64,891.
397. See WQS for the Colville Indian Reservation, 54 Fed. Reg. 28,622 (July 6, 1989) [hereinaf-
ter Colville FWQS].
398. WQS TAS Table, supra note 132.
399. EPA, FWQS for Indian Country and Other Provisions Regarding FWQS (Jan. 18, 2001)
[hereinafter 2001 Core WQS Proposal], https://perma.cc/H9YW-XSP5 (pre-publication
proposed rule).
400. See WQS TAS Table, supra note 132.
401. 2016 Baseline WQS proposal, supra note 70 (advance notice of proposed rulemaking).
402. Colville FWQS, 54 Fed. Reg. at 28,622.
403. 2001 Core WQS Proposal, supra note 399, at 1.
404. Id.
405. 2016 Baseline WQS Proposal, supra note 70, 81 Fed. Reg. at 66,900. An advance notice of
proposed rulemaking is a preliminary step an agency may use to collect public input for
shaping a subsequent proposed rule. See A Guide to the Rulemaking Process, OFF. OF THE

60
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
the December 28, 2016 closing date.406 President Trump was inaugurated the
next month, and no action has been taken since.
These FWQS initiatives stalled primarily for political as well as practical
reasons, and yet they set foundations for effectively closing the Indian country
water quality protection regulatory gap. First and foremost, EPA has legal au-
thority to implement federal WQS in Indian country. Where a state simply
fails to submit WQS, or submits standards inconsistent with the CWA, Con-
gress requires EPA to respond to that gap with FWQS.407 Arguably, the exis-
tence of approximately 260 tribes that have not submitted WQS but could do
so as “states” upon application also triggers EPA’s duty to “promptly prepare”
FWQS. The agency’s duty to fill the Indian country water quality protection
gap also appears more generally in Congress’ mandate the agency promulgate
FWQS “in any case” where it determines revised or new standards are necessary
to meet a CWA requirement.408
The CWA’s minimum requirements could reasonably encompass indige-
nous cultural, traditional, and treaty-based uses.409 Just as states’ (and tribes’)
WQS must, EPA’s FWQS would have to designate the so-called fishable/
swimmable uses for reservation waters.410 The requirement that water quality
protect aquatic organisms411 has long been interpreted by EPA as water quality
levels that allow fish, shellfish, and aquatic wildlife not only to thrive, but also
allow them to be safely consumed.412 For tribes whose lives and culture have
depended on fish from time immemorial, the Supreme Court has recognized
that fishing is “not much less necessary to the existence of the Indians than the
atmosphere they breathe[ ].”413
Almost two decades ago, EPA’s National Environmental Justice Advisory
Council recommended:
FED. REG., https://perma.cc/86JE-8ZQH (follow hyperlink, “How does an agency involve
the public in developing a proposed rule?”).
406. See EPA, supra note 70, Over seventy written comments were submitted by tribal represent-
atives on the prior Core WQS Pre-proposal and docketed. See 2001 Core WQS Proposal,
supra note 399, at 5. While the proposal remains online, the docket is no longer available
there.
407. 33 U.S.C. § 1313(b)(1)(A)–(B).
408. Id. § 1313(c)(4)(B).
409. See, e.g., Colville FWQS, supra note 397, 54 Fed. Reg. at 28,627 (designating ceremonial
and religious water uses).
410. See 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a)(2).
411. Id.
412. See, e.g., EPA, HUMAN HEALTH AMBIENT WATER QUALITY CRITERIA AND FISH CON-
SUMPTION RATES FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS 1 (2013), https://perma.cc/6YW3-
7V6S.
413. United States v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371, 381 (1905).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 61
Because many American Indian and Alaska Native . . . communities
are particularly prone to environmental harm due to their dependence
on subsistence fishing, hunting, and gathering . . .
. . . until tribes are able to assume responsibility for [federal envi-
ronmental] programs . . . EPA should promptly develop effective and
appropriate regulatory strategies for setting, implementing, and attaining
water quality standards within Indian country.414
Determining safe levels of contamination depends critically on the rate of
consumption, which is often significantly higher for native peoples, particularly
those who rely on a subsistence lifestyle.415 Data also increasingly shows more
complex contaminant exposures associated with traditional collection and con-
sumption of traditional foods, and the inability of current risk assessment ap-
proaches to identify and address such risks.416
The CWA’s other minimum goal of protecting human recreational uses417
seems less relevant, but combined with the directive that uses are to protect
public health and welfare,418 could also reasonably encompass non-consumptive
indigenous cultural and traditional uses. In a legal challenge involving a strin-
gent tribal WQS based on ceremonial uses the Tribe was unwilling to explain
to nonmembers, the court approved of EPA accepting the Tribe’s description
of its use as a “primary contact” standard involving incidental ingestion of
water.419 EPA’s Baseline WQS proposal similarly noted that cultural ceremo-
nial uses involving full body immersion and body washings come within the
CWA’s protection of recreational uses.420 Presumably, EPA’s standard primary
contact numeric criteria would be protective of the variety of water-based cere-
monial uses without requiring tribes to specifically define them.
Any legitimate FWQS program for Indian country would have to protect
at least one important category of cultural and traditional uses that do not fall
within the CWA’s minimum fishable/swimmable uses. Many tribes make cul-
tural uses of aquatic plants, harvesting them for food (like wild rice, cattails, and
wapato), cultural products (like reeds, sedges, and rushes for basket weaving,
414. NAT’L ENV’T JUSTICE ADVISORY COUNCIL, FISH CONSUMPTION AND ENVIRONMENTAL
JUSTICE iv (2002) (emphasis added), https://perma.cc/VR9F-SLZ4.
415. See, e.g., id. at 136–39; 2016 Baseline WQS Proposal, supra note 70, 81 Fed. Reg. at 66,908
(listing options for using consumption rates six to eight times higher than the American
default rate, in part based on a survey by the Columbia River Intertribal Fish Commission).
416. See, e.g., NAT’L TRIBAL TOXICS COMM’N, UNDERSTANDING TRIBAL EXPOSURES TO TOX-
ICS (2015), https://perma.cc/BW7Q-Y4CZ (arguing that current risk assessment techniques
inadequately consider tribal exposures to toxics leaving them unnecessarily at significant
risk).
417. 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a)(2).
418. Id. § 1313(c)(2)(A).
419. Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 415, 428 (10th Cir. 1996).
420. 2016 Baseline WQS Proposal, supra note 70, 81 Fed. Reg. at 66,905.

62
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
nets, and cordage), and medicines (like Rat-tail, Bitterroot, Stinkweed, and
Labrador Tea). The variations among tribes and regions would make compre-
hensively identifying the plants and their uses labor-intensive, and reliable data
for particular pollutants’ effects on them may not exist. The CWA is capable of
handling such situations where numeric standards that quantitatively define
water quality concentrations of pollutants cannot be determined, by directing
states (and tribes) to adopt “narrative” standards that describe the water quality
conditions necessary to attain a particular designated use.421 Where EPA is
promulgating FWQS, it must follow this requirement as well.422 So, for exam-
ple, EPA might adopt a narrative WQS that waters must be free from pollu-
tants in amounts that prevent the growth of aquatic plants regularly harvested
by tribes for cultural or traditional activities.423
B.
Challenges for Federal Water Quality Standards in Indian Country
Designing a narrative FWQS covering the variety of national indigenous
uses highlights the obvious challenge of adopting FWQS for reservations na-
tionwide that effectively address varying environmental conditions. The best
solution is of course having each individual tribe adopt WQS specific to their
waters and their priority uses. Thus, any FWQS program adopted for an Indian
country should be clear it is not intended to nor does it bar tribes from adopting
their own standards.424 Further, it should not apply to tribes with approved
WQS, and as soon as a tribe’s WQS are approved they supersede the federal
standards.425 The (expressed) hope should be the federal action spurs tribes to
develop their own WQS.
Consistent with its Indian Policy,426 EPA should make clear how tribes
can influence the federal program’s application to their particular interests in
particular locations. One option is when specific actions like NPDES permits
are proposed on or near a reservation, the agency could consult with a tribe427
on “site-specific interpretations” of FWQS for developing permit conditions
421. 40 C.F.R. § 131.11(b)(2).
422. Id. § 131.22(c).
423. See 2016 Baseline WQS Proposal, supra note 70, 81 Fed. Reg. at 66,906.
424. See 2001 Core WQS Proposal, supra note 399, at 4; 2016 Baseline WQS Proposal, supra
note 70, at 66,904.
425. See id.
426. 1984 INDIAN POLICY, supra note 45, at 2 (Principle 3).
427. Consistent with President Obama’s 2009 Memorandum on Tribal Consultation, 74 Fed.
Reg. 57,879 (Nov. 9, 2009), https://perma.cc/355C-6VTG, EPA issued formal guidance.
See EPA, EPA POLICY ON CONSULTATION AND COORDINATION WITH INDIAN TRIBES
(2011), https://perma.cc/B3DQ-KJL3 (implementing 1984 Indian Policy commitment to
“assure that tribal concerns and interests are considered whenever EPA’s actions and/or deci-
sions may affect” tribes).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 63
necessary to protect identified cultural uses.428 Another option is “tailoring” the
federal program by adding, amending, or deleting WQS as suggested by partic-
ular tribes to better protect their specific interests.429 EPA has used both of
these approaches in other regulatory programs, twice receiving positive re-
sponses from courts.430
Tribes’ longer experience with and dependence on the environment, and
the reality that environmental impacts may be felt more acutely by tribal com-
munities, suggests tribal input could offer new insights for improving western
models and approaches.431 For environmental regulatory programs, that idea is
presently unrealistic since few if any tribes have environmental programs not
modeled on federal laws. But in the uncertain future we face from climate
change, tribal Traditional Ecological Knowledge set in a paradigm thinking
seven generations into the future may spawn tribal management approaches
with great value.432
A critical reminder: FWQS for Indian country—indeed, any federal envi-
ronmental direct implementation in Indian country—addresses the current reg-
ulatory gap but also carries the potential risk of judicial diminishment. 433 That
looming threat hangs over not just tribal jurisdiction, but also federal Indian
affairs authority. In the environmental context, where primacy for most regula-
tory programs are delegated to states, federal direct implementation applies
only if Indian country exists to create gaps. Yankton Sioux was a clear warning.
428. See 2001 Core WQS Proposal, supra note 399, at 5.
429. See 2016 Baseline WQS Proposal, supra note 70, 81 Fed. Reg. at 66,905.
430. See, e.g., Phillips Petrol. Co. v. EPA, 803 F.2d 545, 562 (10th Cir. 1986) (upholding EPA’s
SDWA underground injection program tailored for the Osage Reserve accounting for tribal
preferences); Backcountry Against Dumps v. EPA, 100 F.3d 147, 152 (D.C. Cir. 1996)
(noting EPA’s offer to accept the Tribe’s request for a site-specific regulation revising federal
requirements for on-reservation landfill design).
431. See, e.g., Elizabeth Ann Kronk Warner, Tribes as Innovative Environmental “Laboratories,” 86
U. COLO. L. REV. 789 (2015) (suggesting tribal environmental programs, because of indige-
nous cultural connections to the land, can offer states and the federal government different
approaches to environmental protection).
432. See, e.g., Daniel Cordalis & Dean B. Suagee, The Effects of Climate Change on American
Indian and Alaska Native Tribes, 22 NAT. RES. & ENV’T 45 (2008) (explaining that case
studies on the effects of climate change on Alaska natives suggest that tribes must be in-
cluded in conversations with states and local governments when addressing adaptation poli-
cies); Elizabeth Ann Kronk Warner, Indigenous Adaptation in the Face of Climate Change, 21
J. ENV’T & SUSTAIN. L. 129 (2015) (describing the climate change adaptation plans of four
tribes to identify trends other tribes might use in developing their own adaptation plans).
433. At least two states raised this issue in commenting on EPA’s Baseline WQS announcement.
See Barry N. Burnell, Water Quality Div. Adm’r, Idaho Dep’t of Env’t Quality, Comment
Letter on Federal Baseline WQS: Indian Reservations 2 (Dec. 22, 2016), https://perma.cc/
LS5E-7PPW (urging EPA to exclude reservations “where the existence of the reservation or
its boundaries are in dispute”); Teresa Seidel, Chief, Water Res. Div., Mich. Dep’t of Env’t
Quality 3 (Dec. 28, 2016), https://perma.cc/CY58-CDFJ (suggesting the proposal “categori-
cally exclude waters inside disputed reservations”).

64
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
The Tribe’s trustee’s stringent requirement for an impermeable composite liner
did not apply because the landfill was on diminished land and therefore not
Indian country.434 Instead, the landfill was constructed with the minimum pro-
tections set by South Dakota’s alternate program, and no other federal or tribal
regulations applied.435
RCRA’s unique structure and requirements for municipal landfills, how-
ever, is also a reminder that federal environmental programs are not monolithic.
Indeed, the CWA’s water quality protection program offers creative ways for
promulgation of FWQS without a serious risk of provoking a diminishment
challenge. EPA cannot change the status of Indian country436 but can design
program mechanisms helping insulate tribal interests from diminishment
threats and impacts. For example, EPA extends TAS and direct implementa-
tion programs to trust lands outside formally designated Indian reservations
because the Supreme Court has treated such lands as “informal” reservations.437
That benefits tribes without formal reservations and can address tribal dimin-
ishment losses. After Wyoming v. EPA held the Wind River Reservation di-
minished, EPA revised its TAS decision to exclude only non-trust lands in the
diminished area, leaving tribal primacy over the trust lands that made up over
seventy-five percent of the area as an informal reservation.438
Another mechanism can address the chilling effect of state and state sub-
divisions’ diminishment assertions and ensure tribal interests are protected dur-
ing any litigation that ensues. The Tenth Circuit endorsed an EPA rule under
SDWA treating “disputed lands” as Indian country and thus subject to federal
(or tribal), and not state, jurisdiction until the lands were found otherwise.439
Using the disputed lands approach, a FWQS could be applied to a proposed
discharge on fee lands within a reservation despite a diminishment allegation.
The D.C. Circuit rejected a similar but broader mechanism under the
CAA for lands “in question,” indicating there must be a genuine dispute on
land status, and EPA must have procedures for resolving the dispute to avoid
perpetual federal jurisdiction.440 In the particular context of the CAA, the court
434. South Dakota v. Yankton Sioux Tribe, 522 U.S. 329, 340–42 (1998).
435. See id.
436. Hydro Res., Inc. v. EPA, 198 F.3d 1224, 1242 (10th Cir. 2000).
437. See, e.g., 1991 WQS Rule, supra note 59, 56 Fed. Reg. at 64,881 (citing Okla. Tax Comm’n
v. Citizen Band Potawatomi Indian Tribe, 111 S. Ct. 905, 910 (1991)); Indian Tribes: Air
Quality Planning and Management, 63 Fed. Reg. 7254, 7258 (Feb. 12, 1998). The D.C.
Circuit upheld EPA’s approach in the CAA TAS Rule. See Ariz. Pub. Serv. Co. v. EPA,
211 F.3d 1280, 1284 (D.C. Cir. 2000), cert. denied sub nom. Michigan v. EPA, 532 U.S. 970
(2001).
438. Notification of Final Action, 84 Fed. Reg. 7823 (Mar. 5, 2019); Wyoming v. EPA, 875
F.3d 505, 518 (10th Cir. 2017).
439. See, e.g., Hydro Res., 198 F.3d at 1233.
440. Michigan v. EPA, 268 F.3d 1075, 1082–87 (D.C. Cir. 2001).

2021]Ending Interminable Gap in Indian Country Water Quality Protection 65
found no congressional authority for EPA to assert and maintain permanent
federal air quality regulation.441
But again, not all federal environmental programs are exactly the same. An
extremely valuable aspect of the WQS program is its transboundary require-
ments for ensuring compliance with adjacent jurisdictions’ differing standards.
States and tribes must meet the minimum federal requirements of fishable/
swimmable water uses and corresponding federal criteria, but they may also go
beyond them, setting water quality criteria they deem necessary to protect those
more stringent uses.442 Upstream jurisdictions must take account of more strin-
gent downstream standards both in developing their programs, and in issuing
permits.443 The Supreme Court has confirmed EPA’s authority to require up-
stream regulatory authorities to impose permit conditions on dischargers to en-
sure compliance with downstream WQS.444 And a federal appellate court has
extended that analysis to require off-reservation non-Indian dischargers to
comply with more stringent WQS of downstream tribes.445
In the context of FWQS for Indian country, apart from the benefit of the
disputed lands approach for on-reservation dischargers, EPA could simply take
the reasonable position that there is no need to resolve an asserted diminish-
ment claim: even if the on-reservation discharger’s land is not Indian country
because of diminishment, the CWA transboundary provisions can apply to re-
quire the discharger’s permit be conditioned on the FWQS for the adjacent
Indian country.
CONCLUSION
When Congress enacted the modern CWA in 1972, it gave states that did
not already have WQS six months to develop them, ninety days for the Admin-
istrator to approve them if consistent with the Act, and if not, then ninety days
for the state to make them so or EPA would issue FWQS.446 That is, within one
year every state would have enforceable WQS or EPA would fill the gap for
them. More than three decades since Congress authorized tribal WQS, only
fifteen percent of tribes have approved WQS. The gap in Indian country water
quality protection is indisputable and unacceptable.
441. Id. at 1082.
442. Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 415, 423 (10th Cir. 1996) (holding that EPA’s construc-
tion of the CWA allowing tribes, like states, to establish WQS more stringent than the
minimum federal WQS is permissible because it is in accord with the inherent powers of
tribal sovereignty).
443. 40 C.F.R. § 131.11 (2019).
444. Arkansas v. Oklahoma, 503 U.S. 91, 102 (1992).
445. Albuquerque, 97 F.3d at 422–24.
446. 33 U.S.C. § 1313(a)(3).

66
Harvard Environmental Law Review
[Vol. 45
The gap alone does not prove environmental injustice. Determining tribal
citizens in Indian country face disproportionate health risks requires data on
reservation water quality. So does developing WQS. If no WQS have been de-
veloped, that generally means no data have been collected. Thus, current risk
cannot be determined, nor can trends be identified. And permits cannot contain
conditions protective of site-specific uses when no uses have been designated.
We know generally that many Indians make cultural, traditional, and treaty
rights–based water uses, but without water quality criteria, even concerned per-
mit writers lack the information needed to draft effective permit conditions.
Most aquatic cultural foods, items, and medicines are thus simply invisible uses
left unprotected. Fish consumption is one exception: it is a recognized use with a
criterion based on the ninetieth percentile of Americans—twenty-two grams per
day. Native subsistence fishers eat between 142 and 175 grams per day.
Tribal WQS would not make that mistake. Tribes could make their cultur-
ally important uses, and the water quality criteria they determine necessary for
effective protection, the local value judgments Congress expected would drive
the CWA programs. Once approved by EPA, federal and state permit writers
would be required to translate those tribal value judgments into conditions le-
gally enforceable against non-Indians inside and adjacent to reservations. Tribal
certification under section 401 would ensure those conditions are genuine and
adequate.
Whatever the reasons for so few tribal WQS, EPA can no longer justify
inaction. The federal trust responsibility and environmental justice are relevant
moral imperatives. Congress’ goal of nationwide environmental coverage is a
stark contrast to a regulatory gap the size of New England. The practical risks of
transboundary pollution from unregulated reservations and onto them further
complicates the national protection goal. Legally, the CWA does not authorize
EPA to abdicate its Indian country responsibility to states; the Act’s preference
for tribal primacy on reservations is clear. The law is also clear EPA must fill
gaps that local governments do not. As the first federal agency to embrace tribal
self-determination, EPA has the longest running Indian program and is argua-
bly better suited than other agencies to craft a direct implementation program
that genuinely encompasses indigenous cultural and traditional interests, draw-
ing on tribal input and providing opportunities for tailoring where specific needs
require different treatment. Politics stopped the first two inquiries into FWQS;
perhaps a petition for a rulemaking from tribes or tribal organizations could
break the interminable inertia and finally achieve a measure of environmental
protection for indigenous peoples denied far too long.447
447. See 5 U.S.C. § 553(e) (requiring agencies give interested persons the right to petition for a
rulemaking). A rulemaking petition from states and organizations broke EPA’s political and
practical reticence to begin addressing the most significant environmental challenge facing
humankind—climate change. See Massachusetts v. EPA, 549 U.S. 497 (2007) (forcing EPA
to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from new motor vehicles).

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0213 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
SourHERNr [Jrp IxnrAN TrusE
July 18,2023
Submitted electronically via : http : //www. re g u I at ío n s. gov
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1 200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, D.C. 20460
Re: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 -- Federal Baseline Water Quality
' 
Standards for Indian Reservations; Proposed Rule (As Published in the Federal
Register Vol. 88, No. 87 on May 5,2023)
Dear Sir or Madam:
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the proposed rule on federal baseline water
quality standards for Indian reservations ("Proposed Rule") issued by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA"). 88 Fed. Pleg. 29496 (May 5, 2023).
The Southern Ute Indian Tribe supports the establishment of federal water quality
standards for Indian reservation waters that currently have no water quality standards in effect
under the Clean Water Act. On the Southern Ute Indian Reservation ("Reservation"), EPA s
establishment of baseline water quality standards would fill a gap in water quality protection,
would provide an opportunity for consistency with standards that have been adopted by the Tribe
and approved by EPA, and would reduce confusion and provide greater clarity for industry.
Gap in V/ater Oualit)¡ Protection on the Southern Ute Indian Reservation
On our Tribe's Reservation there is a gap in water quality protection - there are no EPA-
approved water quality standards that apply to waters of the United States located on non-Indian
owned fee lands. On March 28,2018, EPA approved the Tribe's application for treatment as a
state ("TAS") for purposes of setting water quality standards and for exercising Clean V/ater Act
section 401 certification authority. To avoid a jurisdictional disagreement with the state of
Colorado, the Tribe limited its application to Reservation surface waters located on tribal trust
land. On April 15, 2022, EPA approved the Tribe's water quality standards. Consistent with the
extent of the Tribe's TAS approval, EPA limited its approval of the Tribe's water quality
standards to those water bodies located on tribal trust lands, as such trust lands existed at the time
of EPA s approval of the Tribe's TAS application. Likewise, we are informed, EPA has limited its
approvals of Colorado state standards to waterbodies outside the exterior boundaries of the
Reservation. Stated another way, EPA has disapproved the applicability of the State's water
quality standards to water bodies located within the Reservation's exterior boundaries. See
https://www.epa.gov/wqs-tech/water-quality-standards-regulations-colorado 
(stating that
P.O. l\<¡x 737 0 IcNACIO, CO 8ll:t7 0 PHONIi: 970-5 63-0100

Iuly 18,2023
Page 2 of 2
'oColorado water quality standards apply to all waters within the State of Colorado, with the
exception of those waters that are within Indian Country, as defined in 18 U.S.C. Section 1151.")
Therefore, if the Proposed Rule is finalized, EPA would fill the gap in EPA-approved
water quality standards that exists on our Reservation.
Consistent Standards for All Waters of the United States on the Southern Ute Indian Reservation
The Proposed Rule seeks input on the proposed federal administrative procedure for
tribes to request a revision to, and for EPA to revise, a baseline designated use, add a designated
use, or establish a water quality standard variance for a specific Indian reservation water body
based on consideration of location-specific factors and water attributes of importance to the
specific tribe. The procedure requires that such changes may be made through a public
participation process. The Tribe supports the proposed administrative procedure. Through this
procedure, the Tribe believes that federal baseline standards could be adopted that are consistent
with standards adopted by the Tribe.
Furthermore, EPA's adoption of federal baseline water quality standards for Indian
reservation waters and the administrative procedure is consistent with EPA s role in promulgating
water quality standards where necessary to meet the requirements of the Clean WaterAct and the
relative roles of EPA, states, and Indian tribes under the Clean V/ater Act. See 33 U.S.C. $$
1 3 1 3 (c)(a)(B); 125 I (a); 137 7 (e); 40 C.F.R. $ $ 1 3 I . s (b).
Reduce Confusion and Provide Clarit)' for Industr)'
EPA s promulgation of federal baseline water quality standards for Reservation waters on
non-tribal trust land will reduce confusion and provide clarity that discharges into Reservation
waters located on non-tribal trust land should be permitted by EPA. If the Proposed Rule is
frnalized, the only Clean Water Act-effective standards that apply to such waters will be the
federal baseline standards. Additionally, EPA has authorized neither the Tribe nor the state of
Colorado to administer the federal Clean V/ater Act National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System ("NPDES") program on "Indian country" lands, as defined at 18 U.S.C. Section 1151,
which includes all lands within the exterior boundaries of the Southern Ute Indian Reservation.
For the above-stated reasons, the Southern Ute Indian Tribe supports EPA's Proposed
Rule. We are mindful, however, that the state of Colorado, with whom the Tribe enjoys a
cooperative relationship on many issues, may not view EPA's Proposed Rule the same way as the
Tribe. 'We are hopeful, however, that, if fìnalized, EPA's Proposed Rule, together with the Tribe's
water quality protection efforts, will ease, and not exacerbate, jurisdictional tensions with the
state of Colorado regarding the protection of the quality of waters located on non-Indian owned
fee lands within the Reservation.
"/ä/yña
Melvin J. Baker, Chairman
Southcrn Utc Indian Tribal Council

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0226 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
QUAPAW NATION 
 
 
 P.O. Box 765 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        (918) 542-1853   
 Quapaw, OK 74363-0765 
                                                                                                                                            FAX (918) 542-4694 
 
 
August 1, 2023 
 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Water 
William Jefferson Clinton Building 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: Tribal Consultations with EPA in regard to Promulgation of Tribal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards Under the Clean Water Act. Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
 
Office of Water, 
 
On behalf of the Quapaw Nation, I appreciate your efforts in facilitating consultation between 
the Quapaw Nation and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regarding the 
Promulgation of Tribal Baseline Water Quality Standards Under the Clean Water Act. The 
following comments reflect a general summary of the ongoing consultation efforts in regards to 
this very important rulemaking. 
 
 The Quapaw Nation (Nation) appreciates the opportunity to exercise its sovereignty in 
establishing federally approved and enforceable water quality standards that are protective of 
the Nation’s traditional uses of the waters on its reservation. Accordingly, in consultation 
with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Nation intends to update its existing 
water quality standards that more closely adhere to current EPA guidelines but remain 
protective of the Nation’s uses. This would be part of EPA’s established process for 
ultimately granting approval of water quality standards. The Nation understands that 
“Baseline Water Quality Standards” have been proposed that can be adopted by tribes across 
the country. However, because the Nation has unique water quality challenges (the largest 
Superfund site in the country is on the Nation’s reservation) and the Nation already has 
internally approved water quality standards that are protective of the Nation’s uses, the 
Nation elects to update its existing standards in pursuit of obtaining EPA’s final approval.   
 
 The Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act of 2005 (SAFETEA) 
rider seeks to limit Oklahoma tribes’ ability to establish water quality standards and is an 
afront to tribal sovereignty. However, recent Supreme Court cases and actions by the 
Governor of Oklahoma have provided impetus for EPA to strongly encourage the State of 
Oklahoma (State) to work with Oklahoma tribes to facilitate the establishment of enforceable 
water quality standards on tribal lands.  While the SAFETEA rider  gives preference to the 
State of Oklahoma to administer federal environmental programs and would require 
Oklahoma tribes to enter into a cooperative agreement with the State to administer Clean 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 28B41A3B-16E1-4707-8B4A-7465FC116DAD

 
 
Water Act programs, this does not conflict with the approach that the Quapaw Nation 
believes would allow for negotiations between the Nation and the State that would result in 
the ultimate  approval  and implementation of Quapaw Nation  water quality standards. 
However, absent an agreement between the Nation and the State, the Nation requests that 
EPA exercise its authority under the Clean Water Act to make successful negotiations with 
tribes, regarding the establishment of mutually agreeable and enforceable water quality 
standards on reservations, a condition of continued approval of Oklahoma’s delegated 
authority to implement Clean Water Act programs. Nonetheless, it is our hope that EPA will 
assert a mediating presence between tribes and the State of Oklahoma when it is necessary to 
reach a compromise.  
 
 The continuing existence of the Quapaw Nation’s reservation has been reaffirmed by the US 
Supreme Court, first through the McGirt v. Oklahoma case, and just recently (October 2021) 
through the Oklahoma v. Lawhorn case. Throughout the US, EPA respects and encourages 
tribal Nations’ efforts to build capacity to administer various environmental programs on 
their reservations. Tribal Nations are uniquely positioned to determine the environmental 
protections that would safeguard public health and environment within their respective 
reservations, considering their close relationship with the land and its resources. The Quapaw 
Nation is prepared to build the necessary capacity to assume the implementation of a large 
portion, or substantially all, environmental programs within the Quapaw Reservation. In the 
interim, the Quapaw Nation requests that EPA continue to assume environmental 
programmatic authority on Quapaw tribal lands where it is determined that a gap exists 
between the EPA’s and the Nation’s authority.  Through the remediation efforts at the Tar 
Creek Superfund site, the Quapaw Nation has developed an important and meaningful 
relationship with the State of Oklahoma’s Department of Environmental Quality. In the same 
cooperative spirit, the Quapaw Nation remains open to the possibility that the Nation and the 
State can work together to forge a partnership agreement that would allow cooperative 
implementation of environmental programs on reservation land no longer in trust or subject 
to restriction (“fee simple land”). 
 
It is the goal of Quapaw Nation to continue to work toward development of federally approved 
and enforceable tribal water quality standards on the Quapaw Reservation resulting from 
consultation with EPA and successful negotiations with the State of Oklahoma.  We feel that the 
development of partnerships and feedback at both the state and federal level will result in tribal 
water quality standards that support the health of our communities and ecosystems, as well as 
protect and preserve sites of tribal significance for future generations. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Wena Supernaw, Chair 
Quapaw Nation Business Committee 
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 28B41A3B-16E1-4707-8B4A-7465FC116DAD

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0261 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
. . . . . . . . . . . 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   
      
 
 Federal Water Quality Coalition 
August 3, 2023 
James Ray 
Office of Science and Technology 
Standards and Health Protection Division 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
Re: FWQC Comments on Proposed Rule, Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations, Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405
 
 
Dear Mr. Ray: 
The Federal Water Quality Coalition (“FWQC” or the “Coalition”) appreciates the 
opportunity to file these comments on EPA’s Proposed Rule, Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations (“the Proposed Rule”).  The Proposed Rule was issued in 
the Federal Register on May 5, 2023, with a comment deadline of August 3, 2023 (88 Fed. 
Reg. 29496).    
 
The FWQC is a group of industrial companies, municipal entities, agricultural parties, 
and trade associations that are directly affected, or which have members that are directly 
affected, by regulatory decisions made by EPA and States under the federal Clean Water Act 
(CWA).  The FWQC membership includes entities in the aluminum, agricultural, 
automobile, chemical, coke and coal chemicals, cement, electric utility, home building, iron 
and steel, mining, municipal, paper, petroleum, pharmaceutical, water/wastewater, wood 
treatment, tire manufacturing, and other sectors.  FWQC members, for purposes of these 
comments, include: The Aluminum Association; American Chemistry Council; American 
Coke and Coal Chemicals Institute; American Forest & Paper Association; American Iron 
and Steel Institute; American Petroleum Institute; Association of Idaho Cities; Auto Industry 
Water Quality Coalition; Cargill, Incorporated; City of Pueblo (CO); City of Superior (WI); 
City of Tempe (AZ); Corn Refiners Association; Eli Lilly and Company; Freeport McMoRan 
Inc.; Hecla Mining Company; Mid America CropLife Association; National Association of 
Home Builders; National Oilseed Processors Association; Portland Cement Association; 
Shell; Treated Wood Council; U.S. Tire Manufacturers Association; Utility Water Act 
Group; and Western States Petroleum Association. 
 
FWQC member entities or their members own and operate facilities 
located around the country.  Those facilities operate pursuant to NPDES 
Fredric P. Andes, Coordinator 
Barnes & Thornburg LLP 
One North Wacker Drive 
Suite 4400 
Chicago, IL 60606 
(312) 214-8310 

Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
August 3, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 
 
 
 
permits that impose control requirements with respect to wastewater discharges, including 
effluent limitations that are based on water quality standards.  The Proposed Rule would 
result in adoption of Federal water quality standards for waters in Indian reservations, which 
in turn would result in water quality-based effluent limitations in permits issued for FWQC 
member facilities that discharge into or upstream of those waters.  The FWQC therefore has a 
direct interest in the Proposed Rule. 
 
The Proposed Rule would impose binding water quality requirements on dischargers 
into and upstream of hundreds of water bodies around the country.  The Coalition does not 
believe that EPA has clear legal authority under the Clean Water Act to take this action and 
impose the enormous resulting impacts.  Moreover, we have specific concerns regarding key 
aspects of the Proposed Rule, including its provisions regarding inclusion of binding numeric 
effluent limits based on EPA’s interpretation of State narrative water quality standards, and 
its specific, stringent antidegradation requirements for new and increased discharges.  Based 
on these concerns, the FWQC recommends that EPA withdraw the Proposed Rule, and 
instead consider other ways in which it can promote development and implementation of 
water quality standards by Tribes that have been approved in the Treatment as States (TAS) 
program under the CWA.  We believe that is the proper way to address water quality 
concerns for waters in Indian reservations.   Our concerns and recommendations are provided 
in further detail below. 
 
As an initial matter, it is critical to recognize the scope of the requirements in the 
Proposed Rule.  As stated by EPA, the Proposed Rule would apply to waters in more than 
250 Indian reservations.  This would include about 76,000 miles of river and streams, as well 
as about 1.9 million acres of lakes, reservoirs, and other open surface waters.  EPA plans to, 
through the Proposed Rule, set water quality standards for all of these waters (except to the 
extent that a Tribe requests and obtains approval for an exemption).  However, under the 
“major questions” doctrine recently enunciated by the U.S. Supreme Court, such a claim of 
new authority by an agency must be supported by clear statutory provisions that give the 
agency that authority.  Here, no such statutory provisions exist, in the CWA or anywhere 
else.  In fact, to the contrary, EPA’s claims to this authority contradict the entire structure of 
the CWA.   
 
The Clean Water Act gives authority to set water quality standards to the States, and 
to those Tribes with approved TAS applications, subject to limited review and approval by 
EPA to ensure that the standards are consistent with requirements in the Act.  EPA is only 
allowed to set water quality standards in very narrow circumstances, where the State or Tribe 
with principal responsibility has not done its job.  Also, notably, the Act sets up a detailed 
structure under which Tribes can assume this responsibility, through the TAS program.  As 
EPA has conceded, 84 of the Tribes have obtained TAS status, and 47 of those Tribes have 
adopted water quality standards.  This is the way that Congress anticipated water quality 
standards would be set for waters in Indian reservations.  And there is every reason to believe 
that over time, more and more Tribes will assume this authority and set standards.  But EPA 
apparently feels that progress in this program has not moved fast enough.  As a result, the 

Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
August 3, 2023 
Page 3 
 
 
 
 
 
Agency has decided to disregard the statutory TAS program, and simply take over setting 
standards for any Tribal waters that do not yet have standards.  EPA has made no showing 
that this drastic action is needed or is a legitimate exercise of its limited authority to set 
Federal water quality standards.  The Agency’s Proposed Rule violates the CWA, and should 
be withdrawn. 
 
Beyond that overall lack of authority, there are a number of other, more-specific 
problems with the provisions of the Proposed Rule.  One such area of concern is the 
Agency’s declaration that it will set general, narrative water quality standards, and then will 
set numeric levels for these standards, to be applied in permits, by “interpreting” the 
narratives.  EPA has stated before, in other contexts, that this “numeric interpretation of 
narratives” is appropriate, and we have long disagreed, for several reasons – including that 
these generally phrased narrative standards do not take into account waterbody-specific 
factors that need to be considered in shaping binding water quality-based requirements for 
facilities located on and upstream of that waterbody.  But our concerns are magnified further 
in the context of the Proposed Rule.   
 
Here, EPA is going to be “interpreting” the narratives for hundreds of waters, and 
potentially thousands of dischargers that are either discharging to those waters or located 
upstream of those waters.  In each individual situation, EPA will be making choices as to 
what numbers to attach to the narratives for each specific pollutant, and then demanding that 
the State or Tribe that is issuing permits must implement those numbers in the permits that 
they issue.  And, critically, NONE of the numbers that EPA will be demanding be 
implemented will have gone through a Federal or other rulemaking process to determine if 
those numbers are appropriate for that waterbody.  Further, the numbers chosen for each 
specific permit may not be the same as were chosen for another permit in the same 
watershed, since none of these numbers will be written into rule – unlike true numeric water 
quality standards, which are required to be formally adopted.  All of the choices will be left 
to EPA’s discretion, and affected dischargers or other stakeholders would only be able to 
question the Agency’s decisions, apparently, by filing a legal challenge to each permit.  A 
more arbitrary and less workable system can hardly be imagined. 
 
We are also concerned that in the preamble to the Proposed Rule, EPA has 
already provided indications that the numbers that it will be using as “interpretations” of 
the narrative standards will be scientifically problematic.  For instance, the Agency states 
the following (at p. 29507):  
 
EPA recommends that Regional Administrators calculating human health 
criteria select a fish consumption rate based upon local data. Where 
sufficient data are available, a fish consumption rate should be selected 
that reflects consumption that is not suppressed by fish availability or 
concerns about the safety of fish for human consumption.  
 

Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
August 3, 2023 
Page 4 
 
 
 
 
 
In comments on EPA’s 2022 proposed rule regarding water quality standards and Tribal 
fishing rights (attached), the Coalition expressed strong concerns about EPA’s use of this 
new “unsuppressed fish consumption rate” policy, which is not supported by the Agency 
regulations or by objective, current information, but rather by speculation about what 
amounts of fish people might eat if situations changed.  That is not a proper basis for setting 
water quality standards that can result in binding effluent limits.1 
 
There are also several specific concerns as to the “baseline uses” that EPA is 
proposing to adopt and then demand that States and Tribes implement in permits.  For 
instance, EPA is considering extending the reach of the new requirements so that they cover 
not only the “swimmable/fishable” uses that are set forth in Section 101(a) of the CWA, but 
also the so-called “non-101(a) uses,” such as drinking water and industrial water supply.  
There is a reason why Congress specified particular uses in Section 101(a): those are the uses 
that Congress wanted EPA to focus on and protect, through the requirements that it sets using 
its CWA authorities.  EPA has NO authority to expand its jurisdiction by reaching those 
other uses that States may designate – if they want to – and mandating that those uses must 
be protected in Tribal waters (and that EPA will do the protecting).  In addition, EPA extends 
its reach still further, by indicating that it is considering including “cultural and traditional 
uses” within its Federal water quality standards.  Obviously, this is outside of EPA’s CWA 
authority, but it is also utterly inappropriate for EPA, a Federal agency, to assume that it can 
decide for Tribes what their “cultural and traditional uses” are and how they should be 
protected.  Moreover, this provision regarding “cultural and traditional uses” is vague, and 
the terms are not clearly defined, which will substantially increase the risk of arbitrary 
decisions by the Agency.  If EPA does adopt this rule, those problematic “baseline use” 
provisions should be deleted. 
 
EPA’s intent to dictate how Tribal waters – and upstream waters – will be protected is 
further indicated by the level of detail in several areas of the Proposed Rule.  For instance, 
EPA proposes to adopt very specific antidegradation requirements.  Those requirements 
appear to apply to any “lowering of water quality,” no matter how small – so, apparently, any 
request to change permit limits to allow new or increased discharges would be covered, even 
if the increase in loadings is minimal or not even detectable.  At the same time, it is not clear 
exactly what showing the discharger would have to make in order to obtain approval of the 
increase.  It appears that the approval decision would be totally up to EPA’s discretion – 
subject, possibly, to veto by the relevant Tribe.  Here, again, EPA claims broad authority in a 
Tribal area – and yet, contradictorily, it gives the Tribe the opportunity to veto the request, or 
not to submit it to EPA at all.  This provision would, in essence, give EPA – and possibly the 
                                                 
1 Use of these assumptions, along with overly conservative assumptions as to other inputs to the standards 
calculation process, can result in extremely stringent standards that cannot be attained, and which may be more 
stringent than needed to address likely water quality impacts.  To address this concern, the FWQC urges EPA to 
consider applying Probabilistic Risk Assessment (PRA) techniques in deriving water quality standards, which 
use available statistical techniques to assess risks and to develop standards that are reasonably calculated to 
protect against those risks.   

Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
August 3, 2023 
Page 5 
 
 
 
 
 
Tribe – the opportunity to simply veto any economic growth or development in areas near or 
upstream of Tribal waters, with little chance of challenging that inherently arbitrary decision. 
 
These antidegradation concerns apply with particular force with respect to the 
provisions in the Proposed Rule that appear to give EPA broad authority to designate specific 
waters as Outstanding National Resource Waters (ONRWs).  ONRWs are subject to 
extremely stringent restrictions on new and increased discharges, and are reserved for truly 
unique waters that need that degree of special water quality protection.  Allowing waters to 
be designated as ONRWs based on vague, undefined factors such as “cultural significance” 
can result in waters being placed in that category without a showing that the designation is 
needed to protect water quality. 
 
Our concern with the specificity of the Proposed Rule rises to even higher levels in 
our review of the proposed mixing zone provisions.  Here, EPA specifies very detailed 
requirements as to when mixing zones will be allowed, and even as to the size of the mixing 
zones that can be granted.  The use of mixing zones has always been an area in which EPA 
has not issued mandates – the Agency has allowed permitting agencies to determine how best 
to design and implement their mixing zone policies.  The only exception has been in the 
Great Lakes Basin, and that is only because Congress, in Section 118(c) of the CWA, 
expressly gave EPA authority to issue binding requirements in that area.  That does not apply 
elsewhere, so EPA simply does not have authority to dictate how or when States and Tribes 
will allow mixing zones. 
 
Beyond the substantive concerns with the Proposed Rule that we have described here, 
we are concerned that EPA has not adequately estimated or considered the likely costs that 
will result from imposition of Federal water quality standards in the waters covered by the 
proposal.  The Agency estimates that those costs will range between $15 and $35 million 
over a 20-year period.  The Coalition believes that the likely costs will be far greater.  EPA’s 
use of its “unsuppressed fish consumption” policy, and other conservative assumptions that 
the Agency uses in deriving water quality criteria, are expected to yield very stringent 
standards.  In some cases, those standards will not be attainable; in other cases, they may 
require application of extremely expensive control technology (and even then, may not be 
attainable).  And the geographic scope of the new requirements could be very broad, if EPA 
applies the new standards to all permits for dischargers that are any distance upstream of the 
Tribal waters that are subject to the new standards.  The enormous potential costs are simply 
not justified by the uncertain benefits that EPA describes in the Proposed Rule. 
 
For all of the reasons laid out above, the FWQC recommends that EPA withdraw the 
Proposed Rule and not finalize it.  The Proposed Rule lacks legal authority, improperly 
dictates Federal mandates, and creates myriad opportunities for arbitrary and capricious 
Federal actions.  Moreover, it is simply not necessary.  If the Agency believes that the TAS 
program is not being implemented quickly enough, so that Tribes are not getting TAS 
authority and setting water quality standards as quickly as EPA would like, then EPA should 
determine what measures are needed to improve implementation of that program.  In fact, we 

Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
August 3, 2023 
Page 6 
 
 
 
 
 
are aware that in the last several years, EPA has actually taken several actions to help Tribes 
move forward in this area.  If EPA thinks that those already-adopted measures are not 
adequate, then it should consider what else is needed, and report back to Congress and the 
public as to what measures – in regulation, in legislation, or both – should be taken.  
Choosing instead to simply assume Federal authority over all Tribal waters that do not have 
water quality standards is the wrong answer.   
 
The FWQC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments on the Proposed 
Rule.  Please feel free to call or e-mail if you have any questions, or if you would like any 
additional information concerning the issues raised in these comments. 
 
 
 
 
Fredric P. Andes 
Coordinator

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0263 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
August 3, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted via https://www.regulations.gov/ 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
Mail Code: 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
 
 
 
RE: 
Comments on Proposed Rule, “Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for 
Indian Reservations,” RIN 2040–AF62; 88 Fed. Reg. 29496 (May 5, 2023)  
The Western Urban Water Coalition (WUWC) appreciates this opportunity to provide comments 
on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed rule to establish Federal water 
quality standards (WQS) for Indian reservation waters that currently do not have WQS in effect 
under the Clean Water Act (CWA).1  
Introduction 
WUWC was established in 1992 to address the West’s unique water supply and water quality 
challenges that threaten the economic sustainability and growth of the western population 
centers. WUWC consists of the largest urban water utilities in the West, which together serve 
more than 40 million urban water consumers in 20 major metropolitan areas across seven states.2 
Some of these utilities also operate wastewater, stormwater, natural gas, and electric and 
hydroelectric facilities for their customers. Our mission is to ensure the continued availability of 
 
1 88 Fed. Reg. 29496 (May 5, 2023). 
2 WUWC consists of the following members: Arizona (Central Arizona Project, City of Phoenix and Salt 
River Project); California (Eastern Municipal Water District, East Bay Municipal Utility District, City of 
Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, The Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, 
San Diego County Water Authority, Santa Clara Valley Water District, and City and County of San 
Francisco Public Utilities Commission); Colorado (Aurora Water, Colorado Springs Utilities, and Denver 
Water); Nevada (Las Vegas Valley Water District, Southern Nevada Water Authority, and Truckee 
Meadows Water Authority); New Mexico (Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority); 
Utah (Salt Lake City Public Utilities and Washington County Water Conservancy District); and 
Washington (Seattle Public Utilities). 

 
 
2 
high quality and reliable water supplies for present and future generations while balancing 
conservation and environmental requirements and goals.  
WUWC strongly supports the goals of the CWA. As suppliers of reliable, high-quality urban 
water to millions of users, our members are keenly interested in improving water quality for 
municipal water supplies and in the regulatory processes protecting water quality. Our members 
take pride in serving the health, environmental, and economic needs of their communities around 
the clock, every day of the year. To support our members’ activities, WUWC advocates for 
progressive water policies that are sensitive to the environment’s water needs, encourage 
improved conservation technologies, and promote the effective and efficient application of 
federal laws. With the Western region’s arid climate areas, growing fluctuations in annual 
precipitation, extreme weather events, wildfires, and other challenges, protecting and 
maintaining high-quality water supplies is more important than ever.  
At the same time, as closely regulated entities serving millions of users, our members also need 
federal and state regulation that is predictable, clear, and consistent. The regulatory processes for 
modifying the standards that govern our members’ operations must be well-defined and 
transparent, and they must take into account the potential impact on our members’ ability to 
ensure a cost-effective and reliable water supply and other essential services to over 40 million 
users. Predictability, clarity, and consistency in the regulatory standards governing our 
operations are critical to reducing unnecessary costs and delays in the permitting process.  
WUWC members are concerned that the proposed rule for Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations will result in regulatory uncertainty, inefficiency, and conflict. 
WUWC appreciates the need to protect Indian country waters. Such protections are essential for 
the health and welfare of tribal communities, as well as the integrity of waters outside of Indian 
country. But WUWC believes that establishing appropriate and protective water quality 
standards is best left to those most familiar with the unique factors that must be considered when 
developing appropriate WQS—states and authorized tribes. That is, in fact, what Congress 
intended when it announced its policy in 1948 “to recognize, preserve, and protect the primary 
responsibilities and rights of States” to regulate water pollution3 and authorized “treatment as 
states” for qualifying tribes in 1987.4 By assigning states and authorized tribes primary CWA 
responsibility, states and authorized tribes are able to leverage their local knowledge of local 
conditions to decide how best to protect waters for public water supplies, propagation of fish and 
wildlife, recreational purposes, and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes through 
appropriate and scientifically informed WQS.  
Because EPA lacks critical local knowledge, the proposed rule will disrupt the framework states 
and authorized tribes have worked decades to establish. EPA’s proposed changes will have far-
reaching effects, affecting multiple programs, including National Pollutant Discharge 
Elimination System (NPDES) permits under section 402 (33 U.S.C. § 1342), section 401 
certifications for federal licenses and permits (33 U.S.C. § 1341), and section 404 permits for 
 
3 Water Pollution Control Act of 1948, Pub. L. 80-845, 62 Stat. 1155, title I, § 101 (June 30, 1948); see 33 
U.S.C. § 1251(b). 
4 Water Quality Act of 1987, Pub. L. No. 100–4, title V, § 506, Feb. 4, 1987; see 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e). 

 
 
3 
dredged or fill material (33 U.S.C. § 1344). If promulgated as proposed, EPA’s baseline WQS 
will result in confusion, increased regulatory complexity and unnecessary conflict.  
Respectfully, WUWC believes that there are better solutions to the perceived problem the 
proposed rule is intended to address that adequately protects Indian country waters and is in line 
with the more limited authority Congress granted EPA in the CWA. WUWC recommends that 
EPA use the WQS states have spent decades developing that already account for a specific 
water’s “use and value for public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational 
purposes, and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes.”5 As a practical matter, EPA already 
does this in implementing CWA programs in Indian country, and EPA has not explained why the 
state WQS EPA approved are not sufficient for this purpose. Applying state WQS is not only 
consistent with the plain language of section 303(c), it allows tribes to decide whether they want 
to establish their own WQS under section 518(e) on their own schedules. In addition, rather than 
imposing EPA’s WQS throughout Indian country by default, EPA should allow tribes to opt in 
rather than requiring them to justify their opting out.  
WUWC members, which operate in states with many Indian reservations (Arizona, California, 
Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, and Washington), believe that these recommended 
changes will help to avoid conflict and costly disruptions.6 
General Comments 
1. Baseline tribal WQS are not needed under Section 303(c)(4)(B)(2).  
In 2001, the Administrator determined that nationwide tribal WQS are necessary under section 
303(c)(4)(B)(2).7 In support of her 2001 “necessity” determination, the Administrator explained 
that “EPA is concerned that there is currently a gap in water quality standards coverage in Indian 
country under the Clean Water Act,” because states “generally lack the authority to regulate in 
 
5 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c). 
6 Section 303(c)(2) requires WQS “to protect the public health or welfare, enhance the quality of water 
and serve the purposes of this chapter.” 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(2)(A). The standards that must be considered 
in establishing WQS are the water’s “use and value for public water supplies, propagation of fish and 
wildlife, recreational purposes, and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and also taking into 
consideration their use and value for navigation.” Id. 
7 88 Fed. Reg. at 29499 (“On January 18, 2001, EPA Administrator Carol Browner determined, pursuant 
to CWA section 303(c)(4)(B), that new or revised WQS were necessary for certain Indian country waters 
lacking CWA effective WQS.”); see also Federal Water Quality Standards for Indian Country and Other 
Provisions Regarding Federal Water Quality Standards, Proposed Rule (Jan. 18, 2001), available at 
https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-
08/documents/federal_wqs_for_indian_country_proposal_signed_1-18-01.pdf. Section 303(c)(4)(B) 
requires the Administrator to “promptly prepare and publish proposed regulations setting forth a revised 
or new water quality standard for the navigable waters involved in any case where the Administrator 
determines that a revised or new standard or new standard is necessary to meet the requirements of this 
chapter.” 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(4)(B). 

 
 
4 
Indian country.”8 The proposed rule expressly relies on the Administrator’s 2001 determination 
without change.9 Reiterating its understanding that WQS “generally do not apply in Indian 
country,” EPA explains that “76,000 miles of rivers and streams and 1.9 million acres of lakes, 
reservoirs, and other open surface waters within Indian reservations currently lack CWA-
effective WQS.”10  
Respectfully, WUWC members do not read the CWA to omit Indian country waters from 
coverage. The CWA is a comprehensive nationwide environmental regulatory structure that 
expressly requires states to establish WQS “applicable to intrastate waters.”11 The term 
“intrastate waters” is inclusive. In fact, one of the key purposes of the 1972 amendments to the 
Federal Water Pollution Control Act (FWPCA) was to make the Act comprehensive in its 
coverage of navigable waters.12 Prior to 1972, the FWPCA only covered “interstate waters.”13 
By amending the Act in 1972 to require states to establish WQS “applicable to intrastate waters” 
as well, Congress intended section 303 WQS to apply to all navigable waters—interstate and 
intrastate alike. The Supreme Court reads section 303 in the same manner: “Section 303 of the 
Act also requires each State, subject to federal approval, to institute comprehensive water quality 
standards establishing water quality goals for all intrastate waters.”14  
EPA’s error appears to be based on its view that Indian reservations are not part of the state in 
which they are located. For example, EPA repeatedly refers to states in the preamble as 
“adjacent” states.15 Likewise, it references the entities affected by the proposed rules as including 
 
8 See EPA Proposed Rule, Federal Water Quality Standards for Indian Country and Other Provisions 
Regarding Federal Water Quality Standards at 11, 
https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-
08/documents/federal_wqs_for_indian_country_proposal_signed_1-18-01.pdf (citing California v. 
Cabazon Band of Mission Indians, 480 U.S. 202, 216 and n.18 (1987)). 
9 88 Fed. Reg. at 29500 (“EPA is not proposing to amend the Administrator’s Determination.”). 
10Id. at 29499. 
11 33 U.S.C. § 1313(a), (c).   
12 See A Legislative History of the Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 93d Cong., 1st 
Sess. 1420 (1973). 
13 S. Rep. No. 92-414, at 2 (1971). 
14 PUD No. 1 of Jefferson Co. v. Washington Dep’t of Ecology, 511 U.S. 700, 704 (1994) (emphasis 
added); see also Nat’l Wildlife Fed’n v. Browner, 127 F.3d 1126, 1127 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (explaining that 
the CWA requires state WQS for “every body of water” within a state). To the extent that some states 
have omitted Indian reservation waters from WQS application, that too violates section 303’s mandate. 
15 See, e.g., 88 Fed. Reg. at 29507 (“Specifically, the Regional Administrator could utilize this option 
when WQS adopted by the Tribe are not yet CWA effective, or CWA-effective WQS applicable in an 
adjacent or other relevant state(s) or Tribe(s), . . .”); id. at 29515 (“EPA would follow applicable 
requirements to ensure public participation and would coordinate, as appropriate, with adjacent states and 
Tribes, and other interested parties when implementing the standards.”); id. at 29516 (same); id. at 29523 
(section 131.XX(d)(2)(iii), “translate the narrative criteria in paragraph (d)(1) of this section using water 
quality standards adopted by the Tribe, or CWA-effective water quality standards applicable in an 
adjacent or other relevant state(s) or Tribe(s)” (emphasis added)). 

 
 
5 
“states and authorized Tribes near or bordering such reservations.”16 But it has long been 
understood that Indian reservations and Indian country are part of state territory.17 Just last year, 
the Supreme Court expressly held that “Indian country is part of the State, not separate from the 
State” in Oklahoma v. Castro-Huerta .18 Properly read, the term “intrastate waters” must include 
waters located on Indian reservations.19  
EPA has also maintained that state WQS generally do not apply in Indian country because 
“[s]tate authority to regulate activities on Indian lands is generally preempted absent an explicit 
Congressional statute to the contrary.”20 While that may be (partially) true, section 303 is an 
explicit congressional statute to the contrary. Obviously, the CWA is a congressional statute, and 
section 303(c) requires states to establish WQS applicable to all intrastate waters. “A general 
[federal] statute in terms applying to all persons includes Indians and their property interests.”21 
It was not necessary for Congress to reference Indian country to make clear that state WQS apply 
to all intrastate waters. As the Supreme Court recently clarified in the context of a federal statute 
abrogating tribal sovereign immunity, “the clear-statement rule is not a magic-words 
requirement.”22 Because state WQS already apply to all intrastate waters (excluding TAS 
reservations), there is no need for the proposed rule under section 303(c)(4)(B)(2).  
As a practical matter, the gap EPA’s interpretation of 303(c) creates is not as large as the 
proposed rule suggests. Congress structured the CWA to protect downstream sources by 
requiring states and authorized tribes to consider and ensure the attainment and maintenance of 
downstream WQS during the establishment of designated uses and water quality criteria in 
upstream waters. State WQS “serve as the basis for several CWA programs,” including section 
402 NPDES discharge permits, section 303(d) water body assessments, section 401 
certifications, and section 404 dredge and fill permits.23 Under section 402, for example, all 
construction sites on an acre or greater of land and all municipal, industrial and commercial 
facilities discharging wastewater or stormwater directly from a point source into a surface water 
 
16 Id. at 29497. 
17 Surplus Trading Co. v. Cook, 281 U.S. 647, 651 (1930) (“[R]eservations are part of the State within 
which they lie and her laws, civil and criminal, have the same force therein as elsewhere within her limits, 
save that they can have only restricted application to the Indian wards.”). 
18 Oklahoma v. Castro-Huerta, 142 S. Ct. 2486, 2493 (2022). 
19 Reading “intrastate waters” inclusively is also consistent with the express purpose of the CWA: “to 
restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the Nation’s waters.” 33 U.S.C. 
§ 1251(a) (emphasis added); see also Water Quality Standards; Establishment of Numeric Criteria for 
Priority Toxic Pollutants; States’ Compliance; Final Rule, 57 Fed. Reg. 60848, 60851 (Dec. 22, 1992). 
The Nation’s waters cannot be restored or maintained if pollution protections do not apply in Indian 
country. 
20 See, e.g., Water Quality Standards for the Colville Indian Reservation in the State of Washington, 54 
Fed. Reg. 28622, 28623 (July 6, 1989). EPA relies on Wash. Dep’t of Ecology v. EPA, 752 F.2d 1465 (9th 
Cir. 1985) in promulgating WQS for the Colville Reservation in 1989 and in this proposed rule. 
21 Fed. Power Comm’n v. Tuscarora Indian Nation, 362 U.S. 99, 116 (1960). 
22 Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior v. Coughlin, 143 S. Ct. 1689, 1699 (2023).  
23 88 Fed. Reg. at 29,497. 

 
 
6 
must obtain an NPDES permit.24 Section 402 requires the permitting authority to consider 
downstream waters, and NPDES permits are written to ensure that the receiving waters will 
achieve specified WQS.25 Because upstream dischargers must comply with state WQS, state 
WQS protect waters entering reservations. EPA implements the CWA in Indian country.26 When 
EPA issues an NPDES permit for a discharge in Indian country, it must ensure that the Indian 
country discharge does not result in WQS violations in downstream waters. In short, state WQS 
protect waters entering and leaving Indian country.  
Section 401 certification works in a similar way. Under section 401, any person applying for a 
federal permit or license that may result in a discharge of pollutants into waters of the United 
States—including dredge and fill permits under section 404—must obtain a state water quality 
certification that the activity complies with all applicable WQS, limitations, and restrictions.27 
Section 401 certification requires notice to downstream states and authorized tribes and includes 
procedures for addressing discharges that may affect downstream water quality.28 The federal 
agency cannot issue the federal permit or license, unless the downstream state or authorized tribe 
signs off or the permit or license can be conditioned to ensure compliance with the downstream 
WQS.29  
This is, in fact, what EPA requires in the NPDES permits it issues for Indian country 
discharges.30 EPA also looks to state designated uses to identify existing and potential uses of 
specific waterways.31 And where there is an on-reservation discharge and no off-reservation 
 
24 33 U.S.C. § 1342. 
25 Id. § 1342(b)(3). 
26 U.S. EPA, Env’t Protection in Indian Country Clean Water in Indian Country, 
https://www.epa.gov/tribal/clean-water-indian-country (last visited Aug. 2, 2023). 
27 33 U.S.C. § 1341(a)(1). 
28 Id. § 1341(a)(2). 
29 Id. 
30 See, e.g., U.S. EPA, Fact Sheet, Proposed Issuance of a NPDES Permit to Discharge Pollutants 
Pursuant to the Provisions of the Clean Water Act (CWA) (2012), 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2017-01/documents/r10-npdes-swinomish-north-end-wa0025062-
fact-sheet-2012.pdf (applying Washington WQS to Swinomish Indian Tribal Community NPDES 
permit); U.S. EPA, NPDES Permit Fact Sheet (2020), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-
05/documents/ca0050008-santa_ynez_npdes_permit_factsheet-2020-05-12.pdf (applying California WQS 
to Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians); U.S. EPA, NPDES Fact Sheet 3 (2019), 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2019-05/documents/az0024601-cyprus-tohono-npdes-permit-fact-
sheet-2019.pdf (“Arizona WQS for the Santa Rosa Wash and its tributaries are applicable to the discharge 
at the point where the discharge enters the State waters.”). 
31 See, e.g., U.S. EPA, Statement of Basis 4 (2018), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2018-
08/documents/nd0031160-mha-interpretive-center-final-sob.pdf (“Although the State of North Dakota 
water quality standards do not apply where the discharge occurs, the river and lake classification give a 
good indication of existing and/or potential uses of this segment of the Missouri River. This permit is 
written to protect the aquatic life and primary contact recreation uses to meet CWA requirements.”); U.S. 
EPA, NPDES Statement of Basis 4 (2017), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2018-
06/documents/nd0030813-dakota-magic-casino-final-sob.pdf (“While state water standards do not apply 

 
 
7 
receiving waters, EPA identifies beneficial uses and does its own analysis.32 EPA acknowledges 
this, explaining that “[i]n the absence of CWA-effective WQS for these waters, EPA permit 
writers have utilized various tools to write protective NPDES permits, such as relying on 
downstream state WQS to inform relevant permit limits.”33 EPA does not clearly explain why 
state WQS are insufficient, except to say that “these mechanisms are limited in their ability to 
protect Tribal waters reflecting Tribal priorities.”34 But the proposed rule does not reflect tribal 
priorities either. All tribes are different, and all have unique priorities. In the context of water 
pollution, they can reflect their priorities in several ways, including: (1) seeking TAS status for 
section 303 purposes, as Congress provided—or not; (2) passing tribal laws to protect tribal 
waters, which EPA, other federal agencies, and state agencies consider in evaluating permit or 
license applications; (3) working with states during triennial reviews of state WQS to ensure 
reservation waters are protected; or (4) relying entirely on state WQS. In fact, some states have 
already developed WQS that account for the “tribal priorities” EPA identifies. In California, for 
example, the State Water Board established new designated uses for the protection of uses of 
water by California tribes—the Tribal Tradition and Culture beneficial use and the Tribal 
Subsistence Fishing beneficial use.35  
Given section 303’s plain language and EPA’s use of state WQS in the permits it issues for 
Indian country, there does not appear to be any necessity for the proposed rule under section 
303(c)(4)(B)(2). State WQS—which EPA has approved as meeting section 303 requirements—
should apply in Indian country under the Act’s plain language and are applied or referred to in 
most EPA-issued permits in Indian country. In the absence of real “necessity,” EPA does not 
have authority to promulgate the proposed rule.36  
WUWC members are also concerned that EPA may not fully appreciated the economic impacts 
of the proposed rule. Although EPA states that the “baseline WQS proposed in this rule would 
not themselves impose costs on any entity,” it prepared an economic analysis “of the potential 
 
on the Lake Traverse Reservation, they were considered during permit development to assist in 
determining downstream uses.”). 
32 See, e.g., U.S. EPA, Statement of Basis For The Rosebud Hotel And Casino NPDES Permit Sd-
0034584, 8 (2017), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2017-09/documents/sd0034584-rosebud-
casino-sob-9-2017.pdf (identifying beneficial uses that it will consider “in the absence of water quality 
standards on the reservation”). 
33 88 Fed. Reg. at 29499. 
34 Id. 
35 See California, State Water Board Resolution No. 2017-0027 (May 2, 2017), 
https://www.waterboards.ca.gov/board_decisions/adopted_orders/resolutions/2017/rs2017_0027.pdf 
(establishing Part 2 of the Water Quality Control Plan for Inland Surface Waters, Enclosed Bays, and 
Estuaries of California—Tribal and Subsistence Fishing Beneficial Uses and Mercury Provisions); see 
Cal. Code Regs., tit. 23, § 3010 (summarizing the statewide WQS action). 
36 Administrative agencies are creatures of statute” and “accordingly possess only the authority” that 
Congress has lawfully provided. Nat’l Fed’n of Indep. Bus. v. Dep’t of Lab., Occ’l Safety & Health 
Admin., 142 S. Ct. 661, 665 (2022). EPA cannot expand its power beyond that accorded it by statute. See 
Nat. Res. Def. Council, Inc. v. EPA, 822 F.2d 104, 131 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (“[EPA]’s rulemaking power is 
limited to adopting regulations to carry into effect the will of Congress as expressed in the statute.”). 

 
 
8 
control actions and costs that point source facilities discharging into or upstream from waters 
covered by this rule may incur as a result of implementing the baseline WQS.”37 EPA, however, 
only considers 57 “major” facilities in its analysis, seven of which that directly discharge into 
Indian reservation waters and 50 upstream facilities.38  
The analysis does not quantify the proposed rule’s impact on minor or undesignated facilities, of 
which it identified 963. It excluded minor facilities because “[m]inor dischargers typically do not 
have monitoring requirements for toxic pollutants so data to evaluate reasonable potential for 
these facilities is often limited.”39 EPA suggests that “these dischargers may not contribute 
significantly to instream loads even if such pollutants were present in the effluent from these 
facilities,” but without attempting to gather any information, it cannot know if that is true.40 Its 
conclusion that “the potential for minor facilities to incur costs as a result of the criteria 
translations is low,” therefore, is purely speculative.41  
Of much greater concern to WUWC members is EPA’s geographic limitations in identifying 
facilities to consider. EPA explains in its economic analysis that it conducted “an upstream state 
discharger analysis as an informative aspect of this economic analysis which is intended to be 
illustrative and representative of potential costs.”42 But EPA limited that analysis to major 
facilities located on or within a five-mile radius of Indian reservation waters.43 A five-mile 
radius is far too small an area to be “representative of potential costs.”44 EPA has applied 
downstream WQS to facilities over 100 miles away. The proposed NorthMet copper-nickel 
project in northern Minnesota is an example. In 2019, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers issued a 
section 404 permit for the project after the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) 
certified that it would not violate state WQS. Relying on an environmental impact statement it 
had jointly prepared, the Corps determined that the section 404 permit would not violate the 
Fond du Lac Band’s WQS.45 In the course of litigation, however, the Corps suspended the 
permit, and EPA subsequently advised the Corps not to reinstate the section 404 permit because 
it was “unaware of any CWA Section 404 permit conditions that would ensure compliance with 
 
37 88 Fed. Reg. at 29518 (citing Economic Analysis for Potential Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservation Waters, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water (Apr. 
5, 2023), Docket ID EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0208 (hereinafter, “Economic Analysis”). 
38 Economic Analysis at 6. 
39 Id. at 6 n.8. 
40 Id. 
41 Id. 
42 Id. at 6 n.7. 
43 Id. at 6. 
44 See id. at 67. 
45 The EIS for the project actually indicated that the project would lower the amount of pollutants in the 
St. Louis River by capturing and treating the tailings basin seepage from historic mining operations.  

 
 
9 
the Band’s water quality requirements for reservation waters.”46 The NorthMet project site is 
located over 116 river miles upstream from the Fond du Lac Reservation.  
While WUWC members may not know exactly how many of their facilities are likely to be 
impacted by the proposed rule, they believe that EPA’s analysis understates the economic 
impacts of its action. When a proposed rule has the potential to have far-reaching economic 
impacts, as this rule does, it is critical that the agency’s authority be very clear.47 For the reasons 
explained above, WUWC members do not believe that to be the case.  
2. The baseline tribal WQS are likely to create jurisdictional confusion and 
intergovernmental disputes. 
WUWC members are concerned that the proposed rule will substantially increase compliance 
complexity and intergovernmental disputes. The states in which WUWC members are located 
have spent decades establishing science-based water quality standards that recognize each state’s 
unique topography, hydrology, geology, and climate. State WQS protect designated uses and are 
“based on sound scientific rationale.”48 The states have considered “the water quality standards 
of downstream waters and [ensured] that its water quality standards provide for the attainment 
and maintenance of the water quality standards of downstream waters,” as the CWA required.49 
And they have employed EPA’s section 304(a) recommendations, modified to reflect site-
specific conditions, or other scientifically defensible methods to establish WQS.50  
Every three years, states must review their quality criteria, water uses and requirements for 
antidegradation.51 These proceedings are time-consuming, involved, and iterative. In California, 
for example, reviews are handled by basin and involve evaluating new scientific and technical 
information; addressing new legal requirements; responding to EPA’s recommendations and 
guidelines; ensuring compliance with State Water Board policy requirements; and addressing 
stakeholder concerns. Arizona has adopted a “local control approach” to ensure protection of the 
state’s important water resources through a public hearing process. When it determines that a 
revision of a surface WQS is needed, Arizona conducts a rulemaking for the proposed revisions. 
Each state follows its own process, but all carefully consider a variety of factors, including the 
 
46 See Clean Water Act Section 401(a)(2) Evaluation and Recommendations with respect to the Fond du 
Lac Band’s Objection to the Proposed Clean Water Act Section 404 Permit for the NorthMet Mine 
Project, U.S. EPA Region 5 (Apr. 29, 2022), https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-
05/EPA%20CWA%20401a2%20Evaluation%20and%20Recommendations%20to%20the%20Corps%20
on%20NorthMet%204-29-22.pdf. 
47 West Virginia v. EPA, 142 S. Ct. 2587, 2609 (2022) (citing Utility Air Regul. Grp. v. EPA, 573 U.S. 
302, 324 (2014). 
48 40 C.F.R. §131.11(a). 
49 40 C.F.R. §131.10(b). 
50 See 40 C.F.R. §§ 131.11(b), 131.6, 131.5(a). If EPA determines that the standards are consistent with 
federal requirements, it must approve the standards within 60 days of the date of submission. 33 U.S.C. 
§ 1313(c)(3); 40 C.F.R. § 131.5(b). If the state fails to adopt the changes within 90 days of notification, 
EPA must promulgate a water quality standard for the state. Id.  
51 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(3)–(4). 

 
 
10 
aquatic communities, hydrology, geologic formations, and anthropogenic influences affecting 
intrastate waters, and all conduct research into new technologies, weigh alternatives, and involve 
the public.  
EPA cannot account for local factors in promulgating federal baseline WQS for Indian country 
and offer the robust public proceedings needed to ensure that the WQS established are 
appropriate, considering section 303(c)’s enumerated uses. EPA maintains that “as both the 
promulgating entity and the primary implementing authority,” it will allow “a degree of site-
specific tailoring” that will “be accomplished by use of the narrative criteria and binding 
translation procedures identified in the rule.”52 That only underscores why establishing baseline 
WQS for all of Indian country is inappropriate. EPA’s proposed use of narrative criteria, 
translated into numeric criteria using one of five options at EPA’s discretion, will likely make it 
very difficult for regulated entities to plan.  
The legal and jurisdictional complexity throughout Indian country is, in fact, one of WUWC’s 
major concerns. EPA intends for the proposed rule to apply throughout “Indian county,” except 
with respect to: (1) reservations where tribes have been granted TAS status; (2) reservations 
where EPA has “explicitly found that a state has jurisdiction to adopt water quality standards”; 
(3) off-reservation allotments and off-reservation dependent Indian communities; and (4) 
reservations where the Regional Administrator approves an exclusion.53 WUWC believes that 
EPA’s proposed scope is overbroad and will lead to uncertainty and conflict. 
First, Indian land tenure is variable and often highly fractured. Due to federal allotment policies, 
many reservations are a hodgepodge of tribal trust land, allotted lands, and fee lands. It is well-
established that states have jurisdiction over fee lands located within Indian country.54 As such, 
state WQS standards already apply to all intrastate waters on fee lands. The proposed rule cannot 
consequently apply to fee lands located within an Indian reservation because there is no 
“necessity” under section 303(c)(4)(B)(2). EPA does not have authority to supplant state WQS 
with its own baseline standards.   
The legal authorities governing reservations differ from reservation to reservation. In Colorado, 
for example, the Southern Ute Reservation has a checkerboard ownership pattern with many 
non-Indians living within the reservation’s historic boundaries, which has precipitated long and 
contentious jurisdictional disputes. Congress sought to resolve those disputes in 1984 with Public 
Law No. 98-290 (PL 290), which draws reservation boundaries and delineates the respective 
jurisdictional authority of the tribe, the state and the county. Despite PL 290, the state and the 
tribe do not agree as to territorial and regulatory jurisdiction concerning the administration of 
Clean Air Act programs relative to non-Indian air pollution sources on fee land within the 
reservation. Congress also passed tribe-specific allotment acts that can affect the allocation of 
jurisdiction, as well as various termination and restoration acts. In order to determine which 
 
52 88 Fed. Reg. at 29499. 
53 Id. at 29522 (§ 131.XX(a)). 
54 Nevada v. Hicks, 533 U. S. 353, 361 (2001) (“State sovereignty does not end at a reservation’s 
border.”); County of Yakima v. Confederated Tribes and Bands of Yakima Nation, 502 U. S. 251, 257–
258 (1992). 

 
 
11 
WQS applies, states and tribes will have to resolve jurisdictional uncertainties each of these 
unique authorities, which will likely generate intergovernmental disputes that would otherwise 
have been avoided.  
The number of very small reservations and off-reservation trust parcels will also create 
administrative headaches.55 Many tribes have acquired trust lands outside of reservation 
boundaries for a variety of reasons—including to support economic development important for 
tribal self-determination. But non-contiguous trust lands—of which there are many—only 
increase the jurisdictional complexity and make planning difficult for regulated entities. These 
problems will only increase. The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) recently announced that it has 
an affirmative policy favoring trust acquisition.56 It “has processed thousands of applications 
placing over a million acres of land into trust for tribes and individual Indians since the passage 
of the IRA in 1934.”57 BIA has proposed changes to its fee-to-trust regulations that would allow 
it to “process applications more quickly and with less expense to applicants.”58 Among the 
proposed changes is a presumption that the Secretary of the Interior will acquire land in trust and 
the elimination from BIA’s consideration of “jurisdictional problems or conflicts of land use 
which may arise.”59 The combination of EPA’s and BIA’s proposed rules are likely to have far-
reaching consequences to water pollution management.  
For WUWC members, having a checkerboard application of variable WQS can make its 
compliance efforts very challenging. Administration complexity will be exacerbated by EPA’s 
proposed use of narrative criteria, which EPA will numerically translate using one of five 
options. With over 100 recognized tribes in California, 29 in Washington, 23 in New Mexico, 22 
in Arizona, 20 in Nevada, eight in Utah, and two in Colorado, our members’ concerns are well-
founded. In WUWC’s view, the far more sensible approach—and the one most consistent with 
current practice and the plain language of the Act—is to apply state WQS until such time as a 
tribe—in an exercise of its sovereign judgment—decides to seek TAS status under section 518.  
Specific Comments 
1. § 131XX(a) Scope. 
The proposed rule will apply to “all waters of the United States in Indian country,” except for: 
reservations where EPA has already promulgated WQS (i.e., the Confederated Tribes of the 
Colville Reservation); states where EPA has “explicitly found that a state has jurisdiction” or 
where a tribe is authorized TAS; off-reservation allotments and dependent Indian communities; 
and reservations were a Regional Administrator approves an exclusion.60 Exclusions are 
 
55 EPA intends for the proposed rule to apply all trust lands, not just formal reservations. 88 Fed. Reg. at 
29522 (§ 131.XX(a)).  
56 Land Acquisitions, 87 Fed. Reg. 74334, 74335 (Dec. 5, 2022). 
57 Id. (“[I]t will now be clear Departmental policy to support land into trust.”). 
58 Id. 
59 See id. at 74337, 74338. 
60 88 Fed. Reg. at 29522. 

 
 
12 
permitted for tribes “that have a plan in place for establishing WQS for EPA approval or are 
working on a plan and do not yet have EPA-approved WQS for EPA in effect.”61  
For the reasons explained above, WUWC recommends that EPA limit the scope of the rule. First, 
EPA should clarify that the rule does not apply to fee lands located within Indian country. 
Second, EPA should consider limiting application of the rule to the definition of “Indian 
reservation” Congress enacted in section 518—“all land within the limits of any Indian 
reservation under the jurisdiction of the United States Government . . .”62  
WUWC also suggests that EPA not apply the rule to informal reservations to reduce the potential 
for conflicts and the cost of compliance. In addition, EPA should consider applying the proposed 
rule in phases, based on reservation size. The surface waters on small reservations and trust lands 
are far more likely to adequately protected by existing state WQS. To the extent that EPA 
believes that there are serious gaps that it needs to address in Indian country, it should focus its 
efforts on those locations. Doing so would also enable it to more accurately understand how the 
rule is affecting upstream states and dischargers.    
Finally, WUWC recommends that, rather than requiring tribes to seek an exclusion from the 
application of the rule, the rule offer an “opt in” process. Doing so would enable EPA to 
determine whether the proposed rule reflects and protects tribal priorities, rather than EPA’s, by 
empowering tribes to opt into its application. Many tribes may not have invested significant 
resources into evaluating EPA’s proposed rule for various reasons. Some may believe that state 
WQS adequately protect reservation waters. Others may wish to avoid the jurisdictional disputes 
the rule is likely to generate. EPA received comment letters from only ten tribes during tribal 
consultation. The low level of response, coupled with the concerns tribes voiced regarding 
jurisdictional disputes, the need for regionally-specific standards, and the application in 
checkerboard reservations, suggests that an opt-in approach would better reflect tribal priorities 
and respect tribal sovereignty.  
2. § 131.XX(b) Consultation with Tribes. 
Proposed § 131.XX(b) provides that in taking actions under this section, the Regional 
Administrator will initiate Tribal consultation with the tribe(s) whose interests may be affected, 
consistent with applicable EPA Tribal consultation policies. 
WUWC supports EPA’s consultation efforts and believes that such consultation is critical to 
understanding the local complexities that must be considered in establishing appropriate WQS. 
But EPA’s consultation should not be limited to tribes. The baseline WQS will directly impact 
the states in which the trust lands are located, most dramatically where Indian land tenure is 
complex and fractured. Because the proposed rule purports to regulate all waters within Indian 
country (subject to certain exceptions), EPA will assume regulatory control over entities 
operating under state permits that apply state WQS. In addition, the upstream state and 
discharges will also be directly impacted. Consulting only with tribes regarding EPA’s WQS will 
 
61 Id. at 29501. 
62 33 U.S.C. § 1377(g)(1). 

 
 
13 
result in EPA not having sufficient information in translating its narrative criteria into numeric 
standards.  
In addition, many tribes do not have staff or extensive experience in water pollution 
management. That may be because of lack of resources or tribes may have elected to rely on 
state WQS, focusing their efforts on other tribal priorities. In any case, states have entire 
agencies devoted to water pollution management and over a half-century of experience in 
implementing section 303. EPA, which has little local knowledge, should involve the states in 
establishing appropriate WQS. WUWC also recommends that EPA consult with non-tribal 
entities that will be directly affected by the proposed rule.  
3. § 131.XX(c) Federal Baseline Designated Uses 
EPA proposes to establish three baseline designated uses for most of Indian country: (1) the 
protection and propagation of aquatic life, which includes protection of human health of 
consumers of aquatic life; (2) primary contact recreation; and (3) cultural and traditional uses of 
reservation waters.63 Respectfully, WUWC members are concerned that EPA has not and cannot 
meet basic section 303 requirements in implementing the rule. 
Pursuant to the regulations EPA promulgated to implement its WQS program, states and 
authorized tribes are required to specify “appropriate water uses to be achieved and protected.”64 
In doing so, they must “take into consideration the water quality standards of downstream waters 
and [to] ensure that its water quality standards provide for the attainment and maintenance of the 
water quality standards of downstream waters.”65 The proposed rule does not and cannot do 
either of those things, which is likely to lead to significant implementation problems in the states 
WUWC members operate. The western United States is arid; there are many waters that do not 
support fish or primary contact recreation due to insufficient flows or other naturally occurring 
features. Attainment of EPA’s surface water quality criteria is not possible in all waters. It will 
be necessary to use site-specific criteria and/or attainability analyses—which require 
considerable technical expertise to develop—to prevent overly stringent effluent limits, 
unnecessary 303(d) listings, and unattainable TMDL endpoints.  
As EPA admits, its blanket approach to designated uses “may not be attainable in all Indian 
reservation waters because of Tribe-specific or site-specific factors.”66 To address this problem, 
EPA proposes a regulatory process to revise designated uses as “data and information may 
become available after the baseline WQS rule becomes final.”67 But this just underscores the 
problems with EPA’s “one size fits all” approach to WQS. WQS need to be tailed to site-specific 
conditions because aquatic communities, hydrology, geologic formations, and anthropogenic 
influences substantially vary. These resources should be evaluated by individual reservations, 
 
63 88 Fed. Reg. at 29522 (131.XX(c)). 
64 40 C.F.R. § 131.10(a). 
65 Id. § 131.10(b). 
66 88 Fed. Reg. at 29512. 
67 Id. at 29512; 29526 (131.XX(i)). 

 
 
14 
individual waters, and available resources for implementation before designated uses are 
identified.  
The proposed regulation provides that the Regional Administrator “may”—upon request of the 
tribe or upon the Regional Administrator’s identification—revise one or more designated uses to 
“more appropriately reflect the Tribe-specific use and value of waters.”68 But this approach turns 
the process on its head. Rather than designating appropriate uses at the outset, EPA’s blanket 
designations will have to be revised on a case-by-case basis, and the interim, regulated parties 
will face unattainable requirements. Moreover, because the rule does not allow states or 
regulated parties to request revision, the rule could leave states and regulated entities without 
recourse. Tribes that do not have expertise or are not otherwise concerned about off-reservation 
activities may be unmotivated to revise uses that were inappropriate from the start. States and 
upstream dischargers, however, will be directly and indirectly impacted by EPA’s designated 
uses.  
With respect to EPA’s proposed designation of cultural and traditional uses, it does not appear 
that EPA has authority to designate this use. Under section 303(c)(4), the Administrator can 
establish WQS only if he “determines that a revised or new standard is necessary to meet the 
requirements of this chapter.”69 As EPA’s regulations establish, the minimum requirements of 
the chapter are the use designations consistent with sections 101(a)(2) and 303(c)(2).70 Section 
101(a)(2) uses include “the protection and propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife” and 
“recreation in and on the water.”71 Section 303(c)(2) provides that WQS are to be established 
“taking into consideration their use and value for public water supplies, propagation of fish and 
wildlife, recreational purposes, and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and also taking 
into consideration their use and value for navigation.”72 EPA reiterates in 40 C.F.R. § 131.10 that 
“[t]he classification of the waters of the State must take into consideration the use and value of 
water for public water supplies, protection and propagation of fish, shellfish and wildlife, 
recreation in and on the water, agricultural, industrial, and other purposes including navigation.” 
While states and authorized tribes can adopt non-101(a)(2) uses, but they must justify those uses 
before EPA will approve them.73   
EPA maintains that cultural and traditional uses serve “to protect the health and welfare of Tribal 
members exercising such uses and are thus within the purposes enumerated in the Act.”74 There 
is nothing in the CWA to support EPA’s interpretation, as its own regulations establish. In 40 
 
68 Id. at 29526 (131.XX(i)). 
69 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(4)(B) (emphasis added). 
70 40 C.F.R. § 131.6(a). 
71 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a)(2). 
72 Id. § 1313(c)(2)(A). 
73 40 C.F.R. § 131.10(a) (“If adopting new or revised designated uses other than the uses specified in 
section 101(a)(2) of the Act, or removing designated uses, States must submit documentation justifying 
how their consideration of the use and value of water for those uses listed in this paragraph appropriately 
supports the State's action.”). 
74 88 Fed. Reg. at 29503. 

 
 
15 
C.F.R. § 131.2, EPA interprets “‘Serve the purposes of the Act’ (as defined in sections 101(a)(2) 
and 303(c) of the Act)” to require WQS that “wherever attainable, provide water quality for the 
protection and propagation of fish, shellfish and wildlife and for recreation in and on the water 
and take into consideration their use and value of public water supplies, propagation of fish, 
shellfish, and wildlife, recreation in and on the water, and agricultural, industrial, and other 
purposes including navigation.” Cultural and traditional uses are not part of the Act’s purposes 
and, thus, are not “necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter” under section 303(c)(4).     
WUWC is not taking the position that tribes cannot independently designate cultural and 
traditional uses in establishing their own WQS.75 But it does not believe that EPA has the 
authority to do so under section 303(c)(4).76 
4. § 131.XX(d) Federal Baseline Water Quality Criteria 
EPA proposes to use narrative criteria only. Under the proposed rule, EPA can chose among five 
options to numerically translate the narrative criteria: 
1. EPA’s national recommended water quality criteria published under section 
304; 
2. EPA’s national recommended water quality criteria published under section 
304, modified to reflect site-specific conditions and aquatic communities that 
incorporate (where relevant): 
a. Fish consumption rates protective of tribal fish consumers; 
b. Site-specific water chemistry; 
c. Protective default chemistry inputs; or 
d. Other scientifically defensible assessments, such as endangered species 
guidance and indigenous knowledge; 
3. WQS adopted by the tribe or CWA-effective WQS applicable in “adjacent or 
other relevant state(s) or Tribe(s),” taking into account indigenous knowledge; 
4. The Water Quality Guidance for the Great Lakes System; or 
5. Existing CWA provisions in 40 C.F.R. part 131. 
WUWC members are concerned that this approach provides dischargers, permit writers, and 
other regulators with virtually no information regarding the standards they will have to satisfy. 
 
75 Id. 
76 WUWC is also concerned that EPA is “not proposing to define cultural and traditional uses in more 
detail in this rule because they can include a variety of uses specific to the ceremonies and traditions of 
each Tribe, and each use may require different levels of protection.” 88 Fed. Reg at 29503. Without 
identifying the uses or the levels of protection required or where these protections may apply, WUWC 
members cannot evaluate the potential impacts of the proposed rule on their facilities. 

 
 
16 
For regulated entities like WUWC members, the use of narrative criteria makes planning and 
compliance more difficult, while expanding EPA’s discretion.77   
Under option 2, EPA can modify its national recommended water quality criteria published 
under section 304, by adopting fish consumption rates largely as it sees fit. Thus, EPA can use its 
general fish consumption rate of 22 g/day or its national default subsistence value of 142 g/day, 
the latter of which would require most states to substantially reduce their WQS for downstream 
compliance purposes. Under this approach, Regional Administrators will have wide discretion to 
select the numeric criteria they prefer, without “taking into consideration their use and value for 
public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, and agricultural, 
industrial, and other purposes, and also taking into consideration their use and value for 
navigation,” as section 303(c) requires.78 And it appears that stricter standards are EPA’s goal, as 
the preamble explains that “a fish consumption rate should be selected that reflects consumption 
that is not suppressed by fish availability or concerns about the safety of fish for human 
consumption.”79 “[A] suppression effect is when the fish consumption rate for a given Tribe 
reflects a current level of consumption that is artificially diminished relative to the Tribe’s 
heritage fish consumption rate.”80 A tribe’s current level of fish consumption may differ from its 
“heritage fish consumption rate” for a wide variety of reasons, not the least of which is the wide-
spread availability of non-local food sources through supermarkets and other sources.   
It is also concerning that EPA’s justification for this option goes well beyond the purposes of the 
CWA. EPA explains that “[t]he negative impacts of suppression extend well beyond Tribal 
health, leading to consequences for Tribal economies and cultures as well.”81 “Given that aquatic 
resources often support a Tribe’s cultural self-determination and can be pivotal to the economic 
wellbeing of the community, impacts to these resources can affect the very foundation of Tribal 
social and political organization.” The CWA, however, was not designed to address effects 
extending “well beyond Tribal health.” As Congress expressly provided, the purpose of the 
CWA “is to restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the Nation’s 
waters.”82 While WUWC members strongly support WQS that are protective of fish consumers, 
nothing in the CWA authorizes or provides legal support for EPA to require the use of 
“unsuppressed” fish consumption rates.83    
 
77 See e.g., Upper Blackstone Water Pollution Abatement Dist. v. EPA, 690 F.3d 9, 32 (1st Cir. 2012) 
(reviewing EPA’s translation of Massachusetts’ narrative criteria to significant limit phosphorus 
discharges under a “zone of reasonableness” standard); Am. Paper Inst. v. EPA, 996 F.2d 346, 350 (D.C. 
Cir. 1993) (deferring to EPA’s translation of narrative criteria). 
78 88 Fed. Reg. at 29503 n.22. 
79 88 Fed. Reg. at 29507. 
80 Id.at 29521. 
81 Id. 
82 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a). 
83 EPA takes the position that tribal treaty rights require the application of unsuppressed fish consumption 
rates and has proposed a rule that would require states to protect treaty rights in state WQS. See, e.g., 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 88 Fed. Reg. 74361 

 
 
17 
WUWC members are unsure regarding how Regional Administrators will use indigenous 
knowledge to modify national recommended water quality criteria. EPA explains that Regional 
Administrators may “modify the CWA section 304(a) recommended criteria to protect site-
specific conditions based on a sound scientific rationale, including EPA published 
methodologies, if available, and, as appropriate, Indigenous Knowledge (IK), often referred to as 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK), where consistent with EPA’s regulations and CWA 
statutory requirements.”84 WUWC members have deep respect for indigenous communities and 
the traditional ecological knowledge such communities acquired over millennia. But EPA 
developed its national recommended water quality criteria “to accurately reflect the latest 
scientific knowledge on the impacts of pollutants on human health and the environment.”85 Its 
water quality criteria “are based solely on data and scientific judgments on the relationship 
between pollutant concentrations and environmental and human health effects.”86 It is not 
apparent how EPA would use IK to modify its data-based, scientific judgments on the 
relationship between pollutant concentrations and environmental and human health effects or 
why it would be prudent to do so. 
In any event, the Regional Administrator will translate the baseline criteria after the proposed 
rule is in effect using one of the five options, at its discretion.87 It “could,” but is not required to, 
provide a specific public process on EPA’s translation in advance of the public process 
associated with the implementation program.88 And if conflicts arise between upstream state 
WQS and baseline WQS, EPA will apply 40 C.F.R. § 131.7. Under that section, the Regional 
Administrator—who created the conflict in the first place—is responsible for attempting to 
resolve the dispute they created. The Regional Administrator also has the power to appoint a 
mediator or arbitrator, as applicable, and if the state refuses mediation or arbitration, the 
Regional Administrator may appoint an official to prepare a written recommendation to resolve 
the dispute. Whether an NPDES permittee, citizen, citizen group, or other affected entity may 
participate is also left to the discretion of the Regional Administrator. 
The Regional Administrator cannot possibly serve as a neutral arbiter in this situation. This 
approach is inconsistent with the CWA’s policy of ensuring that states (an authorized tribes) 
have the primary responsibility for preventing, reducing, and eliminating pollution.  
 
(Dec. 5, 2022). Under that rule states and authorized tribes would have to: (a) designate uses of 
waterbodies that expressly incorporate protections for tribal reserved rights; (b) establish water quality 
criteria to protect those rights; and (c) adopt antidegradation requirements to protect water quality to the 
level deemed necessary to protect tribal reserved rights. EPA has not identified any treaty language to 
support its position.  
84 EPA refers to indigenous knowledge as traditional ecological knowledge. 88 Fed. Reg. at 29507. 
85 U.S. EPA, Water Quality Criteria, https://www.epa.gov/wqc (last visited August 2, 2023). 
86 See e.g., U.S. EPA, Nat’l Recommend Water Quality Criteria 2002 1 (2002), 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2018-12/documents/national-recommended-hh-criteria-2002.pdf. 
87 88 Fed. Reg. at 29508. 
88 Id.  

 
 
18 
5. 131.XX(e) Federal baseline antidegradation policy. 
WUWC members support antidegradation goals. However, WUWC members are concerned that 
EPA’s broad discretion in translating its water quality criteria into numeric standards discussed 
above will create significant compliance issues. While the Regional Administrator has the power 
to allow lowering of high water quality, the proposed rule requires written agreement from the 
tribe that “is necessary to accommodate important economic or social development in the area in 
which the waters are located.”89 This approach is likely to result in conflicts. If EPA imposes 
standards stricter than state WQS that dischargers cannot meet, tribes will be in a position to 
withhold the written agreement that the regulations require for a lowering of highwater quality. 
In fact, it may be necessary to obtain multiple permissions, depending on waterbody and the 
number of reservations and trust lands involved. 
6. 131.XX(f)(4)(i) Outstanding national resource water protection consistent with 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section. 
This subsection would allow the Regional Administrator to determine, with written agreement 
from the tribe, whether a reservation water qualifies as an Outstanding National Resource Water 
(ONRW). An ONRW, under the proposed rule, could include “such as waters of national and 
Tribal parks and wildlife refuges and waters of exceptional recreational, ecological, or cultural 
significance.”90 The proposed language differs from the current language found in 40 C.F.R. 
§ 131.12(a)(3), which does not include “cultural significance.”91 The proposed rule does not 
require notice to affected upstream states or seek their input prior to the Regional Administrator 
making the determination.  
EPA interprets 40 C.F.R. § 131.12(a)(3) “to mean no new or increased discharges to ONRWs 
and no new or increased discharge to tributaries to ONRWs that would result in lower water 
quality in the ONRWs.”92 In other words, designating waters as an ONRW imposes a nearly 
absolute ban on new or expanded point source discharges. Only “short-term, temporary water 
quality degradation” can be permitted, and “only if the short-term, temporary degradation is 
limited to the shortest possible time, does not impact existing uses, and does not alter the 
essential or special characteristics” that make it an ONRW.93 EPA interprets “short-term” to 
mean “weeks and months, not years.”94 
Given the very significant impact ONRW designation can have, WUWC members are concerned 
that the proposed rule allows the Regional Administrator too much discretion. The affected state 
and the public should be notified prior to the Regional Administrator making a determination, 
 
89 Id. at 29523. 
90 88 Fed. Reg. at 29523 (§131.XX(e)(3)). 
91 Id. 
92 U.S. EPA, Water Quality Standards Handbook, Ch. 4, 12 (2012), 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2014-10/documents/handbook-chapter4.pdf. 
93 88 Fed. Reg. at 29523 (§131.XX(e)(5)). 
94 Water Quality Standards Handbook, Ch. 4, 12. 

 
 
19 
and there should be meaningful standards for making such a determination. In addition, EPA 
should take into account the extent of the waters within and outside of Indian country and the 
economic effects of such designation. While WUWC members support anti-degradation rules, 
there should be clear standards and a more detailed process.  
Conclusion 
This rulemaking is an opportunity for EPA to address our comments and those of others who 
support CWA protections and ensuring that all intrastate waters nationwide are protected. Our 
members are experienced, on-the-ground partners with EPA and states in the implementation of 
the CWA. Based on this experience, WUWC is prepared to assist EPA other federal and state 
regulatory agencies, and members of Congress in addressing this important issue. WUWC looks 
forward to continued dialogue and collaboration as EPA completes its rulemaking. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments. For more information, please contact 
me at (951) 203-2804 or Walshj@emwd.org, or WUWC’s national counsel, Ted Boling, at (202) 
661-5872 or TedBoling@perkinscoie.com, or Jena MacLean at (202 434-1648) or 
JMacLean@perkinscoie.com. 
Very truly yours, 
 
s/ Jolene Walsh 
 
Jolene Walsh 
Vice Chair, WUWC 
 
cc: 
Marshall Brown, WUWC Chair 
 
Ted Boling 
 
Jena MacLean

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0250 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
1 
 
J.R. Simplot Company 
Simplot Headquarters 
1099 W. Front Street 
Boise, Idaho  83702 
P.O. Box 27 
Boise, Idaho 83707 
 
August 3, 2023 
 
 
Submitted via www.regulations.gov 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
 
 
Ms. Radhika Fox 
Assistant Administrator, Office of Water 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue N.W. 
Washington D.C.  20460 
 
Dear Administrator Fox: 
 
On May 5, 2023, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published a 
proposed rule titled, “Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian 
Reservations.” 88 FR at 29,496 (May 5, 2023).  The proposed rule is intended to 
establish nationwide water quality standards for Indian lands claiming that the 
majority of reservations currently lack Clean Water Act (CWA) protections.  
 
These comments are submitted the J.R. Simplot Company (Simplot).  Simplot is a 
privately held, agribusiness corporation based in Boise, Idaho.  Simplot is engaged 
in a number of businesses including vegetable and potato processing, farming, 
mining of phosphate and silica, fertilizer manufacturing, fertilizer distribution, 
ranching, beef cattle feedlots, beef processing, and other enterprises related to 
agriculture.  A number of these operations are subject to requirements of the Clean 
Water Act.  The proposed rule, if implemented as drafted, will have broad and 
substantial changes on Clean Water Act requirements for regulated entities 
upstream and near Indian lands.  Thus, this proposed rule is of direct interest to 
Simplot. 
 
As thoroughly discussed in the attached comment document, EPA has proposed 
a rule that is exceeds its statutory authority and is not in accordance with the law.  
The proposed rule is based on a flawed premise and would create a framework for 
establishing water quality criteria without any of the procedural requirements of the 
CWA, EPA’s regulations, and the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). Finally, the 
methodology to derive numeric criteria, especially for fish consumption rates is 
technically flawed and does not reflect the latest scientific knowledge. We urge 
EPA to withdraw the proposed rule.   
 
 

 
 
 
2 
 
Please contact me at (208) 780-7365 if you have any questions about these comments. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Alan L. Prouty 
Vice President 
Environmental & Regulatory Affairs 
 
Attachment 
 
C: 
National Mining Association 
The Fertilizer Institute 
 
 

 
a 
 
FEDERAL BASELINE WATER QUALITY STANDARDS 
FOR INDIAN RESERVATIONS 
 
Proposed Rule 
May 5, 2023  Federal Register Vol 88 (87) p.29,496 
 
 
 
 
 
J.R. Simplot Company 
Boise, Idaho 
 
August 3, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary  
EPA proposes to establish nationwide water quality standards for Indian lands claiming 
that the majority of reservations currently lack Clean Water Act (CWA) protections.  
However, as shown in these comments, a review of “treatment as states” (TAS) tribes 
shows that this claim is incorrect. Furthermore, the approach that EPA has proposed to 
“remedy” this “problem” is legally flawed. The proposed rule would also create a 
framework for establishing water quality criteria without any of the procedural 
requirements of the CWA, EPA’s regulations, and the Administrative Procedure Act 
(APA). Finally, the methodology to derive numeric criteria, especially for fish consumption 
rates is technically flawed and does not reflect the latest scientific knowledge. We urge 
EPA to withdraw the proposed rule. 
 
 
 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
b 
 
Table of Contents 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 1 
I.  EPA’s Rationale for the Proposed Rule is Flawed ...................................................................... 2 
II.  The Proposed Rule is Unlawful ...................................................................................................... 5 
A. 
EPA Does Not Have CWA Authority Over Tribal Lands Without TAS ........................ 5 
B. 
Section 303 Does Not Authorize EPA to Promulgate Nationally-Applicable Water 
Quality Standards ................................................................................................................................ 6 
C. 
The Proposed Designated Uses Are Inconsistent with the CWA and Unlawful .... 10 
D. 
The Proposed “Cultural and Traditional Use” Is Not Consistent with the CWA ... 11 
E. 
The Proposed “Binding Translation” Framework is Unlawful ....................................... 12 
III. The “Binding Translation” Options are Unworkable .............................................................. 13 
A. 
Translation options 1, 2, and 3 are Unworkable and Result in Significant 
Uncertainty for the Regulated Community. ................................................................................ 13 
B. 
The Proposed Use of Fish Consumption Rates (FCR) is Flawed and Not 
Scientifically Defensible. .................................................................................................................. 16 
IV. The Proposal Lacks Sufficient Explanation and Rationale to Meet APA Requirements
 .................................................................................................................................................................... 25 
A. 
Impacts on State and TAS Tribal Programs .................................................................... 25 
B. 
Impacts on EPA Administration Obligations .................................................................. 26 
V.  The Economic Analysis Dramatically Underestimates the Cost of the Proposed Rule 27 
VI.  Summary and Recommendations .............................................................................................. 29 
 
 
 
 

 
P a g e  1 | 31 
 
Introduction 
 
On May 5, 2023, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published a proposed 
rule titled, “Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations.” 88 FR 
29496 (May 5, 2023). The proposal is intended to modify the Clean Water Act (CWA) 
water quality standards (WQS) program, promulgated at 40 CFR Part 131, to establish 
“baseline” water quality standards that would apply to all Indian reservation waters, as 
described in section 131.xx(a) of the proposed rule. WQS are the foundation for many 
other CWA programs, including impairment assessments, total maximum daily load 
(TMDL) development, section 401 certifications, effluent limits, and permitting decisions 
under the section 402 and section 404 discharge permit programs.   
 
The proposed rule is legally flawed and implicates many of the same legal and policy 
problems reflected in EPA’s recent proposed rule that would mandate states to establish 
designated uses for tribal reserved rights (87 FR 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022)). Both proposed 
rules exceed EPA’s authority under the CWA, implicate the “major questions” doctrine, 
create significant and unanswered implementation questions, and are inconsistent with 
recent Supreme Court decisions limiting agency authority, including Sackett v. EPA, 598 
U.S. ___ (2023)., Biden v. Nebraska, 600 U.S. ___ (2023), W. Virginia v. Env't Prot. 
Agency, 142 S. Ct. 2587 (2022). The proposed rule would also create a framework for 
establishing water quality criteria without any of the procedural requirements of the CWA, 
EPA’s regulations, and the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). As demonstrated in the 
comments below, EPA has failed to provide rationale or explanation for the proposal, 
failed to consider important aspects of the problem, and has proposed a rule that exceeds 
its statutory authority and is not in accordance with the law. 
 
The J.R. Simplot Company (Simplot) is a privately held, global agribusiness corporation 
based in Boise, Idaho. Simplot is engaged in a number of businesses including food 
processing, farming, fertilizer manufacturing, beef cattle feedlots, mining, ranching and 
other enterprises related to agriculture. Simplot has operations throughout the United 
States, with the majority of the facilities to the west of the Mississippi River Valley. As a 
part of the U.S. operations, Simplot has been a reliable domestic manufacturer and 
supplier of phosphate nutrients to American agriculture for over seven decades.  
Simplot’s operations are often subject to the requirements of the CWA, including section 
303 water quality standards and TMDLs; section 401 water quality certification; section 
311 oil spill prevention and response; section 404 dredge and fill permit; and section 402 
discharge permit programs; and, of course, every regulatory interaction with the CWA 
implicates the ever-changing regulatory definition of “waters of the United States” 
(WOTUS). Thus, this rulemaking is of interest as it has a direct impact on the company’s 
United States operations. 
 
 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  2 | 31 
 
I.  EPA’s Rationale for the Proposed Rule is Flawed  
 
The CWA and EPA regulations provide an opportunity for federally recognized tribes to 
obtain “treatment as a state” (referred to as TAS) authority under the CWA. TAS tribes 
can promulgate tribal WQS that, if approved by EPA, become effective for CWA 
purposes. TAS tribes can also obtain authority to administer other CWA programs, 
including the 401 certification and the 402 and 404 discharge permit programs. EPA 
states that its preference is for “Tribes to obtain TAS and develop WQS tailored to the 
Tribe’s individual environmental goals and reservation waters.” However, the proposed 
rule also states that “[a]t the current pace, it could take more than a decade for CWA-
effective WQS to be put in place for all Indian reservations”, indicating that EPA has 
developed this proposed rule to fast-track WQS development for Indian reservations. 88 
FR at 29499. Instead of devoting resources to promote tribal self-determination under the 
existing TAS framework, EPA is proposing its novel baseline WQS rule that would expand 
federal regulation over tribal reservation lands. This proposal has the potential to disrupt 
state and TAS tribal WQS programs and upend the cooperative federalism foundation of 
the CWA. EPA’s proposed rationale for the proposed rule cannot withstand scrutiny.  
 
As an initial matter, EPA asserts that following the existing CWA TAS process would 
“further delay needed water quality protections,” but the proposed rule lacks any 
explanation or description of this need. EPA has not cited specific waters on Indian 
reservations that are in need of protections, has not provided examples of EPA-issued 
NPDES permits that are not protective because a lack of tribal water quality standards, 
and EPA has not identified specific situations that demand greater federal regulatory 
control over tribal lands. It is not enough for EPA to simply state that there is a lack of 
water quality standards. To justify the proposed rule, EPA must demonstrate that there is 
an actual need for additional water quality protections, and that the proposed baseline 
standards and the associated increase in federal regulatory control on tribal lands would 
provide a remedy. 
 
Along the same lines, the proposal preamble appears to significantly underestimate the 
extent that tribal reservations are covered by CWA protections. The proposed rule 
preamble states that 574 tribes have been recognized by the federal government and that 
more than 300 of those tribes have “formal or informal” reservations. 88 FR at 29498. The 
proposed rule goes on to state that “only” 84 tribes with Indian reservations have applied 
for and received TAS authority under the CWA and, of these, “only 47 Tribes” have 
adopted or have submitted WQS for EPA approval. The proposal then states “EPA 
estimates that about 76,000 miles of rivers and streams and 1.9 million acres of lakes, 
reservoirs, and other open surface waters within Indian reservations currently lack CWA-
effective WQS…” 88 FR at 29499. Based on this summary, the proposal concludes that 
“…the majority of Indian reservations do not have this foundational protection laid out by 
Congress in the CWA for their waters.” Id. EPA’s conclusion is misleading and inaccurate 
with respect to the total reservation lands that currently have CWA protections.  
EPA’s statement that the majority of reservations currently lack CWA protections ignores 
the significant variation in both the size of reservations and the number of waters on those 
lands. As EPA well knows all tribes do not have equally sized reservation lands, or an 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  3 | 31 
 
equal number of waters that would be subject to the CWA. See Figure 1. A few tribes 
have very large reservation lands but the reservation lands for most tribes are relatively 
small. Many of the tribes with large reservation lands already have TAS authority and, of 
those, many have adopted WQS consistent with the CWA. When viewed on a land area 
basis, 72% of reservation lands in the United States belong to tribes with TAS authority 
and 75% of those reservation lands have CWA-effective WQS (Tables 1a and 1b). Thus, 
a key justification for the proposed rule, EPA’s assertion that a majority of tribal waters do 
not have TAS authority and do not have CWA-effective WQS, is inaccurate and 
misleading. Waters on the majority of reservation lands do have such protection, and 
nearly three quarters of reservation lands belong to tribes with TAS authority. 
 
Further to this point, the proposal explains that at the current pace of TAS applications, 
all tribes could have a CWA-based water quality standard program in ten years. 88 FR at 
29499. In other words, EPA could continue investing in TAS programming at its current 
rate and the remaining 28% of reservation lands could be covered by legitimate CWA 
TAS authority, with tribe specific WQS, in ten years. If EPA were able to increase its 
funding or programming for TAS efforts, it could likely reach that goal sooner. Given that 
EPA’s first unsuccessful attempt at a baseline WQS rulemaking was more than 20 years 
ago, and considering the significant legal vulnerability of the proposed rule (discussed in 
detail below), the agency’s only reasonable (and realistic) path forward is to focus agency 
efforts to achieve full implementation of the TAS program. EPA also fails to acknowledge 
that there is likely no scenario where EPA could “stand up,” let alone administer, the 
proposed baseline WQS program on 76,000 miles of rivers and streams or 1.9 million 
acres of open waters in less than 10 years.  
 
If the agency finalizes this proposed rule, it is likely to spend the next five or more years 
in court defending the rule and, in all likelihood, rewriting or revising some or all of it on 
court-ordered remand or vacatur. The only reasonable and lawful option is for EPA to 
continue promoting TAS and the associated tribal self-determination through the TAS 
program, and the CWA framework as Congress envisioned water quality protections on 
tribal lands would be established. 
 
 
 

 
P a g e  4 | 31 
 
Figure 1  Indian Lands of Federally Recognized Tribes of the United State 
 
 

 
P a g e  5 | 31 
 
 
Table 1a. Reservation acreage for Tribes within the United States 
Category 
Acreage 
% of Total Acreage 
Total Tribal Reservation Acreage US 
56,200,000 
  
All TAS tribes 
40,644,421 
72% 
TAS tribes with WQS 
30,338,245 
54% 
TAS tribes without WQS 
10,306,176 
18% 
Table 1b. Reservation population sizea for Tribes within the United States 
Category 
Population Size 
% of Total Population 
Total Tribal Reservation Population US 
1,560,000 
  
All TAS tribes 
540,342 
35% 
TAS tribes with WQS 
415,894 
27% 
TAS tribes without WQS 
124,448 
8% 
Notes 
aTribal population living on a reservation, not total tribal 
membership 
TAS = 'treatment as a state" authority 
approved by EPA 
WQS = water quality standards 
 
 
 
II.  The Proposed Rule is Unlawful 
 
A. EPA Does Not Have CWA Authority Over Tribal Lands Without TAS 
 
EPA claims its legal authority to propose the baseline WQS rule lies in an Administrator’s 
Determination that was made in 2001, pursuant to CWA section 303(c)(4)(B). EPA cannot 
rely on CWA section 303(c)(4)(B) because nothing in the CWA authorizes EPA to take 
oversight measures against tribes unless they have TAS authority. As a result, any 
Administrator’s Determination that claims authority over non-TAS reservation lands is 
beyond EPA’s authority and can have no legal effect. EPA does not have legal authority 
to promulgate the proposed baseline WQS regulation and, if finalized, the rule would be 
unlawful. 
 
The proposal correctly explains that CWA section 303 sets out detailed requirements for 
states to establish, maintain, and update water quality standards; to evaluate the quality 
of its waters against those standards; and to develop total maximum daily loads where 
waters are not meeting the applicable standards. The proposal fails to mention that 
section 303 does not mandate that tribes take any of these actions. Instead, CWA section 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  6 | 31 
 
518(e) provides tribes the opportunity to take on these CWA obligations, but nothing in 
the CWA requires tribes to do so.  
Pursuant to CWA section 518(e), EPA “is authorized to treat an Indian tribe as a State for 
purposes of [CWA] title II and [CWA] sections 104, 106, 303, 305, 308, 309, 314, 319, 
401, 402, 404 and 406 of this Act to the degree necessary to carry out the objectives of 
this section, but only if…the tribe receives TAS authority from EPA.” 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e) 
(emphasis added). Put another way, section 303 does not apply to tribes or tribal lands 
unless that tribe has obtained TAS authority from EPA, triggering EPA oversight authority.  
In direct conflict with the text and structure of the CWA, including sections 303 and 518(e), 
the proposed rule, would only apply on tribal reservation lands where there is no TAS 
authority. Congress did not grant EPA authority to regulate tribal reservation lands or 
waters unless those tribes obtain TAS authority under section 518(e). If the agency 
proceeds to finalize this rule it must provide an alternate and legitimate source of legal 
authority and, explain how section 518(e) does not entirely preclude this action. 
 
B. Section 303 Does Not Authorize EPA to Promulgate Nationally 
Applicable Water Quality Standards 
 
EPA’s proposed rule is well beyond the authority Congress provided in section 303 of the 
CWA, it disrupts the balance of power between states/TAS tribes and the federal 
government, and there is no “clear statement” that Congress intended EPA to assert such 
authority. 
Both the courts and Congress agree that States and TAS tribes have primary authority to 
establish WQS under section 303 of the CWA. See 33 U.S.C. § 1313(a), (c)(1), (c)(2)(A); 
see City of Arcadia v. U.S. Env't Prot. Agency, 411 F.3d 1103, 1106 (9th Cir. 2005) (“The 
CWA operates on a principle of cooperative federalism where states take the lead in 
setting [water quality standards].”); Natural Res. Def. Council, Inc. v. EPA, 16 F.3d 1395, 
1401 (4th Cir. 1993) (“While the states and EPA share duties in achieving [the CWA’s] 
goal, primary responsibility for establishing appropriate water quality standards is left to 
the states.  EPA sits in a reviewing capacity of the state-implemented standards, with 
approval and rejection powers only” (citations omitted).)  EPA’s role under CWA section 
303(c) is limited to exercising oversight of those state and TAS tribal programs and 
serving as a “back stop” when states and TAS tribes fail to submit water quality standards 
that comply with federal standards or otherwise violate the CWA. Gulf Restoration 
Network v. McCarthy, 783 F.3d 227, 231 (5th Cir. 2015). EPA has not provided any 
information, evidence, or legal analysis to support its claim that section 303(c)(4)(B) 
authorizes the action EPA proposes to take. 
 
 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  7 | 31 
 
Section 303(c)(4) provides EPA oversight authority to step in where a state or TAS tribe 
is not performing its obligations under the CWA. This is clear from the language of the 
statutory section, which states in its entirety: 
“The Administrator shall promptly prepare and publish proposed regulations 
setting forth a revised or new water quality standard for the navigable waters 
involved— 
(A) if a revised or new water quality standard submitted by such State under 
paragraph (3) of this subsection for such waters is determined by the Administrator 
not to be consistent with the applicable requirements of this Act, or 
(B) in any case where the Administrator determines that a revised or new standard 
is necessary to meet the requirements of this Act. The Administrator shall 
promulgate any revised or new standard under this paragraph not later than ninety 
days after he publishes such proposed standards, unless prior to such 
promulgation, such state has adopted a revised or new water quality 
standard which the Administrator determines to be in accordance with this 
Act.” 
33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(4) (emphasis added). Under this section, EPA’s role is to ensure that 
water quality standards required by the CWA are established and are consistent with the 
CWA. Under subsection (A), if a state or TAS tribe promulgates a water quality standard 
that does not comply with the CWA, EPA can reject that state or tribal standard and 
establish a federal standard in its place. Under subsection (B), if a state or TAS tribe has 
not established a water quality standard where EPA believes one is necessary, EPA can 
establish a federal standard unless the state or TAS tribe acts first. Also, under 
subsection (B), EPA must finalize any proposed federal water quality standard within 90 
days of its proposal.1  
This interpretation is consistent with EPA’s own regulation, which clearly sets forth “State 
authority” in 40 CFR 131.4, and “EPA authority” in 40 CFR 131.5. Pursuant to section 
131.4, 
“States (as defined in 131.3) are responsible for reviewing, establishing, and 
revising water quality standards. As recognized by section 510 of the Clean Water 
Act, States may develop water quality standards more stringent than required by 
this regulation. Consistent with section 101(g) and 518(a) of the Clean Water Act, 
water quality standards shall not be construed to supersede or abrogate rights to 
quantities of water.”  
 
1 The timelines in the above-quoted statutory provision are further evidence that Congress in no way 
intended EPA to pursue nationally applicable water quality standards through this provision of the CWA. 
Under 303(c)(4)(B), EPA is statutorily mandated to finalize a federal WQS rule within 90 days after the 
proposed rule is published in the Federal Register. Here, the proposed baseline rule was published 
on May 5, 2023 and, if EPA were to comply with these mandates it would need to finalize this rule by 
August 3, 2023. EPA has not acknowledged this mandatory timeline, and has clearly made no effort to 
comply with it as the public comment period for the proposal doesn’t even close until August 3. It is clear 
that EPA has no intention of complying with the timelines Congress mandated for this rulemaking. EPA 
has not explained how it squares these mandatory timelines with its proposed action and why it does not 
believe these timelines apply to the proposed rule. 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  8 | 31 
 
(Emphasis added.) Pursuant to section 131.5,  
“EPA is to review and approve or disapprove State-adopted water quality 
standards... If EPA determines that the State or Tribe’s water quality standards are 
consistent with the factors listed in paragraphs (a)(1) through (8) of this section, 
EPA approves the standards. EPA must disapprove the State’s or Tribe’s water 
quality standards and promulgate Federal standards under section 303(c)(4) … if 
State or Tribal adopted standards are not consistent with the factors listed in 
paragraphs (a)(1) through (8) of this section. EPA may also promulgate a new or 
revised standard when necessary to meet the requirements of the Act.” 
(Emphasis added.) It is clear that when EPA promulgated these regulations (first in 1983 
and updated several times, most recently in 2015), it understood that states and 
authorized tribes are to establish water quality standards and that EPA’s role is one of 
oversight. Under its own regulations, EPA is only to promulgate water quality standards 
where a state or authorized tribe failed in its duties under the CWA.  
EPA’s longstanding guidance and its administration of the WQS program over the last 50 
years is also consistent with this interpretation. See e.g., U.S. EPA Water Quality 
Standards Handbook (2017), section 1.5 (“The CWA requires states and authorized tribes 
to adopt new or revised WQS and then submit them to the EPA for review and approval 
or disapproval action. The EPA has the authority and duty under CWA Section 303(c)(3) 
to approve or disapprove new or revised WQS.”); section 1.5.2 (“In the case of 
disapproval, the EPA must promptly propose federal WQS under Section 303(c)(4)(A) 
and promulgate such WQS within 90 days of their denial of the proposal, provided that 
the state or tribe does not make appropriate corrections within 90 days. The EPA may 
approve some provisions and not others within the same WQS submission.”); section 
1.5.2 (“The EPA may also promulgate a new or revised federal WQS where the 
Administrator determines under Section 303(c)(4)(B) that such a WQS is necessary to 
meet the requirements of the CWA, and no WQS have been submitted for the EPA to 
disapprove under Section 303(c)(4)(A). This situation could occur, for instance, if the EPA 
determines that particular WQS provisions are missing from a state’s or tribe’s currently 
applicable WQS or that the current WQS do not otherwise meet the requirements of the 
CWA.”). 
Nothing in section 303(c)(4) of the CWA, in EPA’s regulations, or in its longstanding 
interpretive guidance or implementation actions could have predicted that EPA would take 
the extraordinary and unprecedented step of establishing “baseline” water quality 
standards purporting to be applicable on all tribal reservation lands. After more than five 
decades administering the CWA, EPA’s proposal for the first time “‘claimed to discover in 
a long-extant statute an unheralded power’ representing a ‘transformative expansion in 
its regulatory authority.’” W. Virginia v. Env't Prot. Agency, 142 S. Ct. 2587, 2610 (2022). 
EPA’s proposed reliance on section 303(c)(4)(B) to expand its authority to promulgate 
nationally applicable water quality standards is similar to the Agency’s unlawful location 
of “newfound power in the vague language of an ancillary provision of the Act” that the 
Supreme Court rejected in W. Virginia. Id. Indeed, EPA’s new interpretation of section 
303(c)(4)(B) would allow it to promulgate nationally applicable water quality standards 
outside of its oversight role, an authority that could be used to undermine or even usurp 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  9 | 31 
 
established state and TAS tribal authority in their own water quality standards programs. 
EPA’s new interpretation would upend the cooperative federalism foundation of the CWA. 
The Supreme Court recently rejected similar agency actions, see, e.g., Nat’l Federation 
of Indep. Bus. v. OSHA, 142 S.Ct. 661, 665(2022) (per curiam); Alabama Ass’n. of 
Realtors v. DHS, 141 S.Ct. 2485, 2487 (2021) (per curiam); W. Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 
2615-16, and recently reiterated that an agency must “point to clear congressional 
authorization” when it asserts extraordinary authorities. Nebraska v. Biden, 600 U.S. 
_____ (Slip. Op. 2023), citing W. Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2609 (2022).   
Relatedly, the proposed rule does not pass muster under Sackett v. EPA, 598 U.S. ___, 
143 S. Ct. 1322 (May 25, 2023) or Solid Waste Agency of Northern Cook Cty. v. Army 
Corps of Engineers, 531 U.S. 159, 168 (2001) (SWANCC). In those cases, EPA and the 
Army Corps of Engineers interpreted a provision of the CWA in a way that would 
“significantly alter the balance between federal and state power and the power of the 
Government over private property” (Sackett, 143 S. Ct. at 1341 ) and that “would result in 
a significant impingement of the States’ traditional and primary power over land and water 
use.” (SWANCC at 174). The Supreme Court explained that “[w]here an administrative 
interpretation of a statute invokes the outer limits of Congress’ power, we expect a clear 
indication that Congress intended that result,” id. at 172, especially “where the 
administrative interpretation alters the federal-state framework by permitting federal 
encroachment upon a traditional state power.” Id. at 173. As Congress had not provided 
any such clear statement, the Court “reject[ed] the [Agencies’] request for administrative 
deference” to their claim of jurisdiction. Id. at 174. Similarly, in this case, there is no 
evidence, much less clear evidence, that Congress intended to grant EPA the power to 
establish nationally applicable WQS that can override state and TAS tribal standards, let 
alone establish procedures for itself that do not meet the minimum federal standards (see 
discussion below). 
If Congress had intended to authorize EPA to establish and administer nationally 
applicable federal water quality standards in section 303(c)(4), it would have said so. 
Congress knows how to direct EPA to make nationally applicable regulations, and it did 
so explicitly in CWA section 304(b), directing EPA to develop nationally applicable 
technology-based federal effluent limitation guidelines for specific industries; and CWA 
section 304(a), directing EPA to develop recommended water quality standards that are 
based on the latest scientific information and that can be adopted through rulemaking by 
states and TAS tribes. But Congress did not authorize EPA to establish nationally 
applicable water quality standards in section 303(c)(4), and Congress certainly did not 
intend for EPA to backdoor itself into that role. Nothing in section 303(c)(4) authorizes 
EPA to promulgate nationwide water quality standards and the proposed rule, if finalized, 
would be an unlawful overreach of EPA authority.  
Lastly, this is not an area where EPA can claim deference for its interpretation, because 
Congress has spoken directly to the question of the assignment of authority to states and 
TAS tribes to set designated uses and water quality criteria. Chevron, U.S.A. v. Nat. Res. 
Def. Council, 467 U.S. 837, 842 (1984) (“First, always, is the question whether Congress 
has directly spoken to the precise question at issue. If the intent of Congress is clear, that 
is the end of the matter; for the court, as well as the agency, must give effect to the 
unambiguously expressed intent of Congress”). EPA’s attempt to create new authority for 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  10 | 31 
 
itself that Congress provided only to states and TAS tribes should be accorded no 
deference.   
For all of the reasons detailed above, the proposed rule violates the CWA and the APA 
and easily implicates the “major questions” doctrine. Simplot respectfully requests EPA 
withdraw the proposal, develop additional information and materials for public review, and 
meaningfully engage with states and stakeholders on this important topic. 
 
 
C. The Proposed Designated Uses Are Inconsistent with the CWA and 
Unlawful  
 
Under the Clean Water Act framework, states and TAS tribes are required to establish 
water quality standards that “shall consist of the designated uses of the navigable waters 
involved and the water quality criteria for such waters based upon such uses.” 33 U.S.C. 
§ 1313(c). Water quality criteria “support a particular use” and when the criteria are met 
“water quality will generally protect the designated use.” 40 CFR § 131.3 (b). Designated 
uses are “those uses specified in water quality standards for each water body or segment 
whether or not they are being attained.” 40 CFR § 131.3 (f). In other words, designated 
uses are specific uses identified for specific water bodies, or segments of water bodies.  
 
The proposed rule would establish a single set of designated uses for waterbodies located 
across the country in different climates, at different elevations, in different communities, 
and that likely have very divergent uses. This is not only inappropriate from a water 
resource management perspective, but also inconsistent with the CWA. Designated uses 
are incorporated into water quality standards so that the particular use of the particular 
waters or segment of waters involved will be protected by the applicable criteria. Often, 
a single water body or segment may have multiple designated uses that are targeted for 
the actual uses of that water for segment. See e.g., U.S. EPA Water Quality Standards 
Handbook (2017); EPA Watershed Academy Web: Introduction to the Clean Water Act; 
Water Quality Criteria.2 The proposal does not describe the types of waters the baseline 
standards would apply to, nor does it even suggest that EPA knows how these waters 
are actually used.  
 
For example, the proposal generically explains that cultural and traditional uses are 
important to tribes, that protecting tribal cultural uses also protects tribal welfare, and then 
summarily concludes that the proposed cultural and traditional designated use is 
consistent the CWA. 88 FR at 29503. The problem is, as EPA acknowledges, cultural and 
traditional tribal uses “can include a variety of uses specific to the ceremonies and 
traditions of each Tribe, and each use may require different levels of protection.” 88 
FR at 29503 (emphasis added). The very tribe-specific nature of cultural and traditional 
practices precludes EPA from even attempting to define the term. If EPA cannot define 
the term, and EPA acknowledges that different such uses across the country may require 
different levels of protection, it stands to reason that the agency cannot reasonably or 
lawfully establish nationally applicable standards to protect those widely varying uses.   
 
2 Available at https://cfpub.epa.gov/watertrain/moduleFrame.cfm?parent_object_id=2003 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  11 | 31 
 
 
The reality is, the range of waters, characteristics and qualities, and the diversity of uses 
make it impossible to set effective nationally applicable water quality standards. EPA 
admits as much when it identifies the risk of establishing a nationwide public water supply 
designated use on all tribal reservation waters because it could result in “a designation 
on a water body where such a use is not appropriate (e.g., waters that may not have 
enough flow to support public water supply uses).” 88 FR at 29503. This is the very reason 
why all of the proposed designated uses are flawed. And, this is why, despite what the 
proposed rule says, it does not actually set nationally applicable water quality criteria. 
Rather, as discussed further below, the proposal establishes placeholder narrative criteria 
and a framework that authorizes EPA to set the real CWA-applicable numeric water 
quality criteria in the future without any public comment or rulemaking process. This type 
of framework is not authorized by the CWA and if finalized would be unlawful.  
 
 
D. The Proposed “Cultural and Traditional Use” Is Not Consistent with 
the CWA 
 
When establishing water quality standards, including designated uses, EPA is required 
to comply with all federal regulations, policies and procedures that apply to the 
development and approval of state water quality standards. 40 CFR § 131.22(c). The 
proposed rule does not meet these minimum federal requirements.  
 
Federal regulations require states, and in this case requires EPA, to “specify appropriate 
water uses to be achieved and protected.” 40 CFR § 131.10(a). The proposed “cultural 
and traditional uses” designated use does not specify any actual uses that are to be 
achieved or protected. The proposal indicates that this use could encompass anything 
from full physical submersion for water rituals, to the protection of aquatic grass used in 
basket weaving, to hunting for land-based game species. 88 CFR at 29503. A lawful 
“cultural and traditional uses” designated use cannot be established on a nationwide basis 
because EPA has admitted that it does not know, and therefore cannot “specify” what 
types of cultural uses tribal waters are subject to, and therefore cannot meet the 
requirement in 40 CFR § 131.10(a). Id.  
 
Based on the proposed rule, EPA would apply the cultural and traditional use designation 
universally to all waters within the boundary of each individual reservation without 
considering whether the designated use is necessary for the protection of how the waters 
are actually being used. The proposal cites the basis for this as being consistent with 
CWA section 101(a)(2) which must provide baseline water quality for the “protection and 
propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife, and provide for recreation in and on the water.” 
This CWA goal has been more commonly referred to as meeting “fishable/swimmable” 
objectives and has been implemented through the aquatic life and recreational 
designated uses. It is recognized that tribal uses of waters are unique and may extend 
beyond the protections needed to ensure attainment of fishable or swimmable uses; 
however, if the purpose of this rule is to establish “Federal Baseline Water Quality 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  12 | 31 
 
Standards for Indian Reservations” including a cultural and traditional use as part of 
baseline water quality standards is unnecessary and inconsistent with the CWA.  
 
It is also uncertain if the cultural and traditional designated use can be considered an 
“existing use” universally in all waters on tribal reservation lands. As defined 40 CFR § 
131.3 existing uses are those uses that have been “actually attained in the water body on 
or after November 28, 1975.” EPA presents no information or evidence that even the 
majority of waters on all tribal reservation lands have been used for cultural and traditional 
practices on or after November 28, 1975. Where there is no cultural and traditional 
existing use, the application of this “baseline” designated use would result in more 
stringent water quality criteria than is necessary to protect the existing uses or reasonably 
anticipated uses that could be attained in the future. The distinction of existing and 
attained uses since 1975 is important because many waters in the U.S. historically would 
have been used for subsistence fishing at some time in history; however, the CWA is 
explicit in not defaulting to historic uses because it has not been necessary in more recent 
times to provide such protection. 
State and TAS tribal water quality standards are further required to be protective of the 
designated use, “based on sound scientific rationale,” and to “contain sufficient 
parameters or constituents to protect the designated use.” 40 CFR § 131.11(a)(1). As a 
threshold matter, if EPA cannot define the designated use, it cannot promulgate a 
standard that is protective of that use. Additionally, EPA has presented no information or 
evidence that the proposed narrative standards and binding translations are based on 
sound science or that they contain sufficient parameters to protect the proposed 
designated uses. Indeed, because the actual binding and CWA applicable water quality 
criteria will be a future translation of the narrative language in the proposed rule, and the 
translation could be based on several different options provided in the proposal, there is 
no way for EPA to demonstrate that the future criteria would be based on sound science 
or protective of the designated uses.  
 
Lastly, EPA’s failure to define “cultural and traditional uses,” indeed its refusal to do so, 
renders the rule too vague to understand and implement, and therefore does not meet 
the regulatory requirements that apply to all water quality standards. The proposed rule 
and the designated uses are arbitrary and capricious and, if finalized, would be unlawful. 
 
 
E. The Proposed “Binding Translation” Framework is Unlawful 
 
The proposed rule purports to establish narrative water quality criteria, but the actual 
applicable CWA water quality criteria that will be used to develop permit discharge limits, 
evaluate waters for impairments, and that will be used to establish TMDLs, will be 
established later by EPA without any public procedures. Proposed 131.XX (d)(2). This is 
contrary to the CWA, EPA’s existing regulations and the APA and, if finalized as 
proposed, will be unlawful.  

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  13 | 31 
 
Among other things, state water quality standards are to be set after states follow 
“applicable legal procedures for revising or adopting standards.” 40 CFR §131.5(a)(6). 
EPA is subject to these same requirements. 40 CFR § 131.22(c). For EPA, applicable 
legal procedures include notice and comment rulemaking in accordance with the APA. 5 
U.S.C. §553.  
 
The proposed rule presents for public comment a suite of narrative water quality criteria. 
But the proposed narrative criteria will not be the applicable criteria for CWA purposes. In 
fact, the proposed rule effectively prohibits the EPA Regional Administrator from 
administering the narrative criteria for CWA purposes and requires that they first be 
translated into numeric criteria before they are used for CWA purposes. Proposed 
131.XX(d) (“The Regional Administrator shall utilize one of the options set forth in this 
paragraph (d)(2) to derive numeric translations of the narrative criteria in paragraph (d)(1) 
of this section for all purposes under the [CWA] section 303(c) for specific parameters 
as necessary to protect applicable designated uses…”). It is clear that the proposed 
narrative standards presented for public comment are merely a stalking horse and will 
have no effect for CWA purposes. Any new numeric water quality criteria established 
through the “binding translation” procedures EPA proposes, contrary to its obligations 
under the CWA and the APA, would be unlawful.  
 
 
 
III. The “Binding Translation” Options are Unworkable  
 
The proposal includes five options for EPA Regional Administrators to establish the 
applicable numeric criteria via “binding translations.” In addition to being an unlawful 
procedure to establish applicable criteria for CWA purposes, the translation options 
themselves are seriously flawed.  
A. Translation options 1, 2, and 3 are Unworkable and Result in 
Significant Uncertainty for the Regulated Community. 
 
Under translation option 1, the EPA Regional Administrator can simply replace the 
promulgated narrative criteria with EPA’s CWA section 304(a) recommended criteria. 
Proposed 131.XX(d)(2)(i). In section 304(a) Congress directed EPA to develop and 
publish information and recommended water quality criteria “accurately reflecting the 
latest scientific knowledge.” 33 U.S.C. 1314(a). The 304(a) criteria are provided to states 
and TAS tribes as recommendations, but they are not self-implementing. If a state or TAS 
tribe adopts EPA’s 304(a) criteria, it must go through the same “applicable legal 
procedures for revising or adopting standards.” 40 CFR §131.5(a)(6). No state or TAS 
tribe would be authorized to simply adopt EPA’s 304(a) criteria through guidance or some 
other non-public process; and yet, EPA proposes that authority for itself.  

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  14 | 31 
 
Under translation option 2, the narrative criteria can be replaced with EPA’s section 
304(a) recommended criteria but “modified to reflect site-specific conditions and aquatic 
communities based on sound scientific rationale…incorporating where relevant: 
Indigenous Knowledge, often referred to as Traditional Ecological Knowledge, as 
appropriate…” Proposed 131.XX(d)(2)(ii) (emphasis added). When a state or TAS tribe 
modifies 304(a) recommended criteria with state- or site-specific information, EPA 
requires those criteria to go through public rulemaking procedures and be subject to EPA 
approval. The process for developing state- or site-specific information typically takes 
years and significant engagement with the public and stakeholders to ensure that the 
information and data being used is accurate and reflects site-specific conditions. The 
proposal would have EPA Regional Administrators undertake this process from start to 
finish with no public input, no required engagement with the public, and no rulemaking 
procedures. In other words, EPA Regional Administrators will have no accountability for 
the information they use or the decisions they make to modify 304(a) criteria to be tribe 
specific. 
 
Similarly, under translation option 3, the narrative criteria can be replaced with some other 
“WQS adopted by the Tribe but not yet CWA effective or applicable CWA-effective WQS 
in adjacent or other relevant state or Tribe that are based on sound scientific rationale, 
reflect similar waterbody characteristics, and ensure protection of the applicable 
designated uses established under this rule, taking into consideration Indigenous 
Knowledge, as appropriate.” Proposed 131.XX(d)(2)(iii) (emphasis added). This is clearly 
an unlawful work-around of the TAS program that Congress created specifically to 
authorize tribes to establish WQS for CWA purposes. In option 3, EPA proposes that it 
could replace the narrative criteria it is presenting for public comment with a non-TAS, 
non-CWA WQS developed by a tribe with potentially no public procedure at all. This 
clearly violates the CWA, including the procedural requirements for tribes to obtain TAS 
before establishing WQS for CWA purposes. 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e); 40 CFR § 131.8. 
Additionally, an inconsistency is present throughout these options. WQS developed under 
these options are required to be based on sound scientific rationale and must be 
scientifically defensible under the CWA; however, they could also be based on Indigenous 
Knowledge. The proposal does not define the term Indigenous Knowledge or explain how 
it would or could be used to set numeric criteria that is consistent with the CWA’s rigorous 
scientific standards.  
The CWA requires EPA to meet the following scientific standards and obligations when 
developing water quality standards3:  
• Section 104 (to conduct and coordinate research, investigations, 
experiments, training, demonstrations, surveys, and studies relating to the 
causes, effects, extent, prevention, reduction, and elimination of pollution; 
to develop and issue to states the “latest scientific knowledge available” 
regarding the presence of pesticides in water); 
 
3 See 33. U.S.C. §§ 1254, 1267, 1268, 1269, 1270, 1273, and 1314. 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  15 | 31 
 
• Sections 117, 118, 119, 120, 121 (to make scientific inquiry into water 
quality concerns in specific waters and watersheds, (e.g. Chesapeake Bay, 
Great Lakes, Long Island Sound); and 
• Section 304 (to develop, and from time to time thereafter revise, criteria 
for water quality “accurately reflecting the latest scientific knowledge…on 
the kind and extent of all identifiable effects on health and welfare…on the 
concentration and dispersal of pollutants, or their byproducts, through 
biological, physical, and chemical processes…on the effects of pollutants 
on biological community diversity, productivity, and stability…”) 
To implement these Congressional mandates, EPA promulgated regulations that require 
water quality standards be based on "sound scientific rationale" and "scientifically 
defensible methods.”4 
Neither the CWA nor EPA’s regulations define the terms “sound scientific rationale” or 
“scientifically defensible methods.” However, EPA has made clear that water quality 
standards should be based on data and scientific information derived from biological, 
chemical, and/or toxicological studies published in peer-reviewed literature with a focus 
on science, science policy, and risk management. The following examples from EPA 
guidance demonstrate that the foundation for water quality standards must be science-
based: 
• “When EPA speaks of science or scientific analysis, it is referring to the 
extraction of data from toxicological or exposure studies and surveys with a 
minimum of judgment being used to make inferences from the available 
evidence.” (EPA Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality Criteria 
for the Protection of Human Health, EPA 2000.5) 
•  “Water quality criteria developed under section 304(a) are based solely on 
data and scientific judgments on the relationship between pollutant 
concentrations and environmental and human health effects. Section 
304(a) criteria do not reflect consideration of economic impacts or the 
technological feasibility of meeting the chemical concentrations in ambient 
water.” (National Recommended Water Quality Criteria Recommendations, 
EPA 2002.6) 
• “EPA’s national recommended water quality criteria are scientifically 
derived numeric values that EPA determines will generally protect aquatic 
life or human health from the adverse effects of pollutants in ambient water.” 
(Final Updated Ambient Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human 
Health, 80 FR 36986.)  
Additionally, CWA section 311 defines the term “best available science” to mean “science 
that (A) maximizes the quality, objectivity, and integrity of information, including statistical 
information; (B) uses peer-reviewed and publicly available data; and (C) clearly 
documents and communicates risks and uncertainties in the scientific basis for such 
 
4 40 CFR §§ 131.5(a)(2), 131.11(a)(1), 131.11(b)(iii) 
5 EPA. 2000. Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human 
Health. EPA-822-B-00-005. October 2000. 
6 EPA. 2002. National Recommended Water Quality Criteria: 2002. EPA-822-R-02-047. November 2002. 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  16 | 31 
 
projects.”7 To date, EPA’s regulations and other actions have been largely consistent with 
the definition of “best available science” in section 311.  
To satisfy the CWA requirement that water quality criteria meet sound scientific rationale, 
any inclusion of Indigenous Knowledge in numeric translation of water quality criteria will 
require rigorous, scientific studies that must be specific to each tribe. For example, a fish 
or aquatic plant consumption rate incorporated into a numeric “translation” must be based 
on a study (or studies) using the National Cancer Institute (NCI)8 or NCI-based method.9 
This kind of undertaking will require substantial and likely expensive efforts by each tribe 
and the EPA, costs which are not included in the EPA’s economic analysis of the 
proposed rule.  
 
B. The Proposed Use of Fish Consumption Rates (FCR) is Flawed and 
Not Scientifically Defensible 
 
In the proposal, EPA recognizes that WQS specific to the site-specific chemical, physical 
and biological conditions of each reservation would be more desirable than its proposed 
baseline WQS. 88 FR at 29499. But EPA has concluded that following the CWA TAS 
process will take too long, and instead proposes that the baseline WQS could be tailored 
for each Indian reservation to address location-specific water quality conditions and tribal 
circumstances during implementation. Id.; proposed 131.XX(d)(2)(ii)-(iii).  
As noted in proposed translation option 2, a particular Tribe’s fish consumption rate could 
be used during the implementation stage as part of the calculation to set the appropriate 
human health criteria value for its waters. As an initial matter, we note that setting “the 
appropriate human health criteria value” is not an “implementation” step as EPA suggests 
in the proposal. The human health criteria (HHC) value is the applicable water quality 
criteria for CWA purposes, and setting it is done through the criteria development process. 
States and TAS tribes are required to promulgate the HHC values in accordance with 
state legal requirements, and then submit to EPA for approval under the CWA. However, 
for the first time in this proposal EPA is characterizing setting the actual criteria value as 
an “implementation” step and proposes to authorize itself to complete this process without 
any public notice, comment, or rulemaking process. This is unprecedented and unlawful. 
We also note that the degree of “tailoring” that EPA proposes to allow itself during 
implementation is far more extreme than any state or TAS tribe would be authorized to 
conduct. The FCR is a perfect example because changing the FCR can modify the 
resulting numeric criteria by orders of magnitude. If EPA believes that it would allow a 
 
7 See 33 U.S.C. §1321(a)(27) 
8 Tooze, J. A., Kipnis, V, Buckman, D. W., Carroll, R. J., Freedman, L. S., Guenther, P. M., Krebs- Smith, 
S. M., Subar, A. F., and Dodd, K. W. (2010). A mixed-effects model approach for estimating the distribution 
of usual intake of nutrients: The NCI Method. Statistics in Medicine, 29, 2857-2868.  
Tooze, J. A., Midthune, D., Dodd, K. W., Freedman, L. S., Krebs-Smith, S. M., Subar, A. F., Guenther, P. 
M., Carroll, R. J., and Kipnis, V. (2006). A new statistical method for estimating the usual intake of 
episodically consumed foods with application to their distribution. Journal of the American Dietetic 
Association, 106, 1575-1587.  
9 EPA 2014, Estimated Fish Consumption Rates for the U.S. Population and Selected Subpopulations 
(NHANES 2003-2010). Final Report. April 2014. EPA-820-R-14-002. 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  17 | 31 
 
state or TAS tribe to modify numeric criteria by orders of magnitude during 
“implementation” it must say so in response to public comments. We suspect it is far more 
likely that “tailoring” to that degree would be considered by EPA as modifying the criteria 
and would require public notice, rulemaking in accordance with state procedures, and 
EPA approval of the new criteria. Indeed, EPA’s prior actions rejecting state WQS based 
on the FCR selected by the state demonstrate that setting the FCR is not a step to take 
during “implementation” but that it is an integral step in setting WQS to be protective of 
the designated use.  
Setting all of that aside, establishing tribe-specific and local-specific FCRs that are 
scientifically defensible is a time-and resource-intensive process. For example, fish 
consumption rates for Shoshone-Bannock and Nez Perce Tribes in the Pacific Northwest 
have been derived using the National Cancer Institute (NCI) methodology, a methodology 
that, per EPA, results in more scientifically defensible and accurate estimates of long-
term fish consumption, referred to as Usual Fish Consumption Rates (UFCRs). The 
information used to develop these particular UFCRs is compiled in reports that represent 
more than two years of consumption survey and analysis work—preceded by years of 
planning. In other words, establishing an appropriate, accurate, and scientifically 
defensible UFCR would normally be a years-long process, and is not something that can 
simply be selected during “implementation” of an established water quality criteria.  
 
1) EPA’s Online Human Health Criteria (HHC) Tool 
 
EPA’s Tribal/State HHC Calculator is a tool available to assist a state or TAS tribe in 
developing a numeric HHC criteria. This tool allows a state or TAS tribe to adjust a state 
or tribe’s fish consumption rate and selected cancer risk level, and the calculator provides 
the resulting numeric HHC value. The tool does not consider exposures other than fish 
consumption and therefore reflects an abbreviated approach to EPA’s section 304(a) 
recommended HHC, promulgated in 2015. See 80 FR 36986 (2015).  
The Tribal/State HHC Calculator includes four specific FCRs that may be selected: EPA’s 
default “general” population UFCR of 22 grams per day (g/d); EPA’s default “subsistence” 
FCR of 142.4 g/d; USDA’s recommended daily protein intake of 160 g/d; and the 
Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission Survey (1994) FCR of 175 g/d. Only one 
specific FCR in the calculator is based on an NCI-based methodology--EPA’s default 
general population rate of 22 g/d. The other three rates can no longer be considered 
scientifically sound or defensible given the demonstrated superiority of NCI-based 
methods for deriving long-term fish consumption rates. The Tribal/State HHC Calculator 
also allows a user to input a custom FCR but as described above, that rate would need 
to be derived using the NCI method to be considered scientifically sound.   
Although the use of this tool can help facilitate WQS calculations, selecting and/or 
determining scientifically defensible inputs that are location specific will, as described 
above, require a substantial level of time and effort. Additional tools and resources will be 
needed to consider other potential traditional practices outside of fish consumption. Inputs 
and tools to derive WQS that reflect these additional traditional practices are not readily 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  18 | 31 
 
available and, therefore, will need to be developed and shown to be representative and 
protective of the exposures associated with those practices, and will likely need to be 
developed on a tribe-by-tribe basis. 88 FR at 29503 (“EPA is not proposing to define 
cultural and traditional uses in more detail in this rule because they can include a variety 
of uses specific to the ceremonies and traditions of each Tribe, and each use may require 
different levels of protection.”). 
 
2) Heritage FCR Rates  
 
Heritage or “unsuppressed” FCRs are not based on sound science and EPA’s suggestion 
that such FCRs be developed and utilized for WQS is inconsistent with the CWA.  See 
88 FR at 29521 (“The contamination of aquatic food resources above levels safe to 
consume in desired quantities results in what is often described as a suppression effect. 
An illustration of a suppression effect is when the fish consumption rate for a given Tribe 
reflects a current level of consumption that is artificially diminished relative to the Tribe’s 
heritage fish consumption rate…Given that aquatic resources often support a Tribe’s 
cultural self-determination and can be pivotal to the economic well-being of the 
community, impacts to these resources can affect the very foundation of Tribal social and 
political organization.”). FCRs representative of long-term fish consumption need be 
derived using the NCI methodology.  
 
The NCI method accounts for people not eating the same amount of fish every day or 
week.  Some days or weeks they may eat a lot of fish, other days and weeks, little or 
none.  Because the old survey methods captured only what people ate in the very recent 
past and a few people ate a lot of fish in that recent past, those surveys reported quite 
high FCRs at upper percentiles of the consumption rate distribution. The old survey 
methods could not adjust for the fact that those same people ate far less fish at other 
times. The NCI method does. As shown in Shilling et al. (2014)10 and in Table 6, below, 
the difference between NCI and non-NCI FCRs for Tribes is quite large. If it were possible 
to apply the NCI method to heritage rates, those too would likely be substantially 
smaller. For example, while it is possible that during certain times of the year when 
salmon were most abundant, members of the Spokane Tribe ate as much as 865 g/d of 
fish, it is unlikely they did so every day of the year for their entire lifetimes. Given what we 
now understand about FCR survey methods, non-NCI method heritage rates are 
inappropriate for use in WQS.  
 
Another reason is that heritage rates used by tribes in the Northwest are inappropriately 
high is that they include salmon consumption. Salmon are migratory and spend only a 
small portion of their lifecycle in waters of tribal reservations that are not adjacent to the 
ocean. Because of this life cycle, the concentrations of pollutants in salmon tissue do not 
reflect the water quality on tribal reservations, but instead reflect what has been 
accumulated elsewhere through their migratory journey. For migratory fish like salmon, 
the concentration of pollutants in tribal reservation waters has little to no effect on tissue 
 
10 Shilling, F., Negrette, A., Biondini, L., Cardenas, S. 2014. California Tribes Fish-Use: Final Report. A 
Report for the State Water Resources Control Board and the US Environmental Protection Agency. 
Agreement # 11-146-250 between SWRCB and UC Davis 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  19 | 31 
 
concentrations, and using heritage rates to drive down tribal WQS will also have no effect 
on the actual concentration of pollutants in salmon tissue. What matters is what can be 
affected by implementation of WQS in tribal reservation waters, and that is the 
concentration of pollutants in resident fish whose life cycle is spent in tribal reservation 
waters. It is the FCR of resident fish, excluding salmon and other anadromous fish, that 
should be used when setting WQS for waters on tribal reservation lands. 
The effect of including only resident fish has the potential to have a large effect on FCRs, 
and thus WQS, particularly for tribes who consume a large proportion of migratory fish. 
One example is for tribes in California, where salmon comprised more than half of fish 
caught by tribal members (Table 6 copied from Shilling et al., 2014, below). Though the 
FCRs are not based on the NCI methodology and do not represent long-term 
consumption rates, the difference between FCRs that include salmon and resident fish 
versus FCRs that include only resident fish are significant (141.8 g/d of all fish including 
salmon versus 69.2 g/d of other fish; Shilling et al., 2014, Table 6 below). These 
differences between resident fish only FCRs and FCRs that include both migratory and 
resident fish are likely to be evident in NCI-based UFCRs as well.     
 
  
 
Including migratory fish in the FCR used to derive WQS will result in unnecessarily low 
(i.e., stringent) WQS. Because of the absence of a relationship between a pollutant in the 
water on reservation land and migratory fish, adopting stringent WQS that include 
consumption of migratory fish for reservation lands will have no effect on the 
concentration of pollutants in those fish or on exposure of tribal members to pollutants 
from consuming those fish. To meet the requirement that WQS be based on sound 
science and scientifically defensible, the FCR used to derive WQS for Indian reservation 
lands need to be based on data-informed consumption of resident fish, i.e., fish whose 
level of pollutants in tissue is directly related to the concentration of pollutants in the water 
on reservation lands. 
Lastly, heritage rates reflect past abundance of resident fish on tribal reservations, not 
current abundance. Historic abundance was much greater and was of a magnitude that 
could support tribal members consuming fish at heritage rates. That abundance doesn’t 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  20 | 31 
 
exist today and that reduced abundance is not affected by the WQS for waters on tribal 
reservation lands. It is the result of other factors, such as dams or overfishing, separate 
from water quality on tribal lands. Until those other factors change and fish abundance 
increases to the point where FCRs approaching those of heritage rates can be supported 
by the fish population on tribal reservations, it makes no sense to use heritage rates 
disconnected from current abundance and practices. FCRs used in WQS should reflect 
current abundance of resident fish, not abundance that existed centuries ago.   
In summary, heritage consumption rates are inapplicable to current levels of fish 
consumption and abundance; reduced fish abundance in the present day is primarily a 
result of conditions other than water quality (e.g., overfishing, changes in infrastructure 
including dams, etc.). FCRs used to derive HHC need to account for current conditions 
and be based on data-driven consumption. If and when those conditions change and fish 
abundance once again increases, FCRs can be increased to be consistent with the 
increased abundance. 
 
 
3) Additional FCR Specific Comments 
 
As discussed above in these comments, the proposed rule refers to developing baseline 
narrative WQS for new, but as yet undefined, “cultural and traditional” designated use(s). 
The rule also refers to “binding translation” procedures to translate the baseline narrative 
WQS into numeric tribal WQS that can be “tailored” for site-specific purposes. Yet the 
proposed rule provides little detail regarding the assumptions that would be used to 
represent “cultural and traditional” practices in such a translation procedure.   
The proposed rule refers to EPA Regional Administrators relying on the Tribal/State HHC 
Calculator to adjust the “fish consumption rate and selected cancer risk level” but does 
not propose specific fish consumption rates or procedures through which FCRs would be 
derived. 88 FR at 29507. The proposed rule does refer to EPA’s recently updated 
recommended UFCR of 22 g/day used in EPA’s current national numeric criteria. Id. The 
proposed rule also refers to EPA’s national default subsistence FCR of 142.4 g/d and 
indicates that states that tribes would consult with EPA to “determine the need for a 
modified fish consumption rate…or establish that Tribes rely on fish consumption for 
subsistence (thereby justifying applying the 142.4 g/day rate).” Id. From this description it 
is not possible to understand what FCR the translation procedure would select. Is the 
default FCR EPA’s national UFCR of 22 g/d unless a tribe can justify an alternate usual 
fish consumption rate? The proposed rule points out that the UFCR of 22 g/d is protective 
of the general population of consumers. Is EPA going to use a different UFCR for tribal 
consumers when translating the national baseline WQS? If so, that needs to be specified 
and consistent with the CWA’s requirements of being based on sound science (see above 
for discussion of the critical role of sound science in the CWA).   
Even though the proposed rule is unclear on the FCR EPA will use in the “binding 
translation” procedure to derive numeric tribal WQS, it is notable that the Economic 
Analysis supporting the proposed rule derives tribal WQS using EPA’s default 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  21 | 31 
 
subsistence FCR of 142.4 g/d11. The Economic Analysis then applies the tribal WQS 
derived using the subsistence FCR of 142.4 g/day to all reservation lands throughout the 
United States. Such universal application of a subsistence FCR is inappropriate and not 
supported by existing tribal WQS for the following reasons.    
   
(1) As acknowledged in the proposed rule, cultural traditions and practices vary 
greatly among Tribes. The existence of a range of cultural traditions, 
including a wide range in the importance of fish in tribal diets, is exemplified 
by the range of FCRs used by TAS tribes (Tables 2a and 2b). Among the 
WQS developed by TAS tribes, FCRs range from 6.5 g/d (Northern 
Cheyenne, MT) to 865 g/d (Spokane Tribe, WA). This is likely due to large 
differences in cultural practices and diets among tribes across an area the 
size of the United States. In fact, the larger FCRs (those greater than EPA’s 
default consumption rate(s) for the general population) are associated with 
tribes living near and consuming fish from large water bodies (such as the 
Great Lakes or the Pacific Ocean, Table 2a). The smaller FCRs (equal to 
EPA’s current and previous default consumption rates for the general 
population) are more representative of the diets of tribes living in remainder 
of the United States distant from large water bodies, such as on the Great 
Plains or in the desert southwest (see Table 2b). Such tribes are protected 
by WQS derived with default general population fish consumption rates and 
a subsistence FCR, such as 142.4 g/d would be inappropriate, 
unnecessary, and not reflective of sound science.   
 
(2) In the past, EPA has been faced with a wide range of FCRs when 
developing national recommended numeric WQS and, when doing so, has 
not selected FCRs representative of the highest rates of fish consumption, 
despite knowledge that some individuals within the population to be 
protected likely consume fish at subsistence rates. The dataset from which 
EPA selected 22 g/d as the UFCR when developing the 2015 HHC 304(a) 
recommended criteria had a mean UFCR of 9 g/d and a 99th percentile 
UFCR (the highest percentile reported by EPA) of about 61 g/d. As stated 
in the proposed rule, EPA also uses an FCR of 142.4 g/d to represent fish 
consumption by subsistence anglers. Such anglers are a subset of the 
general population. Yet, when it came to deriving the 2015 national 
recommended HHC, EPA selected the 90th percentile FCR of the general 
population (22 g/d), not a higher percentile or a subsistence FCR. EPA 
needs to follow the same approach when identifying the UFCR for national 
baseline WQS for reservation lands.  
 
 
11 Economic Analysis for Proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations. 
April 5, 2023.  Prepared for: United States Environmental Protection Agency.  Office of Water.  Office of 
Science and Technology. 1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C., 20460 
 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  22 | 31 
 
 
 
Tribe
State
Tribal FCR
State FCR
Bad River Band of the Lake 
Superior Chippewa Tribe
Wisconsin
142.4 g/day for Hg and 
PCBs; otherwise GLI 
20 g/day
Confederated Tribes of the 
Umatilla Indian Reservation
Oregon
389 g/day
175 g/day
Confederated Tribes of the 
Warm Springs Reservation
Oregon
170 g/day
175 g/day
Fond du Lac Band of Minnesota 
Minnesota
60 g/day
30 g/day
Grand Portage Band of 
Minnesota Chippewa
Minnesota
142.5 g/day
30 g/day
Kalispel Tribe of Indians 
Washington
389 g/day
175 g/day
Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake 
Superior Chippewa
Wisconsin
32 g/day
20 g/day
Lummi Tribe 
Washington
142.4 g/day
175 g/day
Makah Indian Tribe
Washington
142.4 g/day
175 g/day
Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe
Washington
142.4 g/day
175 g/day
Saint Regis Mohawk Tribe
New York
150 g/day
33 g/day
Spokane Tribe
Washington
865 g/day
175 g/day
Swinomish Indian Tribal 
Washington
384 g/day
175 g/day
Table 2a - Tribes that use alternative FCRs (that are not the EPA national default) 
and comparison to their  respective state FCRs.

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  23 | 31 
 
 
 
(3) As pointed out in the proposed rule, EPA updated 94 of its national HHC 
WQS in 2015. 88 FR at 29507. A critical element of that update was the 
FCR. The 2015 HHC update changed EPA’s default FCR for the general 
population from 17.5 g/d to 22 g/d based on new data and application of a 
NCI-based methodology that results in more accurate estimates of long-
Table 2b - Tribes that use EPA default FCRs and comparison to their respective state FCRs.
Tribe
State
Tribal FCRa
State FCR
Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the 
Fort Peck Indian Reservation
Montana
EPA Default (17.5 g/day)
22 g/day
Big Pine Paiute Tribe of the Owens 
Valley (Big Pine Indian Reservation)
California
EPA Default (not specified)
general population = 17.5 g/day
subsistence consumers = 142 g/day
Bishop Paiute Tribe of the Owens 
Valley (Bishop Indian Reservation)
California
EPA Default (17.5 g/day)
general population = 17.5 g/day
subsistence consumers = 142 g/day
Coeur D’Alene Tribe
Idaho
EPA Default (not specified)
66.5 g/day
Confederated Salish and Kootenai 
Tribes of the Flathead Reservation
Montana
EPA Default (22 g/day)
22 g/day
Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis 
Reservation
Washington
EPA Default (not specified)
175 g/day
Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians
North Carolina
EPA Default (22 g/day)
17.5 g/day
Hoopa Valley Tribe
California
CTR Default (not specified)
general population = 17.5 g/day
subsistence consumers = 142 g/day
Hopi Tribe
Arizona
EPA Default (not specified)
17.5 g/day
Hualapai Indian Tribe
Arizona
EPA Default (not specified)
17.5 g/day
Kletsel Dehe Wintun Nation (formerly 
the Cortina Indian Rancheria)
California
EPA Default (22 g/day)
general population = 17.5 g/day
subsistence consumers = 142 g/day
Miccosukee Tribe
Florida
EPA Default (not specified)
24.2 g/day
Navajo Nation
Arizona, New 
Mexico, Utah
EPA Default (not specified)
Arizona = 17.5 g/day
New Mexico = 17.5 g/day
Utah = not specified assume EPA default
Northern Cheyenne 
Montana
EPA Default (6.5 g/day)
22 g/day
Ohkay Owingeh (formerly the Pueblo 
of San Juan)
New Mexico
EPA Default (17.5 g/day)
17.5 g/day
Pueblo of Acoma
New Mexico
EPA Default (not specified)
17.5 g/day
Pueblo of Isleta
New Mexico
EPA Default (not specified)
17.5 g/day
Pueblo of Laguna
New Mexico
EPA Default (17.5 g/day)
17.5 g/day
Pueblo of Nambe
New Mexico
EPA Default (22 g/day)
17.5 g/day
Pueblo of Picuris
New Mexico
EPA Default (17.5 g/day)
17.5 g/day
Pueblo of Pojoaque
New Mexico
EPA Default (not specified)
17.5 g/day
Pueblo of Sandia
New Mexico
EPA Default (17.5 g/day)
17.5 g/day
Pueblo of Santa Ana
New Mexico
EPA Default (17.5 g/day)
17.5 g/day
Pueblo of Santa Clara
New Mexico
EPA Default (not specified)
17.5 g/day
Pueblo of Taos
New Mexico
EPA Default (not specified)
17.5 g/day
Pueblo of Tesuque
New Mexico
EPA Default (not specified)
17.5 g/day
Puyallup Tribe
Washington
EPA Default (not specified)
175 g/day
Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe
Nevada
EPA Default (17.5 g/day)
EPA default (not specified)
Seminole Tribe
Florida
EPA Default (not specified)
24.2 g/day
Sokaogan Chippewa Community 
(formerly Mole Lake Band)
Wisconsin
GLI Default (not specified)
20 g/day
Southern Ute Indian Tribe
Colorado
EPA Default (22 g/day)
17.5 g/day
Twenty-Nine Palms Band of Mission 
Indians
California
EPA Default (not specified)
general population = 17.5 g/day
subsistence consumers = 142 g/day
Ute Mountain Ute Tribe
Colorado
EPA Default (not specified)
17.5 g/day
White Mountain Apache Tribe
Arizona
EPA Default (not specified)
17.5 g/day
Notes
a EPA Default (not specified) - WQS document does not explicitly state what FCR was used, assumed current (22 g/day) or prior (6.5 or 17

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  24 | 31 
 
term fish consumption rates. EPA’s default subsistence FCR of 142.4 g/d is 
not based on the NCI method, can no longer be considered scientifically 
sound, and is not appropriate for use to derive WQS. In fact, EPA’s 
subsistence FCR of 142.4 g/d is the 99th percentile of the survey data used 
to establish EPA’s general population FCR of 17.5 g/d (equal to the 90th 
percentile) used in the derivation of the national recommended WQS prior 
to the 2015 HHC. As noted above, the 99th percentile of the NCI-based 
UFCRs is about 61 g/d12, less than half of the subsistence FCR EPA 
identifies in the proposed rule and uses in the Economic Analysis.   
 
The effect of the NCI method on tribal FCRs is evident from recent fish consumption 
survey data from the Nez Perce and Shoshone Bannock Tribes in the Pacific Northwest. 
As shown in in Figure 213 below, estimates derived using the newer NCI methodology 
show that the FCRs based on an outdated survey methodology overstate the long-term 
FCRs of tribal populations and are no longer an appropriate method to use to derive WQS.  
 
Figure 2: Comparison of fish consumption rates for Nez Perce and Shoshone Bannock 
Tribes using the FFQ (food frequency questionnaire) and NCI (National Cancer Institute) 
methodologies. 
 
 
12 EPA. 2014, Estimated Fish Consumption Rates for the U.S. Population and Selected Subpopulations 
(NHANES 2003-2010). Final Report. April 2014. EPA-820-R-14-002. 
13 Available at: https://gaftp.epa.gov/region10/columbiariver/TRWG/Meetings/2018October/Presentation-
03-Water-Quality-Standards.pdf 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  25 | 31 
 
IV. The Proposal Lacks Sufficient Explanation and Rationale to Meet 
APA Requirements 
 
Not only does the proposed rule exceed EPA’s authority and include unlawful procedures 
for establishing WQS, it also fails to explain in sufficient detail how the rule would be 
implemented. First, EPA does not explain that the proposal would significantly impact 
existing EPA-approved state CWA programs. Additionally, though EPA explains 
generically how water quality standards are typically implemented, the proposal does not 
explain that EPA would have significant new resource-intensive administration 
responsibilities should the rule be finalized, nor how EPA plans to execute those 
responsibilities. EPA has not provided appropriate explanation or technical support for 
the proposed rule. 
 
 
A. Impacts on State and TAS Tribal Programs 
 
EPA’s proposal lacks any discussion about how the proposed rule would affect 
longstanding EPA-approved state and TAS tribal regulatory programs. EPA’s failure to 
acknowledge these significant impacts is arbitrary and capricious and unlawful under the 
APA.  
 
First, it is telling that EPA’s pre-proposal outreach to states consisted of a single meeting 
with one association that, while it does represent state water regulators, rarely finds 
unanimity among its membership on serious policy matters like the ones raised by the 
proposed rule. Given this lack of engagement with states it should not be surprising that 
the proposed rule lacks any meaningful discussion of state concerns with the baseline 
water quality standard concept. The proposal similarly lacks any discussion of how those 
EPA-approved state and TAS tribal programs would be affected by the proposed baseline 
rule.  
 
All states, the District of Columbia, and a number of territories and authorized tribes have 
established EPA-approved water quality standards programs under CWA section 303. 
These water quality standards were developed through lengthy, usually years-long, 
processes that include stakeholder engagement, legislative action, regulatory agency 
rulemaking, and approval by the Governor in some cases. State standards are often 
challenged in administrative or judicial review proceedings and can be remanded to 
agencies for further work or vacated entirely, requiring the state to re-start the process. 
Once approved at the state level, these standards must be reviewed and approved by 
EPA. Only then are they enforceable for CWA purposes, meaning that among other 
things, they can be used as a basis for evaluating impairments under section 303(d) and 
incorporated into discharge permits under sections 402 and 404.  
 
As noted in the proposal, water quality standards must be protective of downstream 
standards. This means if EPA’s baseline water quality standards apply to tribal waters 
located downstream of a state with existing EPA-approved water quality standards, that 
state may need to revise their own standards to be more protective based on EPA’s new 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  26 | 31 
 
downstream baseline standards. If a tribe obtained TAS authority and established its own 
water quality standards, this would also be the case; however, if those tribal standards 
would go through the same lengthy development and promulgation process described 
above.  
 
The robust CWA-mandated WQS development process provides substantial 
opportunities for public engagement, including with neighboring states and tribes, and 
remedies for organizations and private citizens to pursue if they believe the state’s or TAS 
tribe’s water quality standards are inconsistent with the CWA. By contrast, though EPA 
says it has been working on the baseline rule concept for more than 20 years, it has 
clearly not provided sufficient opportunities for states to input or engage on the concept 
or the substance of the proposal.  
 
In addition to potentially requiring upstream states to revise water quality standards, 
states issuing NPDES permits will also need to establish effluent limits that are protective 
of downstream water quality standards. If the baseline standards are finalized as 
proposed, upstream states won’t even know the applicable water quality criteria until the 
Regional Administrator determines, at some point in the future, which of the several 
“binding translation” options is selected for a particular tribe. Based on the proposal, it 
would also seem possible for an EPA Regional Administrator to choose different “binding 
translation” options for different waters or for different uses within a single tribal 
reservation or for neighboring or adjacent reservations. EPA assures the public that all 
Regional Administrator decisions on translations will be made available online, but 
availability to review after an agency action is not the same as the robust procedural 
requirements of the CWA and the APA.  
 
The proposed rule falls well short of the agency’s obligations under the APA and, if 
finalized as proposed, would be unlawful.  
 
 
B. Impacts on EPA Administration Obligations 
 
The proposed rule also fails to acknowledge or explain the very significant new 
administrative obligations the proposed rule would create for EPA and how the agency 
plans to meet all of these new obligations.  
 
The proposed rule generically discusses how water quality standards are implemented, 
including their use in issuing NPDES permits, the requirement to evaluate whether subject 
waters are meeting applicable standards, and the requirement to develop TMDLs for 
impaired waters. 88 FR at 29499. But the proposal fails to state explicitly that these 
obligations will fall to EPA for all waters within the scope of the proposal, should the rule 
be finalized.  
 
It is unclear from the proposed preamble how EPA would plan to implement the baseline 
standards for 76,000 miles of rivers and streams and 1.9 million acres of lakes, reservoirs 
and other open waters. The proposal provides no information about how (staffing) or 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  27 | 31 
 
when (timing) the EPA Regional Administrators will conduct the binding translations for 
all of the new EPA-regulated waters or when this information will be made available to 
the public. The proposal similarly does not explain how EPA plans to evaluate each of 
those tribal reservation waters for impairments on the mandatory 3-year timeline in CWA 
section 303(d) and 40 CFR §131.20. And for all Indian reservation waters that EPA 
determines are not meeting the baseline water quality standards, the proposal does not 
explain how EPA will prioritize these waters or develop or implement TMDLs for impaired 
waters within the agency’s proposed and extremely broad federally regulated land base.  
 
Without explaining how EPA will comply with these important and mandatory CWA duties 
once it takes control of all tribal reservation waters, EPA has failed to consider an 
important part of the problem and the proposal is arbitrary and capricious and unlawful 
under the APA.  
 
 
 
V.  The Economic Analysis Dramatically Underestimates the Cost of 
the Proposed Rule  
 
The Economic Analysis is explicit that its purpose is the assessment of the costs incurred 
by dischargers, but it doesn’t assess costs associated with implementation of the new 
standards, such as the costs associated with monitoring programs, integrated reporting, 
impairment assessment and TMDL development. For example, in the Economic Analysis 
the EPA identified “500 total potential impairments across all reaches and pollutants” on 
Indian reservation waters that would be covered by the proposed rule. Collecting data to 
support more thorough studies of these water bodies and development of TMDLs will 
require substantial effort that is likely to cost many millions of dollars, at least meeting, if 
not exceeding the costs to be incurred by dischargers required to upgrade and enhance 
treatment methods or relocate as a result of the proposed rule. Included in the 
development of TMDLs, but not included in the Economic Analysis, are the costs incurred 
by non-point sources such as releases from agricultural lands and municipalities that 
would then have to develop programs to mitigate effects from such land uses. Examples 
of such programs include fertilizer reduction programs and reduced irrigation.  Finally, 
EPA acknowledges that the costs for “minor facilities” was not included in this cost 
estimate and then EPA states that: 14  
“However, EPA acknowledges minor facilities with smaller operating 
budgets, such as those managed by smaller communities, could have more 
difficulty complying with any additional requirements than would major 
facilities.” 
 
 
14 Economic Analysis for Proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations. 
April 5, 2023.  Prepared for: United States Environmental Protection Agency.  Office of Water.  Office of 
Science and Technology. 1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C., 20460.  p.39.  

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  28 | 31 
 
What is not discussed is the impact on rate payers for such municipalities (both large and 
small) from this rulemaking.  In particular, for minor facilities, which most likely are rural, 
economically disadvantaged communities, such additional costs are an extraordinary and 
unjust cost on the ratepayers for such systems. 
 
The Economic Analysis, by being very limited in scope, woefully fails to estimate the 
actual costs of the proposed rule.  Because the Economic Analysis is so incomplete it 
does not meet the agency’s minimum requirements under the CWA and the APA. 
 
 

Proposed Indian Land WQS:  Comments 
 
P a g e  29 | 31 
 
   
VI.  Summary and Recommendations 
 
As demonstrated above, EPA has failed to provide rationale or explanation for the 
proposal, failed to consider important aspects of the problem, and proposed a rule that is 
exceeds its statutory authority and is not in accordance with the law. Simplot respectfully 
requests that EPA withdraw the proposed rule; engage meaningfully with states; engage 
meaningfully with the regulated community; consult with the U.S. Justice Department 
concerning the agency’s ability to create new authorities for itself without Congressional 
authorization; and reconsider this unlawful effort to expand EPA’s authority over tribal 
reservation lands.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0225 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
National Association of Wetland Managers 
“Dedicated to the Protection and Restoration of the Nation’s Wetlands” 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Director 
Marla J. Stelk 
500 Washington Avenue, Suite 201 
Portland, ME 04103 
(207) 892-3399 
 
Chair 
Mark Biddle 
DE Dept. of Natural Resources  
and Environmental Control 
285 Beiser Boulevard, Suite 102 
Dover, DE 19904 
(302) 739-9939 
 
Vice Chair 
Samantha Vogeler 
KY Division of Water  
300 Sower Boulevard, 3rd Floor 
Frankfort, KY 40601 
(502) 782-6995 
Secretary 
Amy Lounds 
MI Dept. of Environment,  
Great Lakes, and Energy 
525 W. Allegan Street 
Lansing, MI 48933 
(517) 331-7966 
 
Treasurer 
Lauren Driscoll 
WA State Dept. of Ecology 
PO Box 47600 
Olympia, WA 98504 
(360) 407-7045 
 
Past Chair 
Collis Adams 
Adams Environmental Consulting, LLC 
110 Pattee Hill Road 
Goffstown, NH 03045 
(603) 660-9797 
 
Members at Large 
 
Stacia Bax 
MO Dept. of Natural Resources 
 
Denise Clearwater 
MD Dept. of the Environment 
 
Andrew Robertson 
Saint Mary's Univ. of Minnesota 
 
Bill Ryan 
OR Dept. of State Lands 
 
Mary Ann Tilton 
NH Dept. of Environmental Services 
 
August 2, 2023 
Mr. James Ray 
Office of Science and Technology 
Mail Code 4305-T 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
100 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
(Docket #EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405) 
Via www.regulations.gov 
 
The National Association of Wetland Managers (NAWM) submits the 
following comments in response to the proposed rule, “Federal 
Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations,” EPA-HQ-
OW-2016-0405. NAWM supports the rulemaking by the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on baseline tribal standards 
and has some suggestions regarding potential improvements. 
NAWM is a national 501(c)(3) professional organization that supports 
the use of sound science, law, and policy in development and 
implementation of state and tribal wetland and aquatic resource 
protection programs. Since 1983, our organization and our member 
states and tribes have had longstanding positive and effective working 
relationships with federal agencies. As an association representing 
states and tribes as co-regulators tasked with implementation of 
regulations implementing the Clean Water Act (CWA), NAWM 
understands the complexity of the CWA, the implementation 
challenges the Act poses, and the central role water quality standards 
play in CWA programs. We have worked for many years together 
with federal, state, and tribal agencies in the implementation of 
regulatory and non-regulatory programs designed to protect waters of 
the United States. Our collaboration has involved programs such as 
the CWA §404 permit program for dredged or fill material, state and 
tribal water quality standards for wetlands, and CWA §401 water 
quality certification of federal licenses and permits. 
This letter first discusses background issues, such as the need for 
water quality standards in Indian country and the importance of tribal 
participation as EPA develops and revises baseline tribal water quality 
standards. The letter then focuses on the proposed water quality 
standards, including beneficial uses, criteria, and anti-degradation 

Comments of the National Association of Wetland Managers 
August 2, 2023 
NAWM Page 2 
 
policies. The letter concludes with a discussion of issues associated with baseline tribal water 
quality standards implementation.  
A. Background Issues. 
 
1. The Need for Baseline Tribal Water Quality Standards.  
Water quality standards developed under Clean Water Act (CWA) §303 are the foundation from 
which CWA programs achieve the primary goal of the Act, restoring and maintaining the 
chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the nation’s waters.1 Standards describe the 
desired water quality for particular waterbodies that is consistent with a water’s designated use.  
CWA §303 has required states to develop water quality standards since the 1970s. In 1987 
Congress amended the CWA to allow tribes to obtain “treatment in a manner similar to states,” 
or TAS, under which tribes can manage water resources on their reservations.2 Of the 
approximately 300 tribes with Indian reservations that are eligible for TAS, 84 Tribes have 
applied and been approved to administer a water quality standards program, and of those only 47 
Tribes to date have adopted standards and submitted them to EPA for review and approval under 
the CWA.3 EPA estimates that about 76,000 miles of rivers and streams, and 2.9 million acres of 
lakes, wetlands, and other surface waters on tribal lands lack CWA-effective water quality 
standards.4 “As a result, 50 years after enactment of the CWA, the majority of Indian 
reservations do not have this foundational protection laid out by Congress in the CWA for their 
waters.”5 
CWA programs are difficult to apply to tribal waters that lack water quality standards. For 
example, §402 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits are required 
to include discharge limits sufficient to achieve compliance with applicable CWA water quality 
standards.6 Section 404 permits addressing discharge of dredged or fill material similarly must 
include requirements that ensure, among other things, that discharges will not cause or contribute 
to a violation of any applicable water quality standard.7 Water quality certification under §401 is 
intended to ensure that a federally issued license or permit would be consistent with attaining 
applicable water quality standards and other enumerated CWA program provisions.8 Without 
applicable water quality standards, implementation of these and other CWA programs lack a 
direct tie to the general goal of the Act established in §101(a): to restore and maintain the 
chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the nation’s waters. 
 
1 CWA §101(a). 
2 CWA §518. 
3 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29499 (May 5, 2023). 
4 Id. 
5 Id. 
6 CWA §402(a)(1); 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29514-29515 (May 5, 2023). 
7 CWA §404; 40 CF.R. §230.10(b)(1). 
8 CWA §401(a)(1); see also 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29516 (May 5, 2023). 

Comments of the National Association of Wetland Managers 
August 2, 2023 
NAWM Page 3 
 
The baseline tribal water quality standards would fill this regulatory gap in CWA protection of 
reservation waters until a Tribe receives TAS authority and develops water quality standards. 
The proposal preamble suggests that baseline tribal standards are intended as a starting point, an 
important first step protecting aquatic life and human consumers of that life, providing for safe 
recreation in and on the water, and protecting cultural and traditional uses.9 These proposed 
baseline standards are somewhat general and when finalized are likely to be useful models for 
tribes that eventually develop their own water quality standards more tailored to specific 
circumstances. Such standards allow EPA and Tribes to address during the TAS and water 
quality standards approval processes reservation-specific natural conditions, cultural or 
traditional practices, and other unique circumstances.  
As EPA finalizes baseline tribal water quality standards, NAWM believes it will be important to 
allow and ideally encourage Tribes to develop specific standards for wetlands, including criteria 
that define the physical, chemical, and biological conditions desired in tribal waters. Tribes may 
seek TAS authority and develop standards approved by EPA for any water of the United States, 
including wetlands. During this process, authorized Tribes have flexibility to adopt sub-
categories of uses and associated criteria to allow for differentiation between types of wetlands 
and their expected uses, functions, and conditions. As EPA emphasized in its recent publication, 
“Protecting Waters and Wetlands in Indian Country: A Guide for Developing Tribal Wetland 
Management Programs,” wetland-specific water quality standards can be an important 
component of a comprehensive tribal plan to manage wetlands, particularly those that play an 
important role in ecological functions and cultural uses for Tribes.10 
Recommendation: NAWM supports EPA’s development of baseline tribal water quality 
standards and believes finalizing those standards is essential for adequately protecting 
Indian reservation waters. NAWM strongly encourages EPA to reflect the important and 
unique attributes of wetlands in those baseline standards. 
2. EPA authority to develop baseline tribal water quality standards.  
The CWA provides EPA with authority to develop new or revised water quality standards  
where the “Administrator determines that a revised or new standard is necessary to meet the 
requirements” of the Act.11 In 2001, then-Administrator Carol Browner determined that  
“ … water quality standards are necessary to meet the requirements of the Clean Water Act for 
all Indian country waters where EPA has not either (1) promulgated other Federal water quality 
standards or (2) explicitly found State or Tribal Jurisdiction to adopt water quality standards (and 
Tribal or State Standards are in effect) under the Clean Water Act.”12 Between 2001 and the 
present, EPA several times renewed rulemaking efforts to provide water quality protections in 
Indian country, focusing on Indian reservation waters that did not have CWA-effective water 
 
9 See 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29503 (May 5, 2023). 
10 Environmental Protection Agency, “Protecting Waters and Wetlands in Indian Country: A Guide for Developing 
Tribal Wetland Management Programs” (EPA 840B21005, December 2022). 
11 CWA §303(c)(4)(b). 
12 Quoted in 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29500 (May 5, 2023). 

Comments of the National Association of Wetland Managers 
August 2, 2023 
NAWM Page 4 
 
quality standards in place. The baseline tribal standards proposed on May 5, 2021, stem directly 
from the 2001 determination by Administrator Browner.13 
During EPA’s 2016 efforts to develop baseline tribal standards, some challenged the Agency’s 
authority to develop such standards. However, the statutory authority seems clear where water 
quality standards are necessary to meet the requirements of the CWA. As discussed in section 1 
above, water quality standards directly link implementation of many CWA programs to the 
statutory goal of “restore and maintain the … integrity of the nation’s waters,” and waters that 
lack standards might not receive water quality protections of those programs. It is a tiny step to 
conclude that federal interim standards for tribal waters are necessary to meet the requirements 
of the Act. 
Recommendation: NAWM supports EPA’s conclusion that the CWA authorizes  
EPA-developed water quality standards because they are necessary to meet the 
requirements of the Act.  
3. Working Collaboratively with Tribes to Develop Baseline Tribal Standards. 
The CWA uses a cooperative federalism approach to achieve its goal of restoring and 
maintaining the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the nation’s waters. For example, 
the statute establishes a role for tribes with TAS in implementing several programs central to 
achieving the Act’s objective, such as administering the water quality standards program and 
impaired waters and total maximum daily loads program under section 303.14 The CWA also 
authorizes tribes with TAS to implement the section 402 and 404 permitting programs. Section 
401 provides authorized tribes authority to review proposed federal licenses and permits that 
may result in a discharge to waters of the United States, and to decide whether to grant water 
quality certification, develop mandatory conditions necessary to ensure water quality goals 
would be met, or to deny certification at which time the federal permit or license could not be 
issued. As a result, under the CWA tribes along with states can have a co-regulator relationship 
with the federal agencies and therefore a very strong interest in how water quality standards are 
developed and implemented. 
Input from Tribes is critical to ensuring baseline tribal standards effectively protect reservation 
waters and cultural values associated with those waters. Tribes intimately understand the 
relationship between their cultural values and waters, desirable uses for those waters, and 
existing relationships among the multiple water quality protection authorities. As a result, input 
from Tribes is critical to ensure the baseline tribal standards achieve the CWA goal of restoring 
and protecting the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of tribal waters. 
NAWM appreciates EPA’s consultation and outreach to Tribes since the Agency began in 1998 
to develop water quality standards to protect waters on reservation lands. The proposed rule 
preamble discusses efforts to date to ensure rulemaking reflected tribal input and perspectives.15  
 
13 “EPA is not proposing to amend the Administrator’s Determination. This remains the source of authority for 
EPA’s proposal of WQS for Indian country waters that lack such standards.” Id. 
14 CWA §518. 
15 Id. 

Comments of the National Association of Wetland Managers 
August 2, 2023 
NAWM Page 5 
 
Recommendation: NAWM encourages EPA to continue working closely with Tribes to 
ensure the resulting final baseline tribal standards are workable and appropriately protect 
reservation waters.  
 
B. Baseline Tribal Water Quality Standards. 
 
1. The Scope of Waters Covered by Proposed Baseline Tribal Standards. 
The proposal would apply baseline tribal water quality standards to all waters of the United 
States in Indian country, with three automatic exclusions in the following circumstances: (1) 
waters for which EPA has promulgated other federal water quality standards; (2) waters where 
EPA has explicitly found that a state has jurisdiction to adopt standards or authorized a Tribe 
with TAS to adopt standards subsequently approved by EPA; and (3) waters in off-reservation 
allotments or Dependent Indian Communities (DICs).16 In addition to these three automatic 
exclusions, the proposal also provides processes under which a Tribe may request the EPA 
Regional Administrator to approve an exclusion (discussed in section C-2 below). 
NAWM has heard from its state members in recent years that uncertainty sometimes exists 
regarding the legal boundaries of tribal lands in the West. Unclear boundaries could raise 
questions whether a state or tribal water quality standard applies to a given water. Boundary 
uncertainties appear to be greatest when involving allotments, DICs, and so-called 
“checkerboard” areas where land alternates between tribal and non-tribal status. The proposal 
preamble acknowledges such uncertainty and indicates it is why EPA “has chosen to focus this 
initial effort on waters where the agency is best positioned to implement the baseline WQS in 
collaboration with Tribal partners.”17 
The proposal preamble notes the Bureau of Indian Affairs and Bureau of Land Management are 
in the process of identifying and locating off-reservation allotments around the country. As a 
result, clarity regarding allotment borders should increase over time. Potentially, in the future 
agencies might undertake a similar project for DICs. EPA should consider extending the scope of 
waters covered by baseline tribal standards to cover allotments and DICS as their borders 
become clear. Additionally, or alternatively, EPA could establish a process under which Tribes 
may petition the EPA Regional Administrator to apply baseline tribal standards to specific 
allotments or DICs on a case-by-case basis where borders are precisely understood and described 
in the petition. Either approach would be consistent with broad coverage of waters by water 
quality standards, and with desirable implementation clarity. 
Some states have expressed uncertainty regarding whether state or tribal standards apply to 
reservation waters with non-tribal owners, to rights-of-ways running through reservations, to 
 
16 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29500-29501 (May 5, 2023). 
17 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29501 (May 5, 2023). 

Comments of the National Association of Wetland Managers 
August 2, 2023 
NAWM Page 6 
 
private landowners engaged in agricultural production on tribal lands, and similar situations.18 
EPA’s proposed baseline tribal standards are described as applying to “all waters of the United 
States in Indian country,” unless excluded.19 That description suggests baseline tribal standards 
(and, for that matter, standards developed by a Tribe with TAS and approved by EPA) apply to 
reservation waters with non-tribal owners, to rights-of-way on reservations, and to agricultural 
production on tribal lands regardless of ownership. Comments in 2016 on baseline tribal 
standards from states and other parties highlighted confusion about whether and how tribal 
standards applied to situations such as these when occurring on reservation lands. To reduce 
continued uncertainty and confusion, it would be helpful if the final baseline tribal standards rule 
explicitly clarified applicability situations such as these involving non-tribal ownership or 
activities. 
Recommendation: NAWM supports the scope of waters to which baseline tribal standards 
would initially apply. NAWM suggests, however, that EPA anticipate expanding 
applicability to allotments and Dependent Indian Communities as their boundaries become 
more precise. In addition, EPA might consider establishing a process whereby Tribes could 
petition the EPA Regional Administrator to apply baseline tribal standards to certain 
allotments or DICs with known boundaries. Also, clarifying applicability of baseline 
standards to non-tribal ownership or activities on reservation lands would be helpful. 
2. Proposed Baseline Tribal Water Quality Standards 
The CWA specifies that water quality standards shall, wherever attainable, provide for protection 
of fish, shellfish, and wildlife, for recreation in and on the water, and must consider use and 
value of waters for those uses and for public water supplies, industrial purposes, and 
navigation.20 A water quality standard typically includes three components: designated uses, 
criteria consistent with those designated uses, and an antidegradation policy. The proposed 
baseline tribal standards follow this pattern. 
a. Proposed Designated Uses 
Designated uses establish and communicate to the public the water management and water 
quality objectives for a state or Tribe’s waters. The designated uses proposed for baseline tribal 
standards include (1) protection and propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife, including 
protection of the health of human consumers of aquatic life, (2) protection of recreation in and on 
the water, and (3) protection of cultural and traditional uses of reservation waters.21  
 
18 See, e.g., letter from Tony Willardson, Executive Director of the Western States Water Council on “EPA 
proposed rulemaking on baseline water quality standards on Indian Reservations, EPA-HQ-2016-0405,” posted on 
https://regulations.gov on January 2, 2017; letter from Barry N. Burrell, Water Quality Division Administrator, 
Idaho Department of Water Quality on “EPA proposed rulemaking on baseline water quality standards on Indian 
Reservations, EPA-HQ-2016-0405,”posted on https://regulations.gov on January 4, 2017.  
19 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29500 (May 5, 2023). 
20 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29502-29503 (May 5, 2023); CWA §101(a)(2). 
21 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29503 (May 5, 2023). 

Comments of the National Association of Wetland Managers 
August 2, 2023 
NAWM Page 7 
 
NAWM’s conversations over the years with our tribal members indicate a very strong support 
for cultural and traditional uses being a designated use in baseline tribal water quality standards. 
In the proposal preamble, EPA notes that “[c]ultural and traditional uses serve to protect the 
health and welfare of Tribal members exercising such uses and are thus within the purposes 
enumerated in the Act.”22 The proposal does not define in any detail what constitutes cultural 
and traditional uses, which seems appropriate given that those uses vary from Tribe to Tribe. As 
noted in the proposal preamble, cultural and traditional uses can be specific to the ceremonies 
and traditions of each tribe, and each use may require different levels of protection.23 A general 
designated use for cultural and traditional uses seems very important, however. Some cultural 
and traditional uses might be protected by an aquatic life use such as fishing, or by a primary 
contact recreation use where traditional fishing involves immersion. Others, such as protection of 
materials used for basketry and other traditional crafts, might not be adequately addressed by an 
aquatic life use or its protective criteria. In such circumstances, a designated use of cultural and 
traditional uses becomes necessary.  
The proposal asks for comment on whether the baseline tribal standards should designate public 
water supply use for all Indian reservation fresh waters. The proposal does not designate water 
supply as a designated use, noting that such a designation could cover waterbodies with local 
characteristics such as inadequate flow that make a water supply use unavailable or 
inappropriate. The proposal notes a Tribe could petition the EPA Regional Administrator to 
designate a public water supply use if available information indicates it is appropriate. In other 
words, the proposal defaults to no water supply designated use unless a Tribe requests it. 
Based on conversations NAWM has had over the years with our tribal members, and a review of 
comments received during earlier EPA efforts to develop tribal standards, NAWM believes that 
the final rule should default to including a designated use of water supply while allowing a Tribe 
to petition the EPA Regional Administrator to remove the designated use if it seems unattainable 
or inappropriate. Under NAWM’s recommendation, the default would be flipped towards 
automatically protecting public water supply unless the Tribe opts out. Given the critical 
importance of water supply on many reservation lands, a default that leans towards protection 
seems desirable. 
Recommendation: NAWM strongly supports inclusion of a designated use of cultural and 
traditional uses to ensure those uses are adequately protected in Indian country. 
Additionally, NAWM supports inclusion of public water supply as a designated use for 
reservation waters with an opt-out provision available for those waters inappropriate to 
use for water supply. 
b. Proposed criteria 
EPA’s water quality standards regulation requires a standard to incorporate water quality criteria 
that protect designated uses.24 Criteria must be based on sound scientific rationale, contain 
 
22 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29503 (May 5, 2023). 
23 Id. 
24 40 C.F.R. §131.11. 

Comments of the National Association of Wetland Managers 
August 2, 2023 
NAWM Page 8 
 
sufficient parameters to protect the designated use, support the most sensitive use where multiple 
designated uses apply, and may be either narrative or numeric.25 A goal for EPA-developed 
criteria is to protect the applicable designated uses, and enable an appropriate degree of 
customization to best account for site-specific conditions and water attributes of importance to 
individual Tribes.26 
When the criteria are narrative, they might need to be translated into numeric values that can be 
used in federally enforceable permits such as those under CWA §402 or §404, or for §303(d) 
lists of impaired waters, or for §401 water quality certifications. The proposal identifies EPA as 
the authority responsible for translating the baseline narrative criteria to numeric values when 
necessary. The proposed rule provides five options that an EPA Regional Administrator can 
consider when translating narrative criteria to numeric values.27 The proposed translation 
guidelines allow the EPA Regional Administrator to consider inclusion of Indigenous 
Knowledge when information is available that more accurately reflects site-specific conditions 
and are consistent with EPA’s regulations and CWA requirements. The proposal preamble 
provides examples where incorporating Indigenous Knowledge could be appropriate, such as 
when defining a fish consumption rate protective of tribal fish consumers.28  
NAWM believes that the procedures for EPA to translate narrative criteria to numeric values 
should be appropriate and applicable to wetlands, in addition to other types of surface waters. As 
with water quality criteria for other surface waters, criteria for wetlands can be narrative or 
numeric. While developing narrative standards may be relatively easy, developing specific 
numeric criteria for wetlands has, for several reasons, been more challenging than developing 
criteria for other types of waters. For example, the sheer number of wetlands in a jurisdiction 
compared to streams and lakes can make developing numeric standards for individual wetlands 
challenging. Criteria for a healthy wetland might be quite different than that for a healthy stream 
or lake, particularly for parameters such as dissolved oxygen, hydrology, vegetation types, flow 
regimes, conductivity, alkalinity, soils, and pH.29  
Recommendation: NAWM supports consideration of Indigenous Knowledge whenever 
possible when translating narrative criteria to numeric values, and when determining site-
specific tailoring is necessary to meet local needs and circumstances. NAWM also urges 
EPA to ensure translation procedures are appropriate for use in wetlands as well as other 
types of waters of the United States. 
 
 
 
25 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29504 (May 5, 2023). 
26 Id. 
27 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29506-29507 (May 5, 2023). 
28 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29507 (May 5, 2023). 
29 For a discussion of opportunities and challenges in protecting waters and wetlands in Indian Country, see: 
Environmental Protection Agency, “Protecting Waters and Wetlands in Indian Country: A Guide for Developing 
Tribal Wetland Management Programs (EPA 840B21005, December 2022). 

Comments of the National Association of Wetland Managers 
August 2, 2023 
NAWM Page 9 
 
c. Proposed antidegradation policies 
Antidegradation requirements are an important component of water quality standards. 
Antidegradation provides a framework for maintaining and protecting water quality that has 
already been achieved, and provide for maintaining and protecting existing uses, high quality 
waters, and the water quality of outstanding natural resource waters.30 Maintaining water quality 
is critical to supporting public health, economic and community growth, and high functioning 
natural systems. 
Proposed baseline tribal standards incorporate an antidegradation policy, while explicitly calling 
for tribal input in its implementation. “Tier 1” waters establish a level of protection sufficient to 
support existing uses for all Indian reservation waters. The antidegradation policy of protecting 
high quality waters (“Tier 2 waters”) requires that high quality to be maintained unless “the 
State” finds that allowing lower water quality is necessary to accommodate important economic 
or social development in the area in which the waters are located. Under the proposed baseline 
tribal standards, it would be the EPA Regional Administrator who would make such a finding, 
since the EPA Regional Administrator is the entity implementing the antidegradation policy. As 
proposed, the EPA Regional Administrator could not make such a finding and allow lowering of 
water quality unless the relevant Tribe agrees in writing that such a lowering is necessary to 
accommodate important economic or social development.31 NAWM believes the proposed 
approach is appropriate because it requires written tribal agreement before the EPA Regional 
Administrator can decide lowering the quality of Tier 2 waters is necessary.  
EPA is proposing to modify the baseline tribal standard’s antidegradation policy for Outstanding 
Natural Resource Waters (ONRWs or “Tier 3 Waters”) to better reflect tribal concerns. To be 
considered an ONRW and qualify for the high level of protection accorded ONRWs, 
antidegradation policies require that the water be of exceptional recreational or ecological 
significance. EPA is proposing to add “cultural significance” as a third criteria for when a water 
could qualify as an ONRW, to clarify that Tribes are able to identify highly valued waters on 
their reservations based on their cultural significance.32 
Recommendation: NAWM supports the proposed antidegradation policies and the 
provisions they include for tribal input, including a requirement that a Tribe agree in 
writing before EPA’s Regional Administrator decides to allow lowering of water quality 
inTier 2 waters. NAWM also supports including cultural significance as a criterion for 
designating a water as an ONRW. 
 
 
 
 
30 40 C.F.R. Part 131. 
31 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29509 (May 5, 2023). 
32 Id. 

Comments of the National Association of Wetland Managers 
August 2, 2023 
NAWM Page 10 
 
C. Implementation of Baseline Tribal Water Quality Standards 
 
1. Education and Outreach Regarding the Final Rule. 
As EPA finalizes a baseline tribal water quality standards rule, the Agency will need to ensure 
that the new baseline standards are well-understood by Tribes, neighboring states, and the 
general public. Some states expressed concern during the 2016 baseline tribal standards effort 
about effects on neighboring states, such as the potential need to consider tribal baseline 
standards in effect on a neighboring reservation when making permitting decisions, and potential 
effects of baseline standards on non-tribal owners and activities on reservation lands.33 Some of 
these concerns may not be specific to baseline tribal standards but inherent in the broader water 
quality standards program. Other concerns may arise from uncertainty how baseline standards 
will be applied. Training and outreach about the rule will be important for minimizing potential 
disruption of existing tribal and state water quality protection programs, and for increasing 
support for water quality standards as an important policy tool for achieving CWA goals. 
Recommendation: NAWM strongly encourages a robust education and outreach effort to 
Tribes, states, and the general public to explain the baseline tribal standards rule when it is 
finalized.  
2. Process for “Opting Out” of Baseline Tribal Water Quality Standards. 
The proposal recognizes that Tribes’ individual circumstances may vary and have differing 
interest in coverage by baseline tribal water quality standards. Some Tribes may need additional 
time to gather information about baseline tribal standards and decide how they choose to protect 
their waters, while others may be intending to develop a plan for establishing water quality 
standards within a reasonable time. Some Tribes may be concerned about the sovereignty 
implications of federally developed water quality standard.34  
The proposal provides an opportunity for an individual Tribe to “opt out” from the EPA-
developed baseline tribal water quality standards by seeking an exclusion from the EPA 
Regional Administrator. The proposal does not limit a Tribe’s rationale for seeking an exclusion 
from coverage by the baseline tribal standards, but does indicate a Tribe should demonstrate to 
the Regional Administrator that baseline tribal standards are not consistent with tribal priorities 
at this time.35 Upon receipt of an exclusion request, the EPA Regional Administrator would 
“consider the impacts of that exclusion … on reservation water quality, including potential 
 
33 See, e.g., letter from Tony Willardson, Executive Director of the Western States Water Council on “EPA proposed 
rulemaking on baseline water quality standards on Indian Reservations, EPA-HQ-2016-0405,” posted on 
https://regulations.gov on January 2, 2017; letter from Barry N. Burrell, Water Quality Division Administrator, 
Idaho Department of Water Quality on “EPA proposed rulemaking on baseline water quality standards on Indian 
Reservations, EPA-HQ-2016-0405,”posted on https://regulations.gov on January 4, 2017.  
34 The proposal notes that, during the 2016 Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking process, some Tribes 
expressed concerns about efforts to develop baseline tribal standards, “perceiving it as an infringement on Tribal 
sovereignty, and requested that EPA not promulgate baseline WQS for Tribes who did not want to be covered…” 88 
Fed.Reg. 29496, 29500 (May 5, 2023). 
35 Id. 

Comments of the National Association of Wetland Managers 
August 2, 2023 
NAWM Page 11 
 
impacts to overburdened communities.”36 An “opt out” provision should reduce tribal opposition 
to promulgation of federal water quality standards, and allow EPA to focus its efforts on 
reservation waters where Tribes are best positioned and interesting in working together with 
EPA to implement baseline standards. 
Some of NAWM’s tribal members have expressed concern that the exclusion process could be 
cumbersome, requiring extensive data and associated extensive effort. They suggest that a 
request for an exclusion from baseline tribal standards should be able to be broad, simple 
statements such as baseline tribal water quality standards do not align with tribal priorities at this 
time.  
Another concern we have heard from our tribal members and others is that the timeframe for 
seeking an exclusion is too short. The proposed rule indicates the timeframe for seeking an 
exclusion begins on May 5, 2023 (publication of the proposed rule) and ends “no later than 90 
days after the final rule is published in the Federal Register.”37 It seems likely that a final 
baseline tribal water quality standards rule will differ from the proposal in some respects, 
responsive to public comments and other analyses. A Tribe will need adequate time to evaluate 
and understand the final rule, decide if it wishes to be covered by the final baseline standards, 
and if not, develop an exclusion request and consult with the EPA Regional Administrator. 
Tribes often have limited professional and legal staff, and their leadership often does not meet 
frequently for consultation and approval. NAWM has heard a tribal endorsement of 180 days 
from final rule publication as an appropriate time. 
Recommendation: NAWM supports the proposal’s “opt out” process and encourages EPA 
to keep the process for requesting an exclusion relatively simple. NAWM also believes EPA 
should discuss with Tribes what would be an adequate timeframe in which to request an 
exclusion and select a timeframe that allows Tribes adequate time for analysis and 
decision-making. 
3. Processes after the Rule is Finalized for Revising Baseline Tribal Standards or for 
Adding a Variance from Baseline Tribal Standards. 
The baseline tribal water quality standards address the CWA’s minimum fishable and 
swimmable goals and reflect the rule’s three proposed beneficial uses of aquatic life uses, 
recreational uses, and cultural and traditional uses. Circumstances may arise after the baseline 
tribal standards rule is final where a Tribe wishes to add or revise a designated use and 
associated criteria, or to establish a variance for certain reservation waters from the baseline 
tribal standards. For example, new data about existing uses might arise, or a Tribe may wish to 
more precisely describe in a water quality standard the cultural and traditional uses protected by 
the standard. The proposal provides a process overseen by the EPA Regional Administrator for 
revising a reservation’s applicable water quality standards that follows public document access 
and public participation requirements of 40 C.F.R. Part 131 without requiring full rulemaking.  
 
36 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29502 (May 5, 2023). 
37 88 Fed.Reg. 29496, 29502 (May 5, 2023). 

Comments of the National Association of Wetland Managers 
August 2, 2023 
NAWM Page 12 
 
Recommendation: NAWM supports inclusion of a process allowing for updates and 
revisions to applicable water quality standards that is less time-consuming and 
burdensome than full rulemaking, provided the process continues to incorporate a robust 
opportunity for public input. 
 
In closing, I would like to thank you for the opportunity for NAWM to submit comments on the 
Agencies’ proposed rule to establish federal baseline water quality standards for Indian 
reservations. We strongly support the Agencies’ efforts to develop tribal baseline standards, 
which NAWM believes are very important for effective implementation of CWA programs in 
Indian country. Although these comments have been prepared by NAWM with input from the 
NAWM Board of Directors, they do not necessarily represent the individual views of all states 
and tribes. We encourage your full consideration of the comments of individual Tribes and 
states, and other state and tribal associations.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Marla J. Stelk, Executive Director  
 
Cc: NAWM Board of Directors

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0240 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Jon Niermann, Chairman 
Emily Lindley, Commissioner 
Bobby Janecka, Commissioner 
Kelly Keel, Interim Executive Director 
TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 
Protecting Texas by Reducing and Preventing Pollution 
P.O. Box 13087   •   Austin, Texas 78711-3087   •   512-239-1000   •   tceq.texas.gov 
How is our customer service? tceq.texas.gov/customersurvey 
printed on recycled paper 
August 3, 2023 
 
James Ray 
Attn: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Science and Technology 
Health Protection Division  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
MC 4305T 
Washington, DC 20460 
Subject: Federal Register, vol. 88, No. 87, Pages 29496 – 29526, May 5, 2023, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency; Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations; Notice of 
Proposed Rule; Availability of Public Comment. 
Dear Sir or Madame: 
The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) appreciates the opportunity to 
provide comments on the proposed rule establishing federal water quality standards (WQS) for 
Indian reservations that currently do not have WQS in effect under the Clean Water Act (CWA). 
Notice of the proposal and request for public comment was published on May 5, 2023 in the 
Federal Register, vol. 88, No. 87, Pages 29496 – 29526. TCEQ is providing comments on the 
public availability and opportunities for public comment of: (1) locations to which promulgated 
baseline standards will apply; and (2) promulgated numeric criteria calculated by EPA in 
association with the proposed rule. Clarity is needed regarding EPA’s authority to promulgate 
and implement the proposed rule, to describe the mechanism that will be used to resolve 
potential conflicts or disputes; and how EPA will meet its existing CWA Section 303(c) 
responsibilities to act on state-adopted WQS in light of the proposal. Technical comments 
include the need to clearly define: (1) the binding translation procedure; (2) Option 5 
implementing the binding translation procedure; and (3) the definition of bioaccumulative.  
If you have questions concerning the enclosed comments, please contact Cari-Michel La Caille, 
Director of the Office of Water at (512) 239-6479, or at cari-michel.lacaille@tceq.texas.gov. 
Sincerely, 
 
Kelly Keel  
Interim Executive Director 
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality 
Attachment 
 
 
 

Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Comments on  
Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
 
Federal Register Vol. 88, No. 87 29496-29526 
 
Background 
 
In the May 5, 2023, edition of the Federal Register, the Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) published the proposed rule establishing federal water quality standards 
(WQS) for Indian reservations that currently do not have WQS in effect under the 
federal Clean Water Act (CWA). Public comments on the proposed rule will be accepted 
by August 3, 2023. EPA published an Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on 
September 29, 2016; and on January 18, 2001, administratively determined core WQS 
for Tribes were needed (Administrator’s Determination). 
The purpose of the rulemaking is to safeguard water quality for Tribes that have not 
obtained authority to administer their own WQS programs in a similar manner as 
states (TAS), or other limited circumstances. Waters in these reservations do not have 
the protection of WQS afforded by CWA. In these waters, EPA currently uses a variety 
of tools to ensure protection when implementing CWA programs such as wastewater 
permitting, including the application of neighboring state WQS or 
federallyrecommended water quality criteria. However, the current practice may not 
reflect uses of Indian reservation waters.  
According to the proposed rule, EPA would develop the baseline WQS in consultation 
with Tribes, in a manner that would address location-specific water quality conditions 
and Tribal circumstances. EPA’s proposed methodology to develop numeric criteria 
tailored to location-specific conditions and Tribal circumstances is a “binding 
translation procedure” to implement narrative criteria statements that prescribe water 
quality be free from objectionable materials and nuisance conditions. The criteria will 
protect baseline designated uses including aquatic life, primary contact recreation, 
cultural and traditional uses. The proposed WQS also include an antidegradation policy 
and implementation methods, and variance procedures; and other policies that 
address critical conditions, mixing zones, and authorize compliance schedules. 
As proposed, EPA Regional Administrators (EPA Regions) will develop, establish, and 
implement the baseline WQS. These include tasks such as: consultation with Tribes; 
translating narrative criteria in accordance with the proposed binding translation 
procedure; maintaining and making publicly available numeric translations of narrative 
criteria; publishing public notice of baseline WQS rulemakings; and holding hearings 
according to federal public participation regulations at 40 Code of Federal Regulations 
(40 CFR) Part 25.  
 
 

TCEQ Comments  
Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
2 
 
 
TCEQ offers the following comments as outlined below. 
 
Comments Regarding Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian 
Reservations 
 
I. General comments on the proposed rule. 
A. A list of surface waters for which WQS are promulgated in association with 
the proposed rule should be made publicly available in rule, and states 
afforded an opportunity to publicly comment. A list of reservation surface 
waters, their known locations, and promulgated baseline designated uses with 
binding criteria should be included in rule, in addition to the dedicated website 
as indicated on page 29502, in a manner similar to other federally promulgated 
WQS. Without this information, it will be unclear to states what baseline 
standards will apply where, or where an allowable exclusion will apply. This 
information is particularly needed for states with multiple reservations within 
its boundaries and with neighboring state boundaries, so that applicability and 
regulatory certainty can be determined. EPA should provide an opportunity for 
public comment, to ensure states can identify waters under state jurisdiction 
and evaluate potential WQS discrepancies. 
 
B. A list of numeric criteria developed by EPA Regions should be made publicly 
available in rule, and states afforded an opportunity to publicly comment. 
TCEQ supports the proposed publishing of calculated numeric criteria 
developed by EPA when implementing the “binding narrative translator 
approach” as indicated on page 29523. However, these criteria and the basis of 
their development should be published in rule, consistent with other federally-
promulgated standards, rather than on a website to be administered by EPA 
Regions. The public availability of this regulatory information is needed to 
ensure criteria may be considered by states when implementing their state 
water quality management programs, and to ensure state programs comply with 
downstream baseline WQS promulgated by EPA. EPA should provide an 
opportunity for public comment to ensure states can identify criteria applicable 
to waters under state jurisdiction and evaluate potential WQS discrepancies. 
 
C. Clarity is needed regarding EPA’s authority to promulgate and implement the 
proposed rule, and to describe the mechanism that will be used to resolve 
potential conflicts or disputes. Page 29500 of the preamble indicates that 
states raised concerns with the authority of EPA to conduct the proposed 
rulemaking during the advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPRM) in 2016, 
and to resolve potential conflicts that may arise when WQS in neighboring areas 
differ. Specifically, “States raised concerns about EPA’s CWA authority and 
resources to promulgate and effectively implement baseline WQS on Indian 
reservations. States also commented that baseline WQS might differ from 
neighboring states’ standards and potentially affect upstream dischargers.” The 
preamble should be revised to clearly indicate how EPA has addressed these 
state concerns, including a thorough and concise description of EPA’s authority 
to promulgate and implement the rule as proposed. The mechanism by which 

TCEQ Comments  
Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
3 
 
EPA will resolve differences, potential conflicts, or disputes among states, tribes, 
and the regulated community should also be described. 
 
D. Clarity is needed to describe how EPA will meet its existing responsibilities 
in Section 303(c) of the CWA in light of the additional requirements imposed 
on EPA by the proposed rule. The proposed rule will require extensive 
resources by EPA Regional staff and headquarters to implement. Given the 
existing EPA backlog of actions on state-adopted WQS, how will EPA allocate 
resources to implement the proposed rule while adequately ensuring EPA’s 
existing responsibilities to state programs are met in accordance with deadlines 
specified in Section 303(c) of the CWA? For example, portions of the 2010, 2014, 
2018, and 2022 revisions to 30 Texas Administrative Code Chapter 307, the 
Texas Surface Water Quality Standards, are awaiting action by EPA. 
 
II.  Comments concerning technical components of the proposal. 
A. A definition for “binding translation procedure” is needed to provide clarity 
and regulatory certainty for states. The preamble generally describes how 
numeric translators of narrative criteria will be developed using a “binding 
translation procedure.” The preamble also provides a summary of five proposed 
options as potential translators. However, it is not clearly defined how “binding” 
these procedures are in a regulatory context and the degree of flexibility that 
may be used to apply and implement the translated criteria. For example, clarity 
is needed to determine how “binding translation procedures” for the same 
constituent will be developed for each respective CWA program (i.e., WQS, 
wastewater permitting, total maximum daily load and assessment) or if the 
binding procedures, resultant criterion, and any other binding requirements will 
be exactly the same for each implementing program. The preamble indicates on 
page 29506 that “numeric values may be needed for different parameters in 
different circumstances, in accordance with EPA regulations, but also reflect 
variations in the way criteria are applied in different CWA implementation 
programs.” Accordingly, implementation of the “binding translation procedure” 
could result in different criteria and targets for different regulatory purposes, 
contributing to cross-programmatic conflict and regulatory uncertainty. 
B. Option 5 of the proposed binding translation procedures, that allows EPA to 
rely on existing CWA implementation provisions to translate narrative 
criteria to numeric criteria, needs additional clarification. The proposed 
descriptions provided on pages 29506 and 29508 are vague and unspecific. 
According to the proposal, the “Administrator would rely on existing CWA 
implementation provisions to translate the baseline narrative criteria, where 
necessary. For example, the Regional Administrator could rely on 40 CFR 
Section 122.44(d)(1)(vi)(A) and (C) for NPDES permitting purposes.” However, not 
all parameters have clear implementation guidance for all CWA purposes, and 
available implementation guidance may not address all CWA programs. 
Additionally, can Option 5 still be used if a technology-based standard is 
insufficient to protect a use, and a water quality-based standard is needed? 
More details are needed to describe Option 5 and how this option can be 
appropriately used for all CWA purposes. 

TCEQ Comments  
Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
4 
 
C. Additional clarity and specificity is needed to define “bioaccumulative.” The 
proposed §131.XX(g)(2)(iv) states “Mixing zones shall not be authorized for 
pathogens, pathogen indicators, or bioaccumulative pollutants in the discharge, 
unless the Regional Administrator can demonstrate, after consideration of the 
effects of the mixing zone (including potential bioaccumulation within specific 
trophic levels of resident species or other relevant factors), that the designated 
use of the water body as a whole will be protected. Bioaccumulative pollutant 
means a pollutant that is taken up and retained by an aquatic organism from 
any surrounding media (e.g., water, food, sediment).” A more specific definition 
of what is considered to be bioaccumulative, such as a pollutant with a 
bioaccumulation factor at or above a specific level, is needed in the proposed 
rule language to ensure specificity regarding which pollutants EPA considers 
ineligible for mixing zones.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0227 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Greg Gianforte, Governor I Chris Dorrington, Director I P.O. Box 200901 I Helena, MT 59620-0901 I (406) 444-2544 I www.deq.mt.gov 
 
July 20, 2023 
 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Attn: James Ray, Office of Science and Technology, Standards and Health Protection Division 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
 
Re: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian 
Reservations 
 
Dear Mr. Ray,  
 
Montana Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the 
proposed rule, “Proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations.”  
 
Montana DEQ is committed to continue collaboratively engaging with EPA under our cooperative 
federalism approach to administering Clean Water Act programs. DEQ is also committed to coordinating 
with our tribal and state partners to achieve shared goals of water quality protection.  
 
Montana DEQ supports the adoption of water quality standards that protect beneficial uses of water 
bodies and are based on sound scientific rationale. Montana DEQ also supports opportunities for public 
input to be provided as standards are adopted and implemented across Clean Water Act programs.  
 
Several Montana tribes have obtained TAS and have adopted water quality standards that have been 
approved by EPA; others are pursuing these actions. Montana DEQ applauds these efforts and 
appreciates EPA’s acknowledgement of these achievements in the proposed rule.  
 
This proposed rule will impact several Montana DEQ programs, including Montana Pollutant Discharge 
Elimination System (MPDES) permitting, beneficial use support and impairment assessment, Total 
Maximum Daily Load development, and our 401 and 404 certification programs. With this letter, 
Montana DEQ submits our comments on the proposed rule, “Proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations.”  
 
Applicability 
States must be able to distinguish where the proposed federal baseline water quality standards apply 
and where state water quality standards apply. States must also accurately identify the spatial 
boundaries of lands to which this rule applies to evaluate water body assessment unit boundaries and 
evaluate potential for downstream impacts of pollutant discharges.  EPA has noted difficulty in acquiring 
accurate spatial information depicting boundaries of certain categories of tribal lands.  
 
Montana DEQ requests that EPA maintain accurate maps that clearly distinguish the spatial boundaries 
of the formal and informal Indian reservation lands (including applicable trust lands) covered by this 
rule, as well as those lands that are considered exceptions including off-reservation allotments or 
dependent Indian communities and make them readily available to states and tribes.  
 

 
 
Page 2 of 3 
 
NarraƟve TranslaƟon Procedures  
The proposed rule includes narrative criteria and binding translation procedures which EPA would use to 
determine case-specific numeric values protective of applicable designated uses for use in CWA program 
implementation. States must know the numeric values that are applicable to downstream waters to 
ensure adequate downstream protections when issuing permits. States also take upstream water quality 
conditions and downstream protections into consideration when performing waterbody assessments, 
reasonable potential analysis, TMDL development, and other CWA program actions.  
 
Montana DEQ recommends EPA provide clarity and guidance related to the following technical aspects 
of the proposed rule’s narrative translation procedures: 
• 
Expectations for the type, quantity and quality of regional and location-specific information 
which may be incorporated when selecting case-specific numeric values using the narrative 
translation procedures, including natural (nonanthropogenic) conditions.   
• 
How EPA will ensure the most appropriate narrative translation procedure option is selected for 
a specific pollutant or circumstance.  
• 
What timing and rationale is considered acceptable to retranslate the narrative for a pollutant 
to which the translator was already applied, particularly if the retranslation may result in a 
numeric value that differs from a previous translation outcome.  
• 
How EPA will or will not ensure the same numeric values produced via narrative translation is 
implemented across all Clean Water Act programs.   
• 
How differences, if they exist, between federal baseline water quality standards and adjacent 
state water quality standards will be reconciled when issuing permits or other CWA program 
actions.  
 
Montana DEQ recommends EPA provide clarity and guidance related to the following logistical aspects 
of the proposed rule’s narrative translation procedures: 
• 
How and when states may request that EPA perform a narrative standard translation for 
downstream waters.  
• 
Who within EPA will perform the narrative translation to case-specific numeric values.  
• 
Who will serve as EPA’s point of contact for coordination with states pertaining to narrative 
standard translation and implementation.   
• 
How EPA will track translated numeric values and make them readily available to states, tribes, 
and the public.  
Public ParƟcipaƟon and InformaƟon Sharing 
Public participation is foundational to water quality standards development, adoption, and evaluation 
through time.  
• 
Montana DEQ urges EPA to implement all reasonable public participation opportunities when 
implementing the proposed baseline WQS, including public notice and triennial review.  
• 
Montana DEQ urges EPA to create a means of signing up to receive notification of significant 
actions related to this rule, including narrative translation, for states, tribes, and any interested 
persons. 
Montana DEQ recommends that EPA develop a consolidated online platform for sharing information 
pertaining to this proposed rule, including notices of narrative translation, the numeric values that result 
from narrative translation procedures, comment opportunities, and other relevant information.  
 

 
 
Page 3 of 3 
 
Best Available Science and DocumentaƟon 
Water quality standards must be based on based on sound scientific rationale and must protect 
designated uses of water bodies. Rigorous documentation and certainty in how the criteria were 
developed is foundational to water quality standards approval.  
• 
Montana DEQ urges EPA to document the scientific rationale used when implementing the 
narrative standard and translation procedures, including documenting the rationale for the 
selected translation procedure option and the scientific basis of the numeric value produced. 
 
EPA Regional Capacity and Impacts to State Clean Water Act Programs 
Montana DEQ urges EPA to ensure that their regional offices receive adequate additional resources to 
enhance their capacity to perform additional workload related to this proposed rule.  
• 
Montana DEQ urges EPA to consider additional resource demands that result from this 
proposed rule including but not limited to performing narrative translations, coordinating with 
states and tribes, issuing permits, performing and reporting on impairment determinations, and 
managing and sharing information related to the baseline water quality standards for Indian 
country.   
 
Montana DEQ urges EPA to communicate to states to what degree the practical implementation of this 
proposed rule may affect EPA regional offices’ capacity and resulting effects to states’ state Clean Water 
Act Programs, including:  
• 
Review and approval of state-issued permits.  
• 
Review and approval of Total Maximum Daily Load documents.  
• 
Review and approval of 303d/305b water quality reports.  
Conclusion 
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide comments on this proposed rule. We look forward to 
ongoing coordination with EPA, states, and tribes on water quality standards.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Katie Makarowski 
Water Quality Standards and Modeling Section Supervisor 
Montana Department of Environmental Quality  
PO Box 200901 
Helena, Montana 59601

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0219 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
DEPARTMENT OF 
ENVIRONMENT, GREAT LAKES, AND ENERGY 
LANSING 
 
CONSTITUTION HALL • 525 WEST ALLEGAN STREET • P.O. BOX 30473 • LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909-7973 
Michigan.gov/EGLE • 800-662-9278 
GRETCHEN WHITMER 
GOVERNOR 
PHILLIP D. ROOS 
DIRECTOR 
July 25, 2023 
 
 
VIA ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
USEPA Docket Center, Office of Water Docket 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW (28221T) 
Washington, DC 20460  
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
SUBJECT: 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405  
USEPA’s Proposed Federal Baseline Tribal Water Quality Standards for 
Indian Reservations Rule 
 
I am writing on behalf of the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and 
Energy (EGLE) in response to the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s 
(USEPA) notice of proposed rulemaking concerning federal baseline tribal water quality 
standards for Indian reservations (Tribal WQS) under the federal Water Pollution 
Control Act (Clean Water Act or CWA), 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. EGLE is a partner with 
USEPA and the twelve federally recognized tribes in Michigan in the protection of 
waters within the state. EGLE supports adopting standards that protect water quality. 
Michigan has been authorized to administer the National Pollutant Discharge 
Elimination System permit program (NPDES) for fifty years. The comments provided 
below are intended to help achieve a more practically workable and protective rule and 
allow EGLE to maintain an effective permit program that is compliant with existing 
statutory requirements. 
In light of the USEPA’s goal to fill the “gap in water quality protection under the CWA for 
waters on Indian reservations,” EGLE respectfully suggests that the USEPA should 
support this Tribal WQS rulemaking effort by: 
1. Applying the Tribal WQS to waters within reservations subject to the listed 
exclusions, but with administrative accommodations for trust lands and without 
resolving jurisdictional disputes. 
2. Clearly establishing a singular source for mapping and communicating applicable 
agreed-upon boundaries and waters to which these proposed rules apply, as well 
as a routine process for updating those boundaries and waters. 
3. Avoiding conflicts and actively coordinating with states to account for WQS 
development timelines where cross-border waters will result in potentially 
significant delays to administrative processes. 

Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
Page 2 
July 25, 2023 
 
 
4. Acknowledging the need for USEPA staff allocation, an analysis of capacity 
needs, and a concrete plan to implement Tribal WQS at the USEPA Regional 
scale.  
5. Maintaining the initial focus of broadly applicable WQS; tailoring to individual 
tribal needs should be done at the Regional level. 
Boundaries and Waters Where Tribal WQS Apply 
The USEPA has proposed to apply the Tribal WQS to reservations and trust lands, but 
to exclude waters on reservations where the USEPA has promulgated reservation-
specific WQS; waters where a tribe has adopted USEPA-approved WQS under the 
CWA; and waters where a state has adopted USEPA-approved WQS under the CWA. 
81 Fed. Reg. 66904. 
In states like Michigan, with substantial and varied water resources and widely 
dispersed trust lands, it can be difficult to draw a bright line between waters inside and 
outside of Indian country. Waters traverse Indian country, affecting federal, tribal, and 
state interests. Special consideration should be given to expectations for trust lands. 
The complications that arise from imposing the baseline Tribal WQS to trust lands are 
more acute when trust parcels are very small, sometimes simply the location of an 
access point or serving a discrete purpose. EGLE believes that the USEPA can and 
should make administrative accommodations for the Tribal WQS to avoid conflicts with 
state programs for small parcels of trust lands or where water quality outside of the trust 
parcel will be affected by imposing the Tribal WQS. EGLE appreciates that at least one 
option to address these situations is contemplated by the proposed rule, which 
authorizes Regions to adopt state WQS when developing numeric translations of 
narrative criteria. However, the proposed rule lacks clarity about how Regions will 
choose among the methods for developing numeric translations and whether that 
process will involve cooperation with states. 
EGLE also proposes that the USEPA categorically exclude waters inside disputed 
reservations. In those situations, the courts have the jurisdiction to resolve whether the 
lands in question are a reservation. Until the courts make that determination, the 
USEPA’s efforts to impose the Tribal WQS could have the unintended effect of 
interfering with the state programs under the CWA in an area outside Indian country 
where the USEPA has authorized states to assume the federal CWA programs. 
Clearly Established Maps and Updating 
Michigan strongly suggests that the USEPA coordinate the creation and distribution of 
GIS maps that define the boundaries of reservations and trust lands in each state prior 
to implementation of Tribal WQS. This information will be critical in determining where 

Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
Page 3 
July 25, 2023 
 
 
Tribal WQS apply and necessary to effectively and efficiently issue NPDES permits that 
are protective of state and Tribal WQS. Careful consideration must also be given to the 
process that will be used to update these maps and how often updates will be made, 
particularly for trust lands, which change frequently. Ideally, the timing of updates would 
correspond with the cycle for renewing NPDES permits and would not result in the need 
for mid-cycle NPDES permit modifications. 
WQS Development Timelines and Conflicts with State Programs  
A public notice is not the place to brief all the legal complexities of regulatory jurisdiction 
in and affecting Indian country. The USEPA’s proposed rule provides an incomplete 
picture concerning state regulatory authority involving Indian country that has the 
potential to create unnecessary conflicts between baseline Tribal WQS and the CWA 
programs the USEPA has approved for states.  
Contrary to the USEPA’s suggestion, states are not simply “near” or “bordering” Indian 
country. “Indian country is part of the State, not separate from the State.”  Oklahoma v. 
Castro-Huerta, ___ U.S. ___; 142 S. Ct. 2486, 2493 (2022). More importantly, the 
Supreme Court has developed a framework for determining when states may regulate 
activities inside Indian country. See, e.g., White Mountain Apache Tribe v Bracker,  
448 U.S. 136, 144–145 (1980). As a result, even where the USEPA asserts that it has 
not authorized a state to assume a CWA program inside Indian country, it remains 
entirely possible that the state may continue to regulate certain activities inside Indian 
country under state law. 
When contemplating numeric translations of narrative criteria within the Tribal WQS, 
EGLE urges the USEPA to recognize that existing State WQS may be more 
comprehensive and tailored to local conditions and may already protect cultural and 
traditional uses, even if they do so indirectly. For instance, Michigan’s designated uses 
for surface water already include partial body contact all year, and full body contact 
between May 1 and October 31 when there is more recreation in surface water. See 
Michigan Administrative Code, R. 323.1100(1)(f) and (2). Those designated uses may 
be protective of cultural or traditional practices that require contact with surface water, 
such as ceremonial washing. The adoption of conflicting standards would miss an 
opportunity to leverage existing protections for water quality inside Indian country and 
could cause unintended impacts to the way these standards are administered and 
applied by states outside of Indian country. 
More than just avoiding conflicts, the USEPA should affirmatively coordinate its baseline 
Tribal WQS with the state programs it has approved under the CWA. The CWA, 
including 33 U.S.C. § 1252(a), requires the Administrator to cooperate with a broad 

Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
Page 4 
July 25, 2023 
 
 
coalition of interested parties, including other governments, to develop comprehensive 
programs for controlling water pollution. Many states adopt WQS designed to serve the 
dual purpose of satisfying state law and the CWA. The CWA strongly supports the 
USEPA cooperating with states in that context. 
Consider, for example, that the USEPA and a state may each have to develop effluent 
limits in their respective permits for a single discharge to surface water by a non-Indian 
business with a facility in Indian country. The USEPA and the state environmental 
agency should have a coordinated approach so that the permittee can obtain permits 
within a reasonable amount of time and can comply with both sets of substantive 
requirements. This coordination will also be critical so that both agencies can enforce 
their permits and respond to critical incidents. 
The intention of developing numeric translations of narrative criteria on an ‘as-needed’ 
basis, and only within the scope and individual water body to which the action applies, 
sets up the potential for lengthy permit issuance delays. For example, once an NPDES 
permit application is determined to be administratively complete, Michigan state law 
requires a new use permit to be issued within 180 days. Mich. Comp. Laws 
§ 324.3120(2). It is unclear how EGLE will be able to comply with existing statutory 
requirements if numeric translations are developed on an as-needed basis. Further, it is 
unclear how this approach will impact Michigan’s progress on reducing its NPDES 
permit backlog. 
Additionally, a public notice process primarily linked to various specific actions leaves in 
question the process when an action originates in State waters, but numeric translation 
is necessary to protect downstream tribal waters and uses. Unclear is the process by 
which this downstream protection can be achieved, timelines and potential delays to 
State actions, and which government will be responsible for a public involvement 
process.  
Michigan recommends the USEPA consider developing numeric translations for 
pollutants most likely encountered (e.g., Pollutants of Initial Focus, Table 6 in  
40 CFR Part 132 Section 132.6) and other criteria commonly applied to NPDES permit 
conditions (e.g., temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen) on a regional basis as a first step 
following the effective date of the final rule. This process should involve public notice 
and be completed prior to implementation. In addition, Michigan suggests upfront 
coordination with the USEPA on their approach to address oxygen demanding 
substances. Developing these regionally applied translations, particularly for the Great 
Lakes System, is consistent with the intent of 40 CFR Part 132 and will provide 
increased efficiency, clarity, and support in the timely processing of subsequent permits 
and other actions.  

Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
Page 5 
July 25, 2023 
 
 
USEPA Capacity 
The Proposed Rule points repeatedly to USEPA Regional Administration as the primary 
implementation agent for Tribal WQS, development of numeric translations for narrative 
criteria, and extensive consultation with Regional tribes and coordination with affected 
states. The technical and procedural undertaking by Regional USEPA staff to 
implement Tribal WQS in a supportive and functional manner will be significant and 
should be clearly acknowledged and addressed.  
Additionally, it remains unclear what role, and with what staffing, the USEPA will 
undertake other CWA programs such as water quality assessment and biennial  
Section 303(d) reporting after baseline Tribal WQS are established. While the Economic 
Analysis does not address the likely need for increased staffing, there is significant 
concern over the workload this Proposed Rule places on USEPA Regional staff and the 
potential for backlogs, affecting the intended support for tribes and impacting state 
program coordination.  
Although the implementation of this Proposed Rule will fall on the USEPA Regional 
staff, it will be important for Tribe-specific designated uses and numeric translations of 
narrative criteria to be housed and accessible in a singular accessible location, as the 
preamble to the proposed Rule suggests. Critical to implementation, this Tribal WQS 
‘clearinghouse’ will provide a nationwide level of transparency and access to 
information, important to Tribes as they explore better ways to protect their designated 
uses and water quality; to NPDES permit holders as they better understand their 
regulatory landscape across various boundaries; to USEPA Regions as they enter into 
rule implementation and can learn from other approaches; to States as they navigate 
additional levels of cross-border use protection; and for the greater public interested in 
how the Proposed Rule is implemented. A centralized location will also serve as a 
predictable location for identifying opportunities for public comment and involvement. 
Broadly Applicable WQS 
Within the preamble of the Proposed Rule the USEPA asks for specific comments on a 
number of issues. Relative to that request, EGLE supports limiting designated use 
promulgation to aquatic life, primary contact recreation, and cultural and traditional 
uses. The interest in, and application of, additional uses such as public water supply, 
agricultural, or industrial uses are best reserved for subsequent requests at the 
Regional level based on specific tribal needs and uses. 

Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
Page 6 
July 25, 2023 
 
 
Conclusion 
EGLE looks forward to working with the USEPA and tribes in protecting the 
environment, especially water resources that are plentiful in Michigan both inside and 
outside Indian country. If carefully crafted and implemented, the USEPA’s proposed 
baseline Tribal WQS would provide a significant opportunity to advance water quality 
protection while avoiding administrative and jurisdictional concerns or problems. 
Thank you for considering these comments. If you have any questions, please do not 
hesitate to contact Kevin Goodwin; Lakes Erie, Huron, and Superior Unit; Surface Water 
Assessment Section; WRD; at 517-290-4198; GoodwinK@Michigan.gov; or  
EGLE, P.O. Box 30458, Lansing, Michigan 48909-7958. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Teresa Seidel, Director 
Water Resources Division 
517-284-5470 
 
 
cc:  
Stephen Jann, USEPA, Region 5 
Dave Pfeifer, USEPA, Region 5 
Polly A. Synk Michigan Department of Attorney General (MDAG) 
Kelly Drake, MDAG 
Phillip D. Roos, Director, EGLE 
Aaron B. Keatley, Chief Deputy Director, EGLE 
Katie Lambeth, Environmental Justice and Tribal Liaison, EGLE 
Phil Argiroff, EGLE 
Christine Alexander, EGLE 
Michael Alexander, EGLE 
Kevin Goodwin, EGLE 
Amanda Bosak, EGLE

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0212 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0249 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Department of Environmental Quality 
To protect, conserve and enhance the quality of Wyoming's 
environment for the benefit of current and future generations. 
WYOMING 
Mark Gordon, Governor 
Todd Parfitt, Director 
August 3, 2023 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Submitted online via https://www.regulations.gov 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-
0405 
To Whom It May Concern, 
The Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality (WDEQ) appreciates the opportunity to provide 
comments on the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) proposed revisions to the Clean Water Act 
(CWA) water quality standards (WQS) regulation at 40 CFR Part§ 131. The revisions propose to establish 
"baseline" WQS for a subset of waters of the United States (WOTUS) under tribal authority that do not 
have CWA-effective WQS. The WDEQ fully supports the proposed rule's intent to ensure that CWA 
protections are in place for WOTUS under tribal authority that currently do not have such protections. 
However, the proposed rule has significant adverse implications for WDEQ and CWA implementation in 
the State of Wyoming. Because EPA has not fully considered the proposed rule's implications, the WDEQ 
recommends that EPA withdraw the proposed rule until the concerns identified in this letter, and letters 
from other states, can be addressed through meaningful consultation with both states and tribes. 
Pursuant to both the Wyoming Environmental Quality Act (Wyoming Statutes Title 35, Chapter 11) and 
the CWA, WDEQ is responsible for the development and implementation of surface water quality 
standards (WQS) within the State of Wyoming, excluding those surface waters that fall under the authority 
of the Northern Arapaho and Eastern Shoshone Tribes, who jointly occupy the Wind River Indian 
Reservation in central Wyoming. In the late 2000's the Northern Arapaho and Eastern Shoshone 
developed WQS; however, neither tribe has received treatment as a state (TAS) under Section 518 of the 
CWA, 33 USC§ 1377. Thus, there are no CWA-effective WQS for WOTUS under their authority. Should the 
tribes choose, the baseline WQS may apply to WOTUS on the Wind River Indian Reservation, including 
segments of the Wind River, Little Wind River, Pogo River, Fivemile Creek, and Muddy Creeks, which flow on 
and off the reservation, alternating between tribal and state authority. The proposed WQS will also likely 
affect WOTUS that originate in Wyoming and flow into areas under tribal jurisdiction without CWA-
effective WQS, including WOTUS within the Crow Reservation in Montana. There are approximately 140 
WDEQ-issued discharge permits upstream ofthe Wind River and Crow Reservations that could potentially 
be impacted by the proposed WQS. 
The proposed baseline WQS establish designated uses (primary contact recreation, aquatic life, and cultural 
and traditional uses); narrative water quality criteria; antidegradation provisions; and implementation 
procedures. The rule also proposes to allow the EPA Regional Administrator, outside of the federal regulation 
200 West 17th Street, Cheyenne, WY 82002 · http://deq.wyoming.gov · Fax (307)635-1784 
ADMIN/OUTREACH 
ABANDONED MINES 
AIR QUALITY 
INDUSTRIAL SITING 
LAND QUALITY 
SOLID & HAZ. WASTE 
WATER QUALITY 
(307) 777-7937 
(307) 777-6145 
(307) 777-7391 
(307) 777-7369 
(307) 777-7756 
(307) 777-7752 
(307) 777-7781 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Page 2 of 15 
revision process, to designate Outstanding National Resource Waters (ONRWs), modify designated uses and 
water quality criteria, and establish variances. The proposed rule describes procedures the Regional 
Administrator can use to translate narrative criteria into numeric thresholds during CWA implementation, 
including discharge permitting under Sections 402 or 404; 401 certifications; water quality assessments under 
Section 305(b); and identification of impaired waters and total maximum daily load (TMDL) development 
under Section 303(d). These methods include (1) 304(a) criteria; (2) 304(a) criteria modified to reflect site-
specific conditions; (3) water quality standards adopted by a Tribe or CWA-effective water quality standards 
applicable in adjacent or other relevant states or tribes; (4) 40 CFR 132 (Water Quality Guidance for the Great 
Lakes System); or (5) if 1-4 are not applicable, other CWA implementation provisions. EPA proposes to provide 
these "translations" on a publicly accessible website. 
It has been more than 35 years since Congress amended1 the CWA to provide two main pathways for 
WOTUS under tribal authority to receive CWA protections. The first, Section 518(d) of the CWA, 33 USC§ 
1377(d), provides for Indian tribes and States to enter into cooperative agreements to jointly administer 
the CWA. The second, Section 518(e) of the CWA, 33 USC§ 1377(e), allows Indian tribes TAS for CWA 
implementation provided they meet certain requirements. Despite Congress's clear direction, EPA has 
chosen to spend the last several decades2 focused on the fundamentally flawed approach of promulgating 
baseline WQS rather than meaningfully engaging with states and tribes to address barriers to CWA 
implementation for surface waters under tribal authority. Furthermore, EPA has proposed a rule that will 
require a significant investment of resources on the part of tribes, states, and EPA without any additional 
funding to support implementation. 
WDEQ has concerns with the proposed rule and its implementation, most notably that Congress did not 
give EPA explicit authority to promulgate WQS and broadly administer the CWA in Indian Country. The 
proposed WQS and revision process are not consistent with requirements states and tribes with TAS must 
meet-EPA's proposed rule seemingly will not be subject to the triennial review, public notice and 
participation, and toxic pollutant criteria requirements established in the CWA and federal regulations. 
Further, the specific applicable surface waters have not been identified, and EPA does not have authority 
to determine the applicable surface waters outside of the TAS process. This ambiguity in application will 
leave states, tribes, and the federal government to work through jurisdictional issues after federal 
promulgation and during CWA implementation, opening the door to potential litigation, and leaving 
would-be permittees and other stakeholders to await resolution. Based on our experience with CWA 
implementation, we question whether the rule will provide tribes with sufficient time to contemplate 
coverage under the federal baseline WQS and hold associated public comment opportunities. Further, 
EPA's reliance on narrative water quality criteria without binding translation procedures is insufficient to 
ensure effective and consistent implementation to meet CWA requirements and will create a burdensome 
process for stakeholder review and evaluation. 
While EPA has provided opportunities to discuss the proposed rule with states during the public comment 
period, these engagement sessions should have been held prior to EPA's drafting the rule, as they have 
(1) highlighted the significant hurdles EPA, states, and tribes face to implement the rule as proposed and 
(2) illuminated EPA's deficient rule development process, which lacked meaningful collaborative input 
from states and tribes. Given this lack of engagement with stakeholders, EPA's approach to address the 
gap in CWA protections is not implementable, will not sufficiently protect water quality in areas under 
tribal authority, and is inconsistent with the goals and objectives of the CWA. 
1 1987 amendments to the CWA, Public Law 100-4 
2 Preamble at 29498. 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Page 3 of 15 
WDEQ recommends EPA withdraw the proposed rule to address the concerns outlined in detail below 
and to conduct meaningful engagement with states, tribes, and other stakeholders. Establishment of WQS 
on a case-by-case basis through collaboration between tribes, states, and the Federal government would 
be a more productive course of action. Empowering tribes to obtain TAS status and have authority for 
CWA implementation on waters under their jurisdiction also supports local decision-making for 
environmental protection, better comports with the intent of Section 101(b) of the CWA, and will facilitate 
a tribe's ability to pursue regulations to protect non-WOTUS waters. The WDEQ strongly encourages EPA 
to not lose sight of this goal. 
1. EPA Lacks Congressional Authority to Promulgate WQS For Tribes That Do Not Have TAS. The legal 
framework established by the CWA for tribes does not grant EPA authority to promulgate and implement 
WQS for all Indian Country. Absent clear congressional authority, an agency cannot act.3 
Congress provided two mechanisms to extend CWA protections and authorities, including promulgation 
of WQS, to WOTUS under tribal authority. First, Section 518(d), 33 USC§ 1377(d), provides that "an Indian 
tribe and the State or States in which the lands of such tribe are located may enter into a cooperative 
agreement, subject to the review and approval of the Administrator, to jointly plan and administer the 
requirements of this Act." Second, Section 518(e), 33 USC § 1377(e), describes "the Administrator is 
authorized to treat an Indian tribe as a State for purposes of title II and Sections 104, 106, 303, 305, 308, 
309, 314, 319, 401, 402, and 404" of the CWA if the tribe has a governing body; the tribe oversees 
management and protection of water resources; and the tribe is reasonably capable of carrying out these 
functions. Section 518(e) allows the Administrator authority to authorize tribes to be treated as a "state" 
for specific purposes of the CWA, but neither 518(d) nor 518(e) granted EPA authority to broadly 
promulgate WQS in Indian Country. 
The CWA also does not contemplate EPA's use of its promulgation authority to supplant the role of tribes 
in administering the CWA. EPA is relying on Section 303(c)(4)(B), 33 USC§ 1313(c)(4)(B), of the CWA as 
authority to promulgate WQS for Tribes not authorized under Section 518 (see the preamble at 29498). 
Section 303(c)(4)(B) provides rulemaking authority when the "Administrator determines that a revised or 
new standard is necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter." However, when read in its entirety, 
subsection (c) pertains to the failure of "States" [or authorized tribes] to promulgate adequate WQS and 
provides "States" [or authorized tribes] an opportunity to adopt revised or new standards in the 90-day 
period after the Administrator publishes proposed standards: 
The Administrator shall promptly prepare and publish proposed regulations setting forth 
[ ... ] new water quality standards for navigable waters involved [ ... ] in any case where 
the Administrator determines that a revised or new standard is necessary to meet the 
requirements of this chapter. The Administrator shall promulgate any revised or new 
standard under the paragraph not later than ninety days after he publishes such proposed 
standards, unless prior to such promulgation, such State has adopted a revised or new 
water quality standard which the Administrator determines to be in accordance with this 
chapter. (Emphasis added). 
3 Bowen v. Georgetown Univ. Hosp., 488 U.S. 204, 208,109 S.Ct. 468 (1988). 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Paee 4 of 15 
Non-authorized tribes are not considered "States" under the CWA, but are a "municipality4" pursuant to 
Section 502(4), 33 USC§ 1362(4), of the CWA since they have not gone through the TAS process. Further, 
the timing requirement for EPA to act on State [or authorized tribes] WQS should clearly not be confused 
as an additional grant of authority to commence an entirely new process with respect to tribes aside from 
the explicitly directed processes outlined in Section 518. 
If Congress had intended for EPA to fully administer the CWA in Indian Country, as EPA outlines in the 
proposed rule5, it would have also revised other portions of the CWA, including Sections 303(c), 33 USC§ 
1313(c)6; 303(d), 33 USC§ 1313(d);7 305(b), 33 USC§ 1315(b);8 to explicitly provide EPA with authority to 
develop WQS, identify impaired waters, and assess waters in Indian Country. In contrast, Congress did 
exactly that when it granted EPA explicit authority in the Clean Air Act.9 Congress could have included 
similar language in the CWA but chose not to. Since Congress did not grant EPA these explicit authorities, 
EPA lacks authority to promulgate and implement WQS in Indian Country. 
EPA must rely on the means identified by Congress in the CWA to establish WQS and address CWA-
implementation in Indian Country. Recent successes suggest that significant progress can be made. As 
described in the preamble at 2949910, 27 of the 84 tribes with TAS were approved after 2016 when EPA 
revised its interpretation of CWA Section 518, 33 USC § 1377, to streamline aspects of a tribe's TAS 
application. EPA should devote its efforts and additional resources to support tribes in the TAS process 
for WQS and other CWA implementation programs. 
2. EPA Must Follow the Same Process that States and Authorized Tribes are Required to Follow in 
Promulgating WQS. The only authority in the CWA that authorizes promulgation of WQS, by any entity, 
is Section 303. As such, in promulgating baseline WQS, EPA is bound by Section 303 and its implementing 
regulations in 40 CFR § 131.22. However, the proposed rule is not consistent with 40 CFR § 131.22(c), 
which holds EPA, when promulgating WQS, to the same policies, procedures, analyses, and public 
participation requirements established for states. EPA does cite explicit congressional authority to use a 
different process to promulgate baseline WQS and has not provided authority or justification for why it 
4 CWA 502(4), 33 USC§ 1362(4): "The term "municipality" means a city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or 
other public body created by or pursuant to State law and having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, or 
other wastes, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency 
under section 1288 of this title." 
s Preamble at 29506: "Specifically, the binding numeric translation procedures in proposed 40 CFR 131.XX(d)(2) would require 
the Regional Administrator to use the procedures as necessary to derive numeric translations for specific water bodies as 
needed for all purposes [emphasis added] under the CWA." 
6 CWA Section 303(c)(l), 33 USC§ 1312(c)(l): "The Governor of a State [emphasis added] or the State [emphasis added] water 
pollution control agency of such state shall .. " 
7 CWA Section 303(d)(l)(A), 33 USC§ 1312(d)(l)(A): "Each State [emphasis added] shall identify those waters within its 
boundaries for which the effluent limitations required by section 1311(b)(l)(A) and section 131l(b)(l)(B) of this title are not 
stringent..." 
CWA 303(d)(l)(C}, 33 USC§ 1312(d)(l)(C}: "Each State [emphasis added] shall establish for the waters identified in paragraph 
(l)(A) of this subsection, in accordance with the priority ranking, the total maximum daily load." 
8 CWA Se~tion 305(b), 33 USC§ 1315(b) "Each State [emphasis added] shall prepare and submit ... a report which shall include ... " 
9 42 USC§§ 7601(d) and 7661(a). 
10 Preamble at 29499: "Tribal interest in obtaining TAS and adopting their own WQS has increased in recent years, especially 
after EPA's action in 2016 to revise its interpretation of CWA section 518, which streamlined aspects of a Tribe's TAS 
application. A total of 27 of the 84 Tribes with TAS for the WQS program have been approved in the six years since then. 
Nonetheless, acquiring TAS authorities and adopting WQS is a time and resource-intensive process. At the current pace, it could 
take more than a decade for CWA-effective WQS to be put in place for all Indian reservations. 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Page 5 of 15 
should not be bound by 40 CFR § 131.22. Therefore, EPA's use of a different, special, process for the 
baseline WQS, while still relying on Section 303 for authority, would arbitrary and capricious. 
EPA's proposed rule deviates from the requirements in 40 CFR § 131.22(c) in the following areas: 
A. EPA Has Not Committed to A Triennial Review Process. Under the proposed rule, WQS revisions (e.g., 
site-specific translations of narrative criteria, changes to designated uses, variances, ONRW designations) 
will be housed on a "publicly available website," but will be made without corresponding changes to the 
federal regulations. EPA also proposes to make modifications to the translations and baseline WQS on an 
ongoing basis (see preamble at 2950411 and 2951412, which speak to the translation of narrative criteria 
on a case-by-case basis and the Regional Administrator's ability to enact designated use changes and 
variances without rulemaking revisions, respectively). Despite EPA's intent to revise aspects of the WQS 
on an ongoing basis, nowhere does the preamble describe EPA's intent to conduct triennial reviews as 
required by 40 CFR § 131.20(a).13 To be consistent with 40 CFR § 131.20(a) and 40 CFR § 131.22(c), EPA 
must provide for triennial reviews with public hearings where all applicable WQS are evaluated and 
revised as necessary. 
B. EPA's Public Notice Requirements for ONRWs Are Not Consistent with 40 CFR § 131.20{b). EPA's 
proposed WQS describe "The Regional Administrator shall issue a public notice, utilizing EPA's own 
procedures and existing Tribal public notice procedures, regarding the decision to assign a water as an 
Outstanding National Resource Water" (ONRW). The proposed process is not consistent with 40 CFR § 
131.20(b), which requires States to hold one or more public hearings for the purpose of reviewing or 
revising water quality standards. Establishment of ONRWs is a WQS since the designation dictates how 
antidegradation provisions are applied. Therefore, in order to be consistent with 40 CFR § 131.20(b) and 
40 CFR § 131.22(c), EPA must hold hearings for designating an ONRW. 
C. EPA's Use of Narrative Criteria for Toxic Pollutants Is Not Consistent with the CWA or 40 CFR § 131.11. 
EPA's proposed WQS include only narrative water quality criteria to protect designated uses, including for 
toxic pollutants. EPA's proposed WQS also specify, without additional guidance or implementation 
methods, the five broad options the Regional Administrator can use to translate the narrative criteria into 
numeric thresholds during CWA implementation. EPA has articulated that it plans to translate narrative 
criteria and make modifications on an as-needed basis rather than make modifications to the federal 
regulations. Given these details, EPA's proposed rule is not consistent with Section 303(c)(2)(B), 33 USC§ 
1313(c)(2)(B) 14, of the CWA, which outlines that states shall adopt numeric criteria for toxic pollutants. Neither 
is the rule consistent with 40 CFR § 131.11, 15 which outlines that if a state chooses to use narrative criteria for 
11 Preamble at 29504: "EPA would use these procedures to translate the narrative criteria into numeric values on a case-by-case 
basis to best reflect site-specific conditions and consideration of new and/or available information representing the latest 
sound science." 
12 Preamble at 29514: For designated use changes and variances, "Pursuant to the proposed Federal administrative procedure, 
a decision by a Regional Administrator would be final and effective upon signature without necessitating a subsequent Federal 
rulemaking revising the baseline WQS rule .... " 
13 40 CFR § 131.20(a): "States shall from time to time, but at least once every 3 years, hold public hearings for the 
purpose of reviewing applicable water quality standards." 
14 Section 1313(c)(2)(B) of the CWA: "states shall adopt criteria for all toxic pollutants listed pursuant to section 1317(a)(l) of this title 
for which criteria have been published under section 1314(a) of this title ... Such criteria shall be specific numerical criteria for such toxic 
pollutants." 
15 40 CFR § 131.11: "Where a State adopts narrative criteria for toxic pollutants to protect designated uses, the State must provide 
information identifying the method by which the State intends to regulate point source discharges of toxic pollutants on water quality 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Paee 6 of 15 
toxic pollutants, the state must provide the methods by which it intends to regulate point source discharges of 
toxic pollutants. EPA's proposed use offive different methods to derive numeric translations without additional 
guidance is not sufficiently detailed to be consistent with the CWA and the implementing regulations. 
D. EPA's Designation of All WOTUS for Traditional and Cultural Uses Is Not Consistent with 40 CFR § 
131.G(b). EPA proposes to designate all applicable WOTUS for "cultural and traditional uses" under Section 
303(c)(2)(A) of the CWA16, 33 USC § 1313(c)(2)(A). EPA has not provided a definition of cultural and 
traditional uses, nor has EPA described the process and information that EPA will use to support the 
identification and application of these uses. In the preamble at 29503, EPA describes "During the Tribal 
consultation process, many Tribes stressed the value and importance of protecting water quality at levels 
appropriate for use in various cultural and traditional activities of individual Tribes." EPA does not provide 
any further rationale or site-specific information to support its designation of a!I WOTUS for traditional 
and cultural uses. 40 CFR § 131.G(b) requires States to submit methods used and analyses conducted to 
support water quality standards. Therefore, to be consistent with 40 CFR § 131.G(b) and 40 CFR § 
131.22(c), EPA must provide information supporting its decision to designate specific waters for cultural 
and traditional uses. 
3. EPA Must Clearly Identify the Applicable Waters, Provide Opportunity to Comment on Specific 
Waters. The proposed rule narratively describes17 that the WQS will apply to WOTUS in "Indian Country" 
by identifying where the WQS will not apply, including "off-reservation allotments," "off-reservation 
dependent Indian communities," and other "Indian reservation waters." Given the lack of specificity in 
the proposed rule, EPA apparently plans to determine jurisdiction as-applied to specific lands and waters 
during CWA implementation (e.g., permits under Sections 404 or 402, Section 401 certification, Section 
305(b) assessment, Section 303(d) impairment identification, or total maximum daily load development). 
Making ad-hoc jurisdictional decisions during the permitting process, however, creates both legal and 
practical concerns. 
First, EPA does not have general authority under the CWA to, on a permit-by-permit or CWA 
implementation action-by-implementation action basis, determine where the federally promulgated 
baseline WQS apply. While an administrative agency may have discretion in whether it determines 
jurisdiction based on rulemaking or an adjudicative procedure, that discretion exists only if Congress has 
not spoken.18 Congress has directed EPA to make jurisdictional determinations for application of the CWA 
to areas under tribal authority under Section 518 when a tribe seeks TAS. EPA has interpreted this 
limited segments based on such narrative criteria. Such information may be included as part of the standards or may be included in 
documents generated by the State in response to the Water Quality Planning and Management Regulations (40 CFR part 130)." 
16 CWA section 303(c)(2)(A), 33 USC§ 1313: Such standards shall be such as to protect the public health or welfare, 
enhance the quality of water and serve the purposes of this chapter. Such standards shall be established taking into 
consideration their use and value for public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, and 
agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and also taking into consideration their use and value for navigation. 
17 40 CFR § 131.XX: [A]II waters of the United States in Indian country except: (1) Indian reservation waters for which EPA has 
promulgated other Federal water quality standards; 2) Indian reservation waters where EPA has explicitly found that a state has 
jurisdiction to adopt water quality standards or authorized a Tribe to adopt WQS pursuant to 40 CFR § 131.8, and where EPA has 
approved the applicable state or Tribal water quality standards; 3) Indian country waters on off-reservation allotments and off-
reservation dependent Indian communities; and 4) Indian reservation waters of Tribes for which the Regional Administrator 
approves an exclusion from application of the standards in this section, informed by consultation with the Tribe. EPA will maintain 
a publicly available list of Indian reservation waters that are excluded [emphasis added] from coverage of the baseline water 
quality standards in this section at [EPA website to be inserted in final rule]. 
18Michigan v. EPA, 268 F.3d 1075, 1087 (2001). 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Page 7 of 15 
congressional direction to make jurisdictional determinations through its promulgation of 40 CFR §§ 
130.16 and 131.8. 
EPA's reliance on Section 303(c)(4) as authority for this proposed rule, and the fact that Section 303(c)(4) 
only applies to "States" [and authorized tribes], binds EPA to the same procedural requirements tribes 
must meet to determine tribal jurisdiction during the TAS process in Section 518(e). Using a process for 
making jurisdictional determinations different from the process outlined by Congress is arbitrary and 
capricious as being contrary to law.19 
Further, by not following the same procedural requirements EPA requires of the tribes for jurisdictional 
determinations, EPA sets itself up for arbitrary decision-making. EPA must "engage in reasoned decision-
making" or its actions will be set aside if found to be "arbitrary or capricious."20 Both 40 CFR §§ 130.16 
and 131.8 require tribes to submit "a map or legal description of the area over which the tribe asserts 
authority to regulate surface water" and a statement that "describes the basis for the Tribes assertion of 
authority." EPA has not outlined a rationale or justification for why it does not have to determine 
jurisdiction through the same process or use the same information it uses in every other jurisdictional 
determination it makes under the CWA. To determine jurisdiction in a manner different from what EPA 
has prescribed for tribes themselves and without the information EPA has previously deemed necessary 
sets the agency up for arbitrary decision-making. 
Second, Section 303(c)(4)21, which EPA cites for its authority to promulgate baseline WQS, requires EPA 
to identify the specific "navigable waters involved" (see 40 CFR 131 Subpart D for examples of federally 
promulgated WQS and lists of specific waters). Identification of the "navigable waters involved" is 
essential for states and tribes to effectively evaluate the proposed rule to determine whether EPA's 
interpretation of jurisdiction is consistent with state and tribal understanding of jurisdiction. EPA and 
the Tribes only have authority where the State of Wyoming does not, and vice versa.22 Assuming EPA 
has authority to promulgate the baseline WQS, EPA does not have authority to promulgate WQS on 
lands where the State has jurisdiction without making the requisite determinations under Section 
303(c). Even on lands or waterbodies with questionable jurisdiction, EPA would be prohibited from 
taking action.23 
Further, not only is the proposed rule not in compliance with Section 303 of the CWA, but by not 
identifying the "navigable waters involved" and jurisdictional boundaries, it is also unconstitutionally 
vague24. Identification of specific waters, along with a rationale, alleviates ambiguity and potential 
inconsistencies among terms used in the authorizing statute, implementing regulations, and how those 
terms have been interpreted by the courts. With jurisdictional issues and the involvement of state 
sovereignty and property rights, any proposed law affecting those rights must be clear enough to put the 
affected party on notice25• This proposed rule fails to provide that notice, and lacks the requisite precision 
19See Michigan v. EPA, 268 F.3d 1075, 1088 (2001). 
20Dep't of Homeland Security v. Regents of the Univ. Of Cal., 140 S. Ct. 1891, 1905 (2020). 
21 Section 303(c)(4) of the CWA, 33 USC§ 1313{c)(4): "The Administrator shall promptly prepare and publish 
proposed regulations setting forth a revised or new water quality standard for the navigable waters involved" 
22 Michigan v. EPA, 268 F.3d 1075, 1085 (D.C.Cir. 2001). 
23 See Michigan v. EPA, 268 F.3d 1075, 1087 (D.C. Cir. 2001) 
24See F.C.C. v. Fox Television Stations, Inc., 567 U.S. 239, 253 (2012). 
2sld. 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
P~ge 8 of 15 
to avoid EPA enforcing the rule in an arbitrary manner when implementing the rule through the permitting 
process. 
Finally, EPA's proposed rule fails to outline any sort of notice and comment opportunity for as-applied 
jurisdictional decisions. It is assumed that such determinations will be made ad-hoc for each CWA decision 
being made under the proposed rule. By skipping a jurisdictional determination at the beginning, EPA is 
disallowing any appeal of its WQS jurisdiction until it is implemented. Certainly, CWA implementation is 
not the appropriate venue to determine applicability of WQS and jurisdictional authority. Without clarity, 
states, EPA, and authorized tribes may all assert authority and issue permits for the same activities, 
creating confusion for permittees and other stakeholders as to which WQS and permit limits or conditions 
apply. 
EPA should recognize both the importance and difficulty of identifying the applicable waters given EPA's 
recent history of incorrectly defining Indian Reservation boundaries (see State of Wyoming v. USEPA, 849 
F.3d 861 (10th Cir. 2017), which vacated a determination EPA made under the Clean Air Act regarding the 
Wind River Reservation boundary in Wyoming. In the years following the decision, WDEQ and EPA Region 
8 have been using Wyoming's official Wind River Reservation boundary map for purposes of determining 
EPA versus Wyoming jurisdiction with respect to CWA Section 404 and 402 permitting and for CWA 
Section 401 certifications. However, EPA's assertion of jurisdiction over all "trust lands" and "land owned 
in fee simple by non-Indians," whether on the reservation or not, as articulated in the proposed rule, could 
upset the current process that has taken several years of deliberations to achieve. This is especially true 
considering the more fluid fee-to-trust land acquisitions that would keep the jurisdictional boundaries for 
purposes of the proposed rule in perpetual flux, creating additional uncertainty. 
4. EPA's Proposed Timeframe of 90-Days for Tribes to Opt-Out of Coverage May Be Too Short, 
Stakeholders Should Be Provided an Opportunity to Comment on a Tribes' Decision to Opt-Out of 
Coverage Under the Baseline WQS, Tribes Should Have the Option to Withdraw from Coverage Under 
the Federal Baseline WQS. The proposed rule outlines that tribes will have 90 days after the final rule is 
published in the Federal Register to opt out of coverage and that the federally promulgated WQS will 
become effective 120 days after the final rule is published in the Federal Register. After this initial 90-day 
period has ended, tribes are not provided a mechanism to either "opt-in" or "opt-out" of coverage. EPA 
states in the preamble at 29517-29518 that, "after the final rule goes into effect for CWA purposes, the 
Regional Administrator generally would no longer exclude additional Indian reservation waters from 
coverage by the baseline WQS," suggesting that even if new areas come under tribal authority, the 
baseline WQS would apply. The proposed rule also does not require tribes or EPA to provide the public 
with an opportunity to comment on a tribe's decision to "opt-in" or "opt-out" of coverage. 
Given the significance of federal promulgation of WQS, 90-days does not seem to be a sufficient 
timeframe for a tribe to evaluate the baseline WQS, determine implications, and decide whether they 
would like to opt-in or opt-out of coverage. It would certainly be challenging for a state to meet this 
timeline and have the necessary consultations with the appropriate decision makers and affected parties. 
While the WDEQ cannot speak for tribal procedures, we encourage the EPA to ensure it has adequately 
consulted with tribes on feasible timelines. Further, not providing a mechanism for tribes to opt-in or opt-
out of coverage once this initial 90-day period closes does not seem consistent with tribal sovereignty, 
and we encourage EPA to consult with tribes on this subject. Finally, an opportunity for the public to 
comment on a tribe's decision to either opt-in or opt-out of coverage should be provided to ensure that 
all relevant information has been considered. 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Page 9 of 15 
5. EPA's Use of Narrative Criteria and Broad Translation Options Are Not Sufficient to Ensure Compliance 
with the CWA. EPA's proposed WQS include only narrative water quality criteria to protect designated 
uses (e.g., primary contact recreation, aquatic life, and cultural and traditional uses). The rule specifies 
five options that the Regional Administrator can use to translate the narrative criteria into numeric 
thresholds during CWA implementation. Beyond the five options, EPA has neither included any specifics 
for how numeric translators will be derived nor identified any guidance that will be followed to ensure that the 
translations are made in a consistent and reproducible way. EPA has not described who will be deriving the 
translators (e.g., permitting staff, water quality standards staff, 401 program, etc.) and how it will ensure 
consistent translations between CWA programs. EPA has not described the spatial extent to which the 
translations will apply or whether the translations will be broadly applicable or specific to each CWA activity. 
Despite the lack of specificity on narrative criteria implementation, EPA describes in the preamble at 29515 
that EPA will use its oversight authority to ensure compliance with WQS26. Presumably, EPA would also use its 
"neighboring jurisdiction" review process under 40 CFR § 121.1327 to evaluate individual CWA 401 
certifications issued by states to determine compliance with the federally promulgated baseline WQS. 
EPA's threat to use its oversight authority to ensure that state and authorized tribes' NPDES permits comply 
with the federally promulgated WQS is both irrational and alarming. First, unless a specific CWA 
implementation activity has occurred that prompted EPA to translate the narrative criteria, there would be no 
translation available that states and authorized tribes could use to ensure compliance with the WQS. Second, 
even in cases where numeric translations were available, since the translation procedures are not actually 
"binding," states and authorized tribes would not necessarily have to use EPA's translations because they are 
not WQS. Regardless, the ambiguity associated with EPA's proposed narrative criteria will lead to significant 
regulatory uncertainty for state and tribal permitting authorities and the regulated community, delaying 
issuance of CWA Section 402 and 404 permits as well as CWA Section 401 certifications, because states and 
EPA may disagree in how to interpret the narrative criteria. In such cases, a long dispute/resolution process is 
likely. 
EPA must identify an alternative approach to establishing water quality criteria so that the criteria are binding, 
transparent, and can be consistently implemented. 
6. EPA Must Use Established Procedures to Promulgate WQS. EPA Must Streamline Access to the 
Baseline WQS and Public Notice Processes for Revisions and Translations. EPA is proposing to 
promulgate WQS for a subset of WOTUS under tribal authority. However, entities interested in 
understanding what WQS are applicable to specific waters will not be able to rely on the proposed rule, 
neither will they be able to use the public notice procedures associated with changes to the federal 
regulations to comment on translations of, or revisions to, the baseline WQS. As proposed, interested 
persons may need to review numerous webpages and documents to identify the applicable WQS, 
26 Preamble at 29515: "NPDES permits must ensure compliance with the applicable WQS of all affected waters. See CWA sections 
301(b)(l)(C) and 402(b)(l)(A); 40 CFR 122.4(a), (d) introductory text, and (d)(l). The proposed rule would allow EPA to ensure that 
NP DES permits issued by authorized states, Tribes, or territories for discharges to waters upstream from Indian reservation waters 
comply with the final baseline WQS. If a permitting authority failed to meet this requirement, EPA could use its oversight authority of 
approved programs, which includes the authority to review permits." 
27 40 CFR § 121.13: "The Regional Administrator shall review the application, certification, and any supplementation 
information provided in accordance with §§ 121.11 and 121.12 and if the Regional Administrator determines there is reason to 
believe that a discharge may affect the quality of the waters of any State or States other than the State in which the discharge 
originates, the Regional Administrator shall, no later than 30 days of the date of receipt of the application and certification from 
the licensing or permitting agency as provided in§§ 121.11, so notify each affected State, the licensing or permitting agency, 
and the applicant. 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Page 10 of 15 
translations, and modifications, because EPA plans to provide all of the following on publicly available 
websites: (1) areas that are not part of the federal promulgation; (2) areas where tribes have chosen to 
opt-out of coverage; (3) variances established by the Regional Administrator; (4) changes to the designated 
uses made by the Regional Administrator; (5) ONRWs designated by the Regional Administrator; and (6) the 
Regional Administrator's "translations" of narrative water quality criteria that have been made during CWA 
implementation, including but not limited to 402 permit development, 404 permit development, 401 
certifications, water quality assessments, identification of impaired waters, and TMDLs. 
Reviewing and providing comment on the baseline WQS, translations of narrative criteria, modifications 
to the baseline WQS, and designation of ONRWs is even more cumbersome under the proposed rule. An 
interested party would need to track, receive notices, review, and potentially provide comments via (1) 
the Federal Register public process; (2) public notice and hearings provided by the Regional Administrator 
regarding proposed revisions to designated uses and/or water quality criteria; (3) public notices 
associated with Section 40228 and 404 permits, 401 certifications, water quality assessments, 303(d) 
Listings, and/or TMDLs that include translations of narrative criteria made by the Regional Administrator; 
and (4) public notices associated with designations of ONRWs made by the Regional Administrator. 
By comparison, states and authorized tribes typically use a standardized rule revision and public review process 
when considering any modifications to their water quality standards. And although states and authorized tribes 
use narrative standards, their use is on a much more limited basis. In addition, when states and authorized 
tribes translate narrative criteria for use during CWA implementation, they often develop detailed and publicly 
vetted implementation procedures. 
If EPA has authority to promulgate baseline WQS, EPA should use the established Federal Register29 process 
and use the associated public notice procedures plus public hearings to take comment on the proposal as well 
as any future modifications. Using this process would be more consistent with past precedent and the 
procedures used by states and authorized tribes and would ensure EPA is fulfilling all public participation 
requirements. Alternatively, at a minimum, EPA must consolidate all the WQS information for particular areas 
under tribal jurisdiction so that it is clear what WQS and translations have been made for particular 
waterbodies and waterbody segments. In addition, EPA must provide a consistent public process for interested 
persons to provide feedback on revisions and translations associated with the baseline WQS. 
7. EPA Must Identify the Evaluation Process for ONRWs, Evaluate Implications of Designating an ONRW, 
and Revise the Public Notice Requirements for ONRWs. EPA's proposed baseline WQS at 40 CFR § 
131.XX(f)(4)(i) describes "any person or entity may nominate," in writing, why "a specific Indian 
reservation water with applicable baseline water quality standards should be assigned as an Outstanding 
National Resource Water (ONRW)." ONRW waters are described at proposed 40 CFR § 131.XX(e)(3) as 
"waters of national and Tribal parks and wildlife refuges and waters of exceptional recreational, 
ecological, or cultural significance, that water quality shall be maintained and protected." 40 CFR § 
131.XX(f)(4)(ii) describes "The Regional Administrator shall determine with written agreement from the 
Tribe whether the nominated water qualifies as an Outstanding National Resource Water as described in 
paragraph (f)(4) of this section." The rule does not further elaborate on the criteria that the Regional 
Administrator will use to determine whether a waterbody should be designated as an ONRW, the process 
28 Preamble at 29508: "For federally issued NPDES permits, for example, EPA would describe in the permit fact sheet or 
statement of basis how it used the numeric values translated from the applicable baseline narrative criteria to derive WQBELs." 
29 40 CFR § 131.31, Federally Promulgated Water Quality Standards 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Page 11 of 15 
for tribal consideration and concurrence, nor the type of analysis that would be conducted to determine 
the potential implications of designating the ONRW. 
Assigning and maintaining tier 3 antidegradation protections for waters such as ONRWs is a significant 
WQS action with wide-ranging implications. The designations and associated protections may preclude 
new or expanded discharges upstream of the ONRW and may require action on the part of nonpoint 
sources30• Further, identifying current water quality of ONRWs and evaluating whether degradation may 
have occurred requires significant resources. 
Wyoming has a number of "ONRW-equivalent" waters. WDEQ and stakeholders have invested 
considerable resources into ensuring that the quality of these waters is maintained. Some of Wyoming's 
"ONRW-equivalent" waters are located upstream and downstream of areas where the federally 
promulgated baseline WQS could apply. For at least one downstream water, WDEQ has worked 
cooperatively with EPA to ensure the Wyoming's WQS antidegradation protections are met via WDEQ-
and EPA-issued NPDES permits. Even after many years and significant investment in resources, WDEQ and 
EPA are still working collaboratively to obtain the information needed to inform development of permit 
effluent limits. Should additional ONRW waters be designated, the level of complexity and effort to ensure 
protections would undoubtedly compound. Based on WDEQ's experience conducting these activities, it is 
unlikely that EPA regions are equipped to add these new expanded roles and responsibilities with current 
resources and workloads. 
As such, it is essential that before designating a new ONRW, a thorough evaluation of the potential 
implications is conducted such that states, tribes, EPA, and other stakeholders can fully grasp the 
consequences and impacts. If the proposed rule is finalized, EPA must include the evaluation process 
within the WQS. 
8. Proposed Narrative Criteria Regarding Adverse Impacts to Hydrologic Conditions May Create 
Confusion Regarding Scope of CWA. Among EPA's proposed narrative water quality criteria is a hydrologic 
integrity narrative31. Although some states and authorized tribes may have authority over the hydrologic 
integrity of surface waters through their WQS, Section 101(g) of the CWA, 33 USC§ 1251, makes it clear 
that Congress did not intend for the CWA to interfere with state authorities to allocate quantities of 
water32• Given that hydrologic integrity is integrally linked with allocation of water and other hydrologic 
modifications, WDEQ is concerned the hydro logic conditions narrative will hinder potential water projects 
or implicate the legal diversion of water for beneficial uses (including diversions from waters under state 
jurisdiction) as causing or contributing to a designated use impairment. In circumstances where neither 
EPA nor the tribe has authority over allocation of water, the narrative will only cause confusion regarding 
30 Proposed 40 CFR 131.XX(f)(4), "For Indian reservation waters assigned as Outstanding Aquatic Resource Waters, the Regional 
Administrator shall ensure, through the application of appropriate controls on point and Tribal-regulated non point pollutant 
sources, that water quality is maintained and protected. No new or expanded regulated discharges will be allowed to 
Outstanding National Resource Waters or tributaries to such waters that would result in lower water quality unless it is on a 
short term and temporary basis, consistent with paragraph (f)(4)(v) of this section." 
31 Proposed 40 CFR 131.XX(d)(l)(ii): "All waters shall be free from adverse impacts to the chemical, physical or hydrologic 
[emphasis added], or biological integrity caused by pollutants or pollution that prevent attainment of applicable designated 
uses." 
32 Section l0l(g) of the CWA, 33 USC§ 1251: "It is the policy of Congress that the authority of each State to allocate quantities 
of water within its jurisdiction shall not be superseded, abrogated or otherwise impaired by this chapter. It is the further policy 
of Congress that nothing in this chapter shall be constructed to supersede or abrogate rights to quantities of water which have 
been established by any State." 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Page 12 of 15 
the scope of the CWA. Given these concerns, EPA must remove any provisions related to hydrologic 
integrity since it is outside the scope and authority of the CWA and the EPA. 
9. EPA's Proposed Rule Creates Confusion Regarding Requirements to Address Nonpoint Sources of 
Pollution. Proposed 40 CFR § 131.XX(e) describes that in administering the federal baseline 
antidegradation policy for High Quality Waters, "the Regional Administrator shall assure that there shall 
be achieved the highest statutory and regulatory requirements for all new and existing point sources and 
all Tribal-regulated cost effective and reasonable best management practices for nonpoint source 
control." Although this language mimics the language in 40 CFR § 131.12(a)(2)33, the proposed rule does 
not define "tribal-regulated nonpoint sources," elaborate on what statutory authority and regulated 
requirements might be applicable, or describe that there may be no statutory and regulatory 
requirements for nonpoint sources. 40 CFR § 131.XX(f) adds to the confusion by describing that "Before 
allowing any degradation of high water quality, the Regional Administrator shall identify point sources 
and Tribal-regulated nonpoint sources that discharge to, or otherwise impact, the receiving water." This 
provision suggests that EPA will identify non point sources, regardless of whether a tribe has authority to 
regulate nonpoint sources. 
Although EPA cites the 1994 Davies memorandum that outlines "[a]lthough there are no Federally 
enforceable requirements for control of nonpoint sources in the Clean Water Act" and "Section 
131.12(a)(2) does not REQUIRE a State to establish BMPs for nonpoint sources where such BMP 
requirements do not exist," the proposed rule will undoubtedly cause confusion. Therefore, if EPA 
finalizes the federal baseline WQS, EPA should either remove these provisions or both define "tribal-
regulated nonpoint sources" and clarify that nonpoint source controls only need to be addressed if the 
tribe has authority over nonpoint sources. The WDEQ encourages EPA to ensure that it has adequately 
consulted with tribes on this subject to ensure the rule does not pre-empt a tribe's determination of how 
it may wish to address nonpoint sources on tribal lands. 
10. EPA Did Not Conduct Sufficient Local Consultation, as Required in Executive Order 1313234• In the 
Federal Register notice, EPA concludes that Executive Order 13132 does not apply to this action. 
Executive Order 13132 outlines that the Agency cannot promulgate rules with federalism 
implications,35 including those that pre-empt state and local laws, unless the agency provides all 
affected State and local officials notice and an opportunity for appropriate participation in the 
proceedings. EPA's proposed rules potentially promulgate WQS for areas where tribal, state, and 
local officials may not agree about authority. Moreover, the WQS will likely have implications for 
point sources (e.g., municipal discharges, industries) as well as nonpoint sources upstream of tribal 
waters subject to the baseline WQS. As such, the proposed revisions have the potential to conflict 
with state and local laws and authorities. 
EPA described in the preamble that on September 15, 2021, they provided an overview of the draft 
regulations for the Association of Clean Water Administrators (ACWA) Monitoring, Standards and 
33 40 CFR § 131.12(a)(2): that in allowing lowering of water quality, the "state shall assure that there shall be achieved the 
highest statutory and regulatory requirements for all new and existing point sources and all cost-effective and reasonable best 
management practices for non point sources," 
34 Executive Order 13132, Federalism: https://www.govmfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1999-08-10/pdf/99-]077Q r,rtf 
35 Federalism implications are defined as having substantial direct effects on states or local governments (individually or 
collectively), on the relationship between the national government and the states, or on the distribution of power and 
responsibilities among the various levels of government. 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Page 13 of 15 
Assessment Subcommittee. EPA did not describe any additional consultation with elected state and local 
officials, nor is WDEQ aware of any efforts made by EPA to engage beyond water quality management 
agencies. Due to the potential implications of the proposed revisions to local and state laws, EPA is 
required under Executive Order 13132 to consult with state and local officials as part of the regulation 
revision process. 
11. EPA's State Consultation Process Was Insufficient. EPA has been contemplating promulgation of 
federal baseline WQS for more than 20 years. The preamble states that EPA released the 2016 Advanced 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPRM) and that 11 states commented on the ANPRM. On September 
15, 2021, EPA provided an overview of the draft regulations for the ACWA Monitoring, Standards and 
Assessment Subcommittee. One ANPRM that garnered comments from 11 states and one listening 
session via ACWA cannot be considered substantive engagement on a rule with such significant 
implications. In addition, while ACWA is an important national organization that represents states, 
engagement with ACWA should be used in addition to, not instead of, engagement with individual states. 
Further, EPA has not addressed the concerns identified by states that provided feedback on the ANPRM, 
including Wyoming. In response to the 2016 ANPRM, WDEQ raised concerns about differences between 
the baseline WQS and Wyoming's WQS, the inability of baseline WQS to sufficiently reflect site-specific 
conditions, a lack of resources to implement and modify the baseline WQS, potential impacts of the 
baseline WQS on EPA resources in Region 8, and a lack of sufficient public input into the baseline WQS. 
Other states raised concerns about EPA's authority and resources to promulgate and effectively 
implement baseline WQS; differences between the baseline standards and neighboring states' standards; 
impacts to upstream dischargers; jurisdictional issues; criteria for establishing ONRWs; triennial review 
requirements; and dispute mechanisms for waters with shared jurisdiction. However, none of these 
comments were addressed in EPA's proposed rule, and WDEQ finds itself repeating the comments it 
submitted in 2016. It is clear that EPA gave little credence to the feedback Wyoming and other states 
provided in an attempt to help EPA craft a more effective and implementable rule. 
Cooperative federalism, whereby states, tribes, and EPA work together, is essential to successful 
development and implementation of WQS under the CWA. Cooperative federalism requires EPA to more 
thoroughly integrate states and tribes into the regulation development and revision process. A meaningful 
cooperative federalism and nation-to-nation consultation process with states and tribes is critical to 
develop an implementable rule. 
12. EPA Should Formalize/Codify Tribal Participation in Baseline WQS Implementation. The proposed 
rule authorizes the Regional Administrator to make many decisions regarding interpretation and 
implementation of the baseline WQS without a binding tribal consultation process (e.g., translations of 
narrative criteria, water quality assessments, TMDL development). While WDEQ recognizes that EPA has 
policies regarding tribal consultation, these policies are not legally binding and are therefore subject to 
deviation. From a state co-regulator perspective, WDEQ would be concerned with this approach, and we 
recommend EPA ensure that adequate consultation with tribes on this subject has been conducted. 
13. EPA Must Provide an Alternative Dispute Process to 40 CFR § 131.7. 40 CFR § 131.7, Dispute 
resolution mechanism, was added to the federal regulations in 1991 to provide a process for the Regional 
Administrator to resolve disputes between states and authorized tribes where there were differences in 
WQS on common bodies of water. In the case of the baseline WQS, the process is no longer appropriate 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Page 14 of 15 
because the Regional Administrator is responsible for translating and revising the baseline WQS. EPA 
describes this lack of applicability in the preamble at 2950936• Given the scale of the federally promulgated 
baseline WQS, as well as the lack of site-specific information that was used to inform the WQS, if EPA 
finalizes the proposed rule, a dispute resolution process must be included to ensure differences in WQS 
between states and EPA can be addressed objectively, fairly, and consistently. Allowing the Regional 
Administrator to both promulgate WQS and be the arbiter of disputes is neither objective, fair, nor 
consistent. 
14. EPA's Economic Analysis Was Incomplete. EPA's economic analysis (EA) was based on potential 
impacts to NPDES discharges within a 5-mile radius, which identified 57 major NPDES discharges. EPA 
specifically identified only 10 of these facilities in the EA. EPA described on page 6 of the EA that minor 
discharges were not included because they "typically do not have monitoring requirements for toxic 
pollutants, that these dischargers do not contribute significant loads, and that the potential for these 
facilities to incur costs is low." Point source discharges receive effluent limits and incur costs based on the 
WQS of the downstream receiving waters, regardless of the size of the discharge. WDEQ estimates that 
21 and 122 facilities are permitted through Wyoming's delegated CWA Section 402 program upstream of 
the Wind River Indian Reservation in Wyoming and the Crow Reservation in Montana, respectively. All of 
these facilities, including the minor discharges, may be impacted by the proposed rule and should be 
considered in the economic analysis. In addition, despite stating that "attainment of the baseline WQS 
would likely depend on additional actions such as nonpoint sources controls," and the rule "may lead to 
nonpoint sources incurring costs as an indirect result of the proposed baseline WQS," EPA did not include 
any costs associated with non point source controls. EPA should consider and include estimates associated 
with nonpoint sources. Finally, the economic impacts of designating ONRWs must be included, as must 
costs associated with 404 permits and 401 certifications. 
15. EPA Must Work with the US Army Corps to Determine Jurisdiction Before Implementation. EPA, 
before initiating or authorizing any CWA activities in areas with federally promulgated WQS, must work 
with the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), the primary federal agency responsible for 
identifying WOTUS, to determine whether a water is a WOTUS. This is important to ensure WOTUS are 
identified consistently, particularly given the Supreme Court's recent Sackett decision. This step is also 
critical to ensure that EPA's actions are consistent with the scope of the CWA. 
16. The Proposed Rule Does Specifically Address Wetlands. EPA's proposed WQS apply to all WOTUS in 
Indian Country. Since the proposed rules are silent on the subject of wetlands, WDEQ presumes EPA 
intends for the assigned designated uses of primary contact recreation, aquatic life, and cultural and 
traditional uses to be applicable to all WOTUS, including wetlands. WDEO/WQD recommends EPA clarify 
the applicability of the proposed rule to wetlands and ensure the proposed WQS are appropriate for 
wetlands. 
WDEQ appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the proposed revisions. Given WDEQ's 
extensive concerns, WDEQ recommends EPA withdraw the proposed rule and conduct meaningful 
engagement with states and tribes. To this end, WDEQ is ready to engage further with EPA and tribes on 
this important issue. Please contact Lindsay Patterson, Surface Water Quality Standards Supervisor, at 
307-777-7079 or Lindsay.Patterson@wyo.gov, should you have any questions regarding these comments. 
36 Preamble at 29509: "Although 40 CFR § 131.7 does not apply to situations with different Federal and state WQS on a shared 
water body, EPA could utilize procedural steps similar to those laid out in that section where appropriate to work with the 
relevant parties in a neutral fashion in an effort to resolve the issues involved." 

Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Promulgate Baseline WQS 
Page 15 of 15 
Todd Parfitt, Director 
cc: 
Jennifer Zygmunt, Water Quality Division Administrator 
David Waterstreet, Watershed Protection Section Manager 
Brandon Gebhart, Wyoming State Engineer 
Chris Brown, Attorney General's Office 
Abigail Boudewyns, Attorney General's Office 
Kit Wendtland, Office of the Governor 
Nolan Rap, Office of the Governor 
Anita Roman, Office of the Governor

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0218 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0258 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Peter Capossela, Attorney at Law, PC 
 
 
Post Office Box 10643 
 
August 3, 2023 
Eugene, Oregon 97440 
(541) 505-4883 
 
Page 1 
pcapossela@nu-world.com 
 
 
Submitted via https://www.regulations.gov 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 3, 2023 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Technology, Standards and Health Division 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW MC 4305T 
Washington D.C. 20460 
 
RE:  
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
  
To the Environmental Protection Agency: 
 
 
I represent the Great Plains Tribal Water Alliance, Inc.  I write on behalf of the Board of 
Directors of the Alliance to comment on the proposed rule for Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations.   
 
 
The Tribal Water Alliance is a non-profit, inter-Tribal organization chartered for the 
purposes of protecting the water rights of the Great Plains Tribes reserved in Treaties with the 
United States, and for advising the Great Plains Tribal Chairman’s Association on policies 
affecting water.  The Board of Directors of the Tribal Water Alliance is comprised of the Standing 
Rock Sioux, Rosebud Sioux, Oglala Sioux, Flandreau Santee, Lower Brule and Cheyenne River 
Sioux Tribes.   
 
 
The Tribal Water Alliance offers qualified support for the proposed rule.  All waters 
traversing, bordering, or put to use on trust land or in Indian communities should be protected by 
water quality standards.  Native sovereignty contemplates that Tribal water quality standards 
govern, and EPA should continue to actively support Tribes with the development of water quality 
standards.  Funding should be increased.  In the meantime, federal baseline water quality standards 
are appropriate for those Tribes that agree to their application. 
 
 
The Tribal Water Alliance believes that water bodies on trust allotments or Tribal lands 
outside of recognized Reservation boundaries should be also protected by federal baseline 
standards.  The proposed rule excludes those waters.  It should be revised to ensure the potential 
application of baseline standards for the protection of water throughout Indian Country, including 
off-Reservation trust allotments or Tribal land.   
 
 
This affects many Great Plains Tribes. See e,g, Rosebud Sioux Tribe v. Kneip, 430 U.S. 
584 (1977) (resulting in trust allotments outside of current Rosebud Reservation boundaries); 
United States ex rel Cook v. Parkinson, 552 F.2d 120 (8th Cir. 1975) (trust allotments in Bennet 

Peter Capossela, Attorney at Law, PC 
 
 
Post Office Box 10643 
 
August 3, 2023 
Eugene, Oregon 97440 
(541) 505-4883 
 
Page 2 
pcapossela@nu-world.com 
County, S.D.); DeCoteau v. District County Court, 420 U.S. 425 (1975) (Sisseton-Wahpeton 
Oyate trust allotments no longer within a Reservation).   
 
 
 
The proposed rule should also more explicitly recognize the role of Indigenous traditional 
ecological knowledge (ITEK), for the application of federal baseline water quality standards as 
well as the development of Tribal water quality standards.  Any final rule should eliminate any 
limits to the use of ITEK by Tribes in the WQS process.   
 
 
Finally, the Great Plains Tribal Water Alliance encourages all agencies, including EPA, to 
thoroughly fulfill the obligation to consult with the Indian Nations.  This is an on-going challenge.   
 
The proposed rule contemplates on-going Tribal consultation for application of federal 
baseline standards on Indian Reservations.  EPA actually restricted Tribal consultation on the 
proposed rule to the time period for public comment. That had the effect of limiting consultation, 
and confusing Tribal consultation with public comment.    
 
There is no conflict between the government’s obligation to consult with the Indian Nations 
and the notice and comment requirements of the APA.  EPA should clarify that Tribal consultations 
will be considered for all actions affecting Tribes, and are not reliant upon APA notice and 
comment when issuing regulations affecting Tribal water.     
 
Nation-to-Nation consultation is a Treaty right for the Great Plains Tribes.  Article 5 of the 
Fort Laramie Treaty of 1868 states in part “[t]he United States agrees… to keep an office open at 
all times for the purpose of prompt and diligent inquiry into such matters of complaint by and 
against said Indians.”  15 Stat. 636.  The Treaty obligation for Nation-to-Nation consultation 
applies to the proposed rule.  The agency violated the Fort Laramie Treaty by unilaterally imposing 
deadlines in order to overlap Tribal consultation with public notice and comment under the APA.  
The rule should be developed and implemented through a consultative process, not short time 
frames dictated by irrelevant considerations.   
 
On behalf of the Board of Directors of the Great Plains Tribal Water Alliance, Inc., I thank 
you for your consideration.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Very truly yours, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Peter Capossela 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attorney at Law

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0246 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
August 3, 2023  
  
Mr. James Ray 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
Office of Science and Technology, Standards and Health Protection Division 
Mail Code 4305T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
  
RE:  Comments on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Proposed Rule 
to Establish Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
  
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
  
Dear Mr. Ray:  
  
These comments are submitted on behalf of the Wisconsin Paper Council (WPC), 
Wisconsin Manufacturers and Commerce (WMC), and the Midwest Food Products 
Association (MWFPA).  
WPC is the premier trade association in Wisconsin that advocates for the papermaking 
industry before regulatory bodies, and state and federal legislatures to achieve positive 
policy outcomes. WPC also works to educate the public about the social, environmental, 
and economic importance of paper, pulp, and forestry production in Wisconsin and 
throughout the Midwest. The pulp and paper sector employs over 30,000 people in 
Wisconsin and has an annual payroll of $2.5 billion. Wisconsin is the number one paper-
producing state in the United States, with the output of paper manufactured products 
estimated to be over $18 billion.  
WMC is the largest general business association in Wisconsin, representing 
approximately 3,800 member companies of all sizes, and from every sector of the 
economy. Since 1911, WMC’s mission has been to make Wisconsin the most competitive 
state in the nation to do business. WMC members depend on fair and predictable 
environmental standards that do not unduly target or harm Wisconsin businesses.  
MWFPA is a trade association founded in 1905 representing the food processing industry 
in the states of Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Illinois. MWFPA’s purpose includes advocating 
on public policy issues including food safety, workforce, and environmental regulations. 

 
2  
  
Wisconsin has been delegated authority by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
pursuant to the Clean Water Act to issue wastewater discharge permits. The Wisconsin 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) issues these permits pursuant to the Wisconsin 
Pollutant Discharge Elimination (WPDES) permit program. Many or our members operate 
in conformance with WPDES permits, which include provisions for compliance with 
applicable water quality criteria. 
EPA is proposing to create federal baseline water quality standards (WQS), with certain 
exceptions, for Indian reservation waters that currently do not have Clean Water Act 
(CWA) water quality standards. WQS include designated uses, water quality criteria, and 
antidegradation policies. EPA notes, however, that “Tribes are encouraged to seek 
authority to administer their own WQS program under the [Clean Water] Act’s provisions 
for eligible Tribes to be treated in a similar manner as states (TAS authority).” EPA’s 
proposed baseline WQS would not apply to where Tribes with TAS authority have EPA-
approved WQS.  
 
Nationally, EPA notes that this rule would apply to more than 250 reservations, containing 
approximately 76,000 of rivers and streams, and about 1.9 million acres of lakes and other 
surface waters.  
 
Wisconsin has eleven federally recognized tribes. These include:  
 
• 
Bad River Band of Lake Superior Chippewa 
• 
Ho-Chunk Nation 
• 
Lac Courte Oreilles Band of Lake Superior Chippewa 
• 
Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa 
• 
Menominee Tribe of Wisconsin 
• 
Oneida Nation 
• 
Forest County Potawatomi 
• 
Red Cliff Band of Lake Superior Chippewa 
• 
St. Croix Chippewa 
• 
Sokaogon Chippewa (Mole Lake) 
• 
Stockbridge-Munsee 
 
According to EPA’s website, the Bad River Band of Lake Superior Chippewa, the Lac du  
Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa and the Sokaogon Chippewa Community 
have TAS authority and have EPA-approved WQS (see EPA Actions on Tribal Water 
Quality Standards and Contacts | US EPA). Thus, EPA’s proposed rule would not apply 
to these Tribes. The baseline standards, however, would apply to other Tribes in 
Wisconsin. Thus, this rule will have a significant impact on Wisconsin Tribes and other 
entities.  
 
In fact, EPA notes that WQS would be used to develop discharge limits for facilities that 
discharge into or upstream of tribal waters. EPA specifically lists “industries discharging 
pollutants that may affect surface waters on Indian reservations currently without CWA-
effective WQS” as potentially impacted entities. In addition, WQS are also used to assess 

 
3  
  
water quality, identify impaired waters and develop total maximum daily loads for impaired 
waters.  
 
WPC, WMC, and MWFPA urge EPA to withdraw this proposed rule. EPA lacks the 
necessary authority under CWA to promulgate this rule. Moreover, the proposed 
regulatory approach could result in unattainable water quality standards, would impose 
far greater costs than estimated by EPA, and could create incredible regulatory 
uncertainty for Wisconsin manufacturers and businesses.  
 
In addition, our coalition supports the joint comments submitted on this docket by the U.S. 
Chamber of Commerce, American Forest and Paper Association, and several other 
organizations, and the comments of the Federal Water Quality Coalition and hereby 
incorporates both those sets of comments herein by reference. 
 
Thank you for consideration of these comments.  
 
 
 
  
Patrick Stevens  
Vice President, Environment & Regulatory Affairs  
General Counsel  
Wisconsin Paper Council  
 
 
 
 
 
Craig Summerfield 
Director of Environmental & Energy Policy 
Wisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce 
 
 
 
Jason Culotta 
President 
Midwest Food Products Association

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0270 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
August 01, 2023 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Water Docket 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
UA 
<' -
 
m 
R11c> 
Submitted through http://www.reulations.oy Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 and 
https: //tcots,epa.gov. 
RE: Snoqualmie Indian Tribe's Comments on Proposed EPA Baseline Tribal Water Quality 
Standards, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
Dear Office of Water: 
The Snoqualmie Indian Tribe ("Tribe") is a federally-recognized sovereign Indian tribe with inherent 
sovereign rights and reserved rights as a signatory to the Treaty of Point Elliott of 1855, art. V, 12 
Stat. 928. The Tribe submits these comments on the EPA's proposed baseline tribal water quality 
standards. 
The Tribe supports the EPA's desire to formally protect tribal waters, consistent with legal 
obligations. It is appropriate and appreciated that the EPA baseline tribal water quality standards 
rule commits EPA to consult with the Tribe to establish human health and environmental objectives, 
and to protect culturally significant waters. The Tribe will directly benefit from EPA's position that all 
upstream water users must maintain a level of water quality that ensures the downstream tribal 
water quality standards are attained when waters enter the Snoqualmie Indian Reservation. 
However, the EPA rule should not inhibit the Tribe's determination of water quality under its own 
sovereign authorities. 
Free, prior and informed consent is a prerequisite 
The rule requires that EPA consult with the Tribe throughout its process of crafting standards; 
however, consultation is not a substitute for consent. EPA must not adopt or enforce baseline water 
quality standards affecting the Tribe, its land or resources without the Tribe's free, prior and 
informed consent ("FPIC"). 
FPIC is an international rights-based norm codified in United Nations Declaration of the Rights of 
Indigenous People ("UN DRIP") that governs interactions with indigenous peoples. FPIC stands for 
the principle that all project-affected indigenous peoples have the legal right to be part of decision­
making processes for projects that impact their lands and resources. FPIC is designed to replace 
historical processes that excluded indigenous peoples from decision-making regarding activities that 
occurred on or near their ancestral lands and resources. The United Nations General Assembly 
Post Office Box 969 I Snoqualmie, WA 98065 I P: 425.888.6551 I www.snoqualmietribe.us I Page 1 of 4

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0221 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
August 3, 2023 
Submitted via www.regulations.gov 
Michael Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations. Proposed rule. 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
The Petroleum Association of Wyoming represents companies involved in all aspects of responsible oil 
and natural gas development in Wyoming, including upstream production, oilfield services, midstream 
processing, pipeline transportation and essential work such as legal services, accounting, consulting and 
more1. PAW urges the Environmental Protection Agency to pursue development of water quality 
standards for Indian reservations in a more deliberate manner. The Clean Water Act (CWA) offers other 
avenues that, from the outset, will tailor standards more applicable to the waters in question and lessen 
the likelihood of severe variations in standards when crossing jurisdictional boundaries.  
The EPA is proposing to set water quality standards (WQS) based on narrative criteria and then go 
through a process to translate those narratives into numeric thresholds. The EPA’s proposed approach 
intends to set a static standard across each EPA region and then, only after the fact and through 
cumbersome processes, allow opportunities for adjustments. There is no "one size fits all" approach to 
surface water quality standards. Aquatic communities, hydrology, geologic formations, and 
anthropogenic influences vary substantially among surface waters. As a result, surface water quality 
standards should be tailored to site-specific circumstances and should be considered carefully in the 
context of individual reservations, individual waters and available resources for implementation. 
PAW believes the EPA would be better suited to start this process off right and set standards more 
nuanced to the needs of the water body. The EPA can accomplish this by tiering tribal WQS from those 
set by a state. States are often the primary regulator in water quality matters and have the depth of 
 
1 PAW advocates for oil and gas development that supports sustainable production of Wyoming’s abundant resources; fosters 
mutually beneficial relationships with Wyoming’s landowners, businesses, and communities; and upholds the values of 
science-based, environmental stewardship. Recent studies show this industry supports over 20,000 jobs in Wyoming and 
contributes $8 billion in economic activity. Our industry generates significant tax revenue to the state of Wyoming, funding 
state and local government operations, education and public infrastructure. Eighty-five percent of the oil and gas companies 
operating in Wyoming are classified as small businesses. 

expertise to appropriately set standards for each water body under consideration. States go through a 
laborious process to identify existing uses and to establish standards protective of those uses. Through 
the triennial review process, those standards and their attainment are under constant supervision.  
Another avenue available to the EPA is through Section 518(d) of the CWA. It states that "In order to 
ensure the consistent implementation of the requirements of this Act, an Indian tribe and the State or 
States in which the lands of such tribe are located may enter into a cooperative agreement, subject to the 
review and approval of the Administrator, to jointly plan and administer the requirements of this Act." 
Rather than promulgating broad federal baseline WQS for reservations, the EPA should consider 
encouraging tribes to enter into cooperative agreements with states to expand coverage over reservation 
waters. Again, adjacent states are much more likely to have WQS that take into consideration site-
specific factors that are critical to scientifically defensible WQS. 
The Wind River Indian Reservation is the only reservation in the nation home to two federally-
recognized tribes. There are many instances where having two sets of standards covering one land is not 
possible. Establishing WQS is such an instance. The tribes are no strangers to working through their 
differences to find common ground. But the process to get there is not always an easy one.  
PAW offers this for the EPA’s consideration in light of the EPA’s proposed intention to establish new 
uses, including for cultural and traditional factors. The EPA has not provided any indication of the level 
of protection that could be afforded for those uses. It is unclear how these new uses will interplay with 
compliance objectives for point sources in another jurisdiction upstream from an Indian reservation. And 
it is unclear how the EPA would resolve any potential differences of opinion in the level of protection 
sought. 
Though already set in regulation2, PAW recommends the EPA reconsider its position of carte blanche 
authority to deny a state-issued permit to which it has objected. PAW requests the EPA include an 
appeal process. States are delegated the authority to administer their programs upon approval from the 
EPA. In instances of disagreement and in line with cooperative federalism principles, the EPA should 
afford states greater latitude in making permitting decisions and offer an appeal process in those rare 
instances where amicable resolutions cannot be found. 
A final point of concern is with respect to the EPA’s proposed process for designation of Outstanding 
National Resource Waters (ONWR). PAW isn’t concerned about the ability for ONRW’s to be proposed 
or designated. But as currently written, the process of review and potential designation lacks the 
stringency commensurate with the protections applied to ONRW’s. State programs have established 
processes to review waters proposed for ONRW. They include thorough internal review and substantial 
opportunity for public and stakeholder input. The EPA’s proposed process seems to lack, or severely 
limit, these protocols. The standards applied to ONRW’s are the most stringent available for any 
waterbody, allowing for no new and time-limited increases in current point source discharges. This is 
true for both the water designated as an ONRW and for all of its tributaries. For a reservation like the 
WRIR, the Wind River traverses from one side to the other and nearly every navigable water is a 
 
2 40 CFR 122.4(c) 

tributary to it. The potential of it being designated as an ONRW, without truly strong standards for 
review, would have adverse effects to many industries on the WRIR. 
PAW appreciates the EPA’s consideration of our comments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Colin McKee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulatory Affairs Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Petroleum Association of Wyoming 
 
cc: 
The Honorable John Barrasso, U.S. Senate, State of Wyoming 
 
The Honorable Cynthia Lummis, U.S. Senate, State of Wyoming 
 
The Honorable Harriet Hageman, U.S. House of Representatives, State of Wyoming 
 
The Honorable Mark Gordon, Governor, State of Wyoming

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0211 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Department of Environmental 
Conservation 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER 
Juneau 
 
PO Box 111800 
Juneau, AK 99811 
Main: (907) 465-5180 
www.dec.alaska.gov
May 31, 2023 
 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Attn: Administrator Michael S. Regan; Assistant Administrator Radhika Fox; Regional Administrator 
Casey Sixkiller 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
 
Re: Dkt. ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian 
Reservations 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, Assistant Administrator Fox, and Regional Administrator Sixkiller: 
 
Earlier today, the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation (“DEC”) met with 
representatives of the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) to discuss Alaska’s Human Health 
Criteria efforts, a State-led rulemaking potentially intersecting with EPA’s draft Tribal Reserved 
Rights Rule and EPA’s draft Tribal Baseline Water Quality Standards Rule.  Each of these 
rulemakings has important policy implications for Alaska.  EPA, however, has been mum at best, 
Machiavellian at worst, about how their new rules apply in our Great State.  In this meeting, we 
sought clarity.  Predictability.  We asked for something in writing.  Anything!  We needed some 
indication that EPA, indeed, is a partner to us in our efforts to protect the environment as we, the 
State, marry our environmental-protection policy objectives with our other policy goals.  But EPA 
indicated an alarming lack of understanding of Alaska and a severely distorted perception of the 
proper role of a federal agency in a democratic republic.   
 
Therefore, I write to express the State of Alaska’s continuing frustration with EPA’s lack of 
communication, transparency, and respect for the State.  The Clean Water Act calls for a 
cooperative federalism approach, which means “a partnership between the States and the Federal 
Government”1 where States take a “primary”2 role and EPA, a “secondary.”3  After over two years 
of interaction with the Biden EPA, however, EPA’s worldview is clear: EPA gets to play Congress,4 
crafting rules of national applicability and leaving the details to be filled in later.  And the Great State 
of Alaska?  We’re a puppet, a servant, subordinate to EPA.  Alaska exists to do EPA’s bidding, on 
EPA’s terms, per EPA’s rules—uninformed by Alaska’s input, experience, or policy preferences.  
 
1 See State of Alaska Comments to EPA’s Proposed Rule Redefining Waters of the United States (February 7. 2022) 
(outlining basic tenets of cooperative federalism).  
2 CWA § 101(b). 
3 Gulf Restoration Network v. McCarthy, 783 F.3d 227, 230 (5th Cir. 2015). 
4 Or does it?  See West Virginia v. EPA, 142 S. Ct. 2587, 2616 (2022) (EPA loses on major questions doctrine). 

 
 
Administrator Regan et al. 
May 31, 2023 
 
 
 
Page 2 
 
EPA engages with Alaska belatedly5 or not at all6,7 and speaks in the language of threats,8 mandates,9 
whips,10 and handcuffs11—State protections be damned!12   
 
In short?  We’re the sub to EPA’s Dom.   
 
Wildly inappropriate. 
 
Disturbingly, EPA’s latest rule (Tribal Baselines) is only the latest in a chain of denigrating 
actions taken by EPA.  EPA is now proposing to promulgate new water quality standards for all 
“reservations,” a term whose new definition is inconsistent with the Clean Water Act.  (Specifically, 
EPA disregards the Clean Water Act’s definition of “reservation” (“all land within the limits of an 
Indian reservation under the jurisdiction of the United States Government . . .”) in favor of its own 
(includes “formal and informal reservations such as trust land that has been validly set apart for use 
by a Tribe even if such land is located outside of the exterior boundaries of a formally designated 
reservation), creating ambiguity as well as legal issues.)13  Under this new proposal, permits for 
upstream discharges must have effluent limitations stringent enough to meet EPA’s new standards.14  
Alaska, through our APDES program, is the entity responsible for permitting upstream discharges.  
This means that Alaska will have to ensure that standards in upstream permits are protective of 
downstream “reservation” waters.  Considering Alaska’s 227 federally recognized Tribes, and EPA’s 
new, more expansive definition of “reservation,” this rule could drastically alter the permitting 
landscape in Alaska.   
  
Alaska’s water quality standards already apply throughout the State.15  Tribes who meet 
Congress criteria for Treatment as States (“TAS”) may promulgate their own.  When States (and 
TAS Tribes) make these types of decisions, they remain mindful of the bigger picture: the stricter the 
effluent limitations, the more costly the compliance, and the greater the disincentive for 
 
5 Frequently, Alaska finds out about EPA’s actions in the 30-minute embargoed briefing held the day before the action 
drops—well after the time for meaningful input has passed.  Exhibit A?  This proposed rule. 
6 EPA has drafted 404(g) revisions that are presently in OMB.  Alaska, as a State pushing for assumption of the 404 
program, is uniquely situated to provide helpful input into these regulations.   
7 EPA exercised its 404(c) veto power over an Alaska project on the basis of adverse effects to anadromous fish without 
bothering to consult with Alaska to learn about Alaska’s Title 16 permitting process, which is designed to protect 
anadromous fish.  The Title 16 permitting process hadn’t been initiated much less completed at the time of EPA’s veto. 
8 See Sept. 6, 2022 Ltr. from Regional Administrator Casey Sixkiller (requesting Alaska establish a “mutually acceptable” 
timeline for revising human health criteria standards upon threat of EPA action).  
9 See Mar. 3, 2023 Memo from Radhika Fox re: Addressing PWS Cybersecurity in Sanitary Surveys or an Alternate 
Process (mandating that “during a sanitary survey of a PWS, states must do the following . . .”). 
10 See FN 8. 
11 See Final Determination of the EPA Pursuant to Section 404(c) of the Clean Water Act Pebble Deposit Area, Southwest Alaska (Jan. 
2023) (preventing Alaska from developing 309 square miles of Alaska-owned land). 
12 In the context of EPA’s 404(c) veto, finalized on the basis of unacceptable adverse effects to anadromous fish, EPA 
couldn’t be bothered to learn about Alaska’s unique Title 16 fish habitat permitting program, which exists to protect 
anadromous fish and fish habitat and had not been initiated prior to finalization of the veto.  This, despite numerous 
invitations from Alaska to do so. 
13 Compare CWA § 518 (h)(1) with 88 FR 29498.  But that’s a discussion for different letter.  
14 These standards are currently proposed only in narrative form, leaving EPA discretion to choose among “options” 
when translating into numeric criteria.  This, too, is a discussion for another letter.  
15 Presently, in the Lower 48, EPA incorporates State water quality standards into NPDES permits issued on 
reservations. 

 
 
Administrator Regan et al. 
May 31, 2023 
 
 
 
Page 3 
 
development.  Alaska takes seriously its commitment to the health of its people, its environment, 
and its economy, and is committed to addressing the State’s lack of critical infrastructure, including 
water infrastructure, in a lawful16 manner.  Our considered water quality standards—which allow for 
responsible development while protecting our environment—reflect our commitment to Alaskans.  
 
Juggling multiple policy considerations, of course, is not EPA’s job.  This is why the Clean 
Water Act “recognize[s], preserve[s], and protect[s] the primary responsibilities and rights of 
States”—not EPA—to “prevent, reduce, and eliminate pollution,” and to “plan the development 
and use . . . of land and water resources.”  The United States Supreme Court now recognizes this 
too.17  States are well-equipped to balance the multiple policy considerations going into pollution 
control—it’s what we do.  EPA’s role, in contrast, is to “provide Federal technical services and 
financial aid to State and interstate agencies and municipalities in connection with the prevention, 
reduction, and elimination of pollution.”18  In other words, per the Clean Water Act and the United 
States Supreme Court: States make the policy calls, EPA provides technical and financial support.  
And where EPA exercises power?  States have the “right . . . to consult with the Administrator in 
[its] exercise.”19   
 
This broader framework is reflected in the Clean Water Act’s water quality standard 
provisions.  The Clean Water Act says that States and TAS Tribes get first go at promulgating.20  
This means it is States and TAS Tribes—not EPA—who get to make the policy calls.  If States’ and 
TAS Tribe’s standards are scientifically defensible, EPA approves.21  In its “secondary”22 and 
“backstop”23 role, EPA’s job is limited to reviewing the science underlying the State’s or TAS Tribe’s 
standards and to publishing guidance reflecting the latest scientific knowledge for states to consult.24  
  
But EPA has flipped the script.  In drafting this rule, EPA did not: 
 
- 
Alert the State25 that it was promulgating this rule; 
- 
Meet with the State; 
- 
Request input from the State; 
- 
Allow TAS Tribes to take first go at promulgating standards; or 
- 
Attempt to identify how this rule will apply in the State. 
 
16 Consistent with EPA’s view that it is above the law, Assistant Administrator Fox has repeatedly urged Alaska to 
unlawfully waive the Safe Drinking Water Act’s capacity requirements, which exist to ensure that community water 
systems have the technical, managerial, and financial capacity to operate before funding is provided.  Congress wisely 
imposed these requirements to avoid creating future liabilities from unmaintained or poorly maintained facilities: the 
Safe Drinking Water Act expressly prohibits the provision of federal funding for water systems that do not meet capacity 
requirements.  A waiver is not a legal option.  But it seems that laws—like the Pirate’s Code—are more what EPA’d call 
guidelines than actual rules . . . 
17 Sackett v. EPA, No. 21-454, 2023 WL 3632751, at *12 (May 25, 2023) (decision gutting EPA’s “durable” rule). 
18 CWA § 101(b). 
19 Id. 
20 Id. § 303(c)(3). 
21 40 C.F.R. § 131.11(b)(iii). 
22 Gulf Restoration Network v. McCarthy, 783 F.3d 227, 230 (5th Cir. 2015). 
23 Nw. Env’t Advocs. V. EPA, 2021 WL 2206497, at *2 (W.D. Wash. 2021). 
24 CWA § 304. 
25 Reaching out to the Association of Clean Water Administrators, a national organization whose policy positions do not 
always reflect Alaska’s policy positions, is no substitute for reaching out to the State directly. 

 
 
Administrator Regan et al. 
May 31, 2023 
 
 
 
Page 4 
 
 
This rule was news to us.  By failing to alert the State during the development stage of this rule, EPA 
deprived us of our right to consult.  By failing to meet with us and solicit input, EPA’s rule expresses 
only EPA’s policy preferences.  By failing to abstain until TAS Tribes first promulgate water quality 
standards, EPA usurps TAS Tribes’ prerogative to identify and weigh their own potentially 
competing policy considerations.  And by failing to attempt to identify how this rule will apply in 
Alaska, EPA has now deprived Alaska of the opportunity for meaningful comment.    
 
 
 
At EPA’s May 2 briefing, held one day before the rule’s release, I asked EPA how this rule 
was intended to apply in Alaska.  EPA’s response muddied more waters than it cleared.  To 
paraphrase: 
 
EPA believes this rule applies to more than just Alaska’s one 
reservation (Metlakatla)—it will apply to some Alaska Native Villages, 
too.  Though we’re not sure which ones, or how many.  Or why.   
 
Our pesky question was important to us.  It still is!  And today’s answers left us even more 
concerned.  EPA warns that if the State fails to correctly implement this rule when issuing upstream 
permits, “EPA could use its oversight authority of approved programs [like APDES], which includes 
the authority to review permits.”26  This not-so-subtle threat means that EPA will review—and 
object to—State APDES permits that allow discharges resulting in downstream exceedances in areas 
where this new rule applies.   
 
Raise the whip, in other words, and make States submit.  EPA’s modus operandi. 
 
 
Had EPA reached out to the State while drafting this rule, we could have—once again27—
explained why it cannot apply to land inhabited by Alaska Tribal members (excluding Metlakatla), 
contrary to EPA’s silent rule and misleading hints.  In 1971, the Alaska Native Claims Settlement 
Act (“ANCSA”) abolished all reservations in Alaska, excluding one.28  This has been recognized by 
the United States Supreme Court,29 Circuit Courts,30 and EPA itself.31  If EPA disagrees with this 
 
26 88 FR 29515. 
27 See Alaska Dep’t of Env. Consv., Alaska Cmt. Ltr. re: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved 
Rights, EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, at 3–4 (Mar. 6, 2023) (explaining the effect of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act 
on aboriginal claims). 
28 ANCSA provides that “the various reserves set aside by legislation or by Executive or Secretarial Order for Native use 
or for administration of Native affairs, including those created under the Act of May 31, 1938 (52 Stat. 593), are hereby 
revoked. . .”  43 U.S.C.A. § 1618(a).  The Metlakatla Indian Community resides in the Annette Island Reserve, the sole 
reservation in Alaska.  
29 Yellen v. Confederated Tribes of Chehalis Rsrv., 141 S. Ct. 2434, 2439 (2021) (“ANCSA officially dispensed with the idea of 
recreating in Alaska the system of reservations that prevailed in the lower 48 States.”); Alaska v. Native Vill. Of Venetie 
Tribal Gov’t, 522 U.S. 520, 532 (1998) (“ANCSA transferred reservation lands to private, state-chartered Native 
corporations . . .”). 
30 United States v. Roberts, 185 F.3d 1125, 1133 (10th Cir. 1999) (stating there is “no possibility” that lands of an Alaska 
Tribe (not Metlakatla) “could qualify as a reservation . . . because the ANCSA had explicitly abrogated its reservation 
status.”); Akiachak Native Cmty. V. United States Dep’t of Interior, 827 F.3d 100, 103 (D.C. Cir. 2016) (“ANCSA 
extinguished aboriginal claims and revoked all designated reservations, except for one: the Annette Island Reserve 
inhabited by the Metlakatla Indians, who, as immigrants from Canada, had no aboriginal claims to Alaska lands.”). 
31 Amendments to the Water Quality Standards Regulations That Pertain to Standards on Indian Reservations, 54 FR 39098-01, 39105 
(1989) (concluding, based on the Clean Water Act’s definitions of “reservation” and “Indian Tribe” that “Alaska Native 

 
 
Administrator Regan et al. 
May 31, 2023 
 
 
 
Page 5 
 
authority (and itself), this issue should have been raised to us, with us, during the drafting process—
not at us, coyly, the day before release—with no opportunity for input before release.  
 
EPA has now forced Alaska to play bad cop: we must be the ones to inform our Alaska 
Native residents that no, actually, EPA’s attempt to save tribal waters from Big Bad States does not 
apply here.  Putting us in this position disrespects us, disregards Congress, and signals an alarming 
lack of awareness and transparency from EPA. 
 
This rule is merely the latest in EPA’s series of affrontive events.  And it’s not even the most 
grievous!  From “guidance” that mandates cybersecurity requirements in public wastewater system 
sanitary surveys, to letters compelling States to update HHC on EPA’s preferred (crunched) 
timeline, to determinations handcuffing the State’s ability to manage 309 square miles of State-
owned land contrary to the very purpose for which we selected those lands, EPA has perverted the 
role of partnership into something almost too inappropriate to say out loud.   
 
Our only safeword?  Sadly: “court.” 
 
Now that Sackett has been issued, EPA’s masochistic streak32 should be satiated.  Alaska can 
help EPA learn to follow the law and be a better federal agency.  Going forward, we hope to 
cultivate a relationship that might one day be described in more wholesome terms.  Now that EPA’s 
power trip is coming to a close,33 perhaps we join together to protect human health and the 
environment in the way that Congress intended—with States in the lead, EPA standing ready to 
assist with technical and financial support. 34 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Jason W. Brune 
Commissioner 
 
 
 
cc: The Honorable Lisa Murkowski, United States Senate 
The Honorable Dan Sullivan, United States Senate 
The Honorable Mary Peltola, United States House of Representatives 
 
 
 
 
Villages, with one exception [Metlakatla] do not exercise governmental authority over Federal Indian Reservations” and 
are therefore “not eligible to apply for treatment as States” status.).   
32 E.g., Michigan v. EPA, 268 F.3d 1075, 1084 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (EPA loses); West Virginia v. EPA, 142 S. Ct. 2587, 2616 
(2022) (EPA loses); Sackett, 2023 WL 3632751 (EPA loses).  
33 See Sackett, 2023 WL 3632751. 
34 Contrary to the inappropriate expectation of the previous EPA Acting State Director that Alaska should just be 
grateful to get federal money and not worry about being ignored on policy, exemplifying the main theme of this letter.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0245 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
August 3, 2023 
 
Attn: Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2016–0405 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Water (Mail Code 4301T) 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Submitted via: federalregister.gov 
 
Re: Comments on the Proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations, EPA-HQ-
OW-2016-0405 
 
To the Office of Water, 
 
The Kansas Department of Health and Environment, Bureau of Water (KDHE) appreciates the opportunity to 
comment on the Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations, EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
(herein referred to as the Baseline WQS). 
 
Comments on the Proposed Baseline WQS: 
 
KDHE thanks EPA for the opportunity to not only provide comment on this proposed rule change but the 
multiple listening sessions held in addition to public hearings EPA conducted in support of this rulemaking. As 
was expressed verbally during multiple of these meetings, KDHE would like to formally reiterate some focused 
points of concern for the state in addition to showing support for the Association of Clean Water Administrators 
(ACWA) comment letter comprised of copious note-taking and review on the part of ACWA. 
 
KDHE agrees that surface waters should have Water Quality Standards (WQS), just as the Clean Water 
Act (CWA) intended. Waters lacking these Standards pose risk to adjacent lands and its users in addition to 
those waters downstream and all uses applicable to them as well. KDHE initially did not wish to take a position 
on the EPA pursuit of Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations as KDHE considered these 
standards to be beyond the authority and jurisdiction of KDHE. However, EPA’s proposal of translation from 
narrative to numeric criteria as currently presented has potentially massive ramifications for the state of Kansas. 
To reiterate, KDHE is not interested in taking a stance related to Tribal and EPA interactions as it is considered 
beyond our purview at this time; however, as the state of Kansas is impacted by this rule, KDHE provides these 

 
 
comments to provide perspective and suggestions for a more tenable and workable final rule in the pursuit of a 
more implementable approach to establishing these WQS. 
 
EPA has proposed adoption of narrative criteria as a starting point for the baseline WQS. Following the 50-
year history of the CWA, states similarly started with these criteria and have further expanded into the numeric 
criteria realm. KDHE considers a narrative criteria approach as a starting point to be in accordance with how 
WQS have developed over the life of the CWA and appropriate for this rulemaking. 
KDHE instead holds concern towards EPA’s proposed translations of narrative criteria to numeric criteria. 
The application of baseline WQS to tribal lands is, on the surface, an issue that would not be of impact to the 
state of Kansas as it pertains to WQS being applied to just those tribal lands without WQS already. However, 
the CWA requires protection of not just the water quality adjacent to or intersecting these lands but protection 
of the WQS applicable downstream as well. On EPA’s presentations of potentially affected tribal lands, the 4 of 
Kansas were denoted as possibly affected by the rule and the entire state of Oklahoma was excluded due to 
uncertainty from various legal rulings. Thus, the impacts of considering downstream protections are of direct 
interest to the state of Kansas and KDHE in its implementation of multiple CWA programs. 
EPA has presented 5 Options for translation of the narrative criteria to numeric (paraphrased from 
presentations): 
1. Translate the baseline narrative criteria using Section 304(a) criteria recommendations 
2. Translate the baseline narrative criteria using Section 304(a) criteria modified to reflect site-specific 
conditions 
3. Translate the baseline narrative criteria using numeric criteria available in Tribal WQS not yet CWA 
effective or adjacent state/tribal CWA-effective WQS 
4. Translate the baseline narrative criteria using required criteria methodologies for the Great Lakes Basin 
5. EPA may rely on existing CWA implementation provisions to translate applicable narrative criteria, as 
necessary 
Option 4 is not applicable to KDHE’s concerns as none of the waters west of the Mississippi River (all of 
Kansas) are upstream of the Great Lakes. Instead, KDHE’s concerns can be ranked in likelihood of the options 
expected to be chosen by EPA. In order, Options 1, 2, 5, and 3 give EPA extraordinary latitude for derivation of 
numeric criteria based on the narrative criteria. 
EPA has placed the authority and responsibility of execution of this rule on the EPA regional offices and 
staff. Considering no additional resources are expected to be provided to the regional offices for implementation 
of this rule, it is KDHE’s expectation that Options 1 & 2 will be the primary, if not sole, Options selected. This 
is further supported by the Economic Analysis for Proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for 
Indian Reservations (EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0208 but titled “Baseline WQS NPRM Economic Analysis” on 
the docket; herein referred to as ‘Impact Analysis’) conducted by EPA where Option 1 was combined with 
Option 2 for their analysis. It is KDHE’s opinion that these options are the most likely to survive litigious action 
with minimal effort needed by EPA and will become the common practice of the regional offices in 
implementation of the baseline WQS as proposed. 
The majority of 304(a) criteria are of relatively minor concern to KDHE as presented in the current 
proposed rule as their adoption has been largely done in Kansas’ WQS already, along with subsequent 
implementation. However, select criteria and their protection if applied downstream are of potentially 
extraordinary consequence and burden to both the EPA regional offices but all entities upstream of where these 
baseline standards will be applied. 

 
 
 
 
Of particular concern among the 304(a) criteria are numeric nutrient criteria, both for lakes/reservoirs and 
the ecoregional approach for streams. Nutrient pollution is an ubiquitous concern nationwide and has been 
tackled in a nigh uncountable assortment of manners with multitudes of considerations made. Compared to 
almost every other pollutant among the 304(a) criteria with a concentration consideration and focus, how far to 
consider downstream uses applicable for nutrients could logically be declared as having no limit due to the 
loading being the primary concern as opposed to concentration in the water column. Thus, it is KDHE’s 
expectation that EPA will apply encompassing the entire watershed above where baseline WQS are applied 
with numeric nutrient criteria. 
The likelihood of EPA applying these criteria to the furthest upstream reaches of the watersheds may be 
reasonable speculation, and it has been observed EPA’s presumption of 5 miles upstream in their Impact 
Analysis. EPA has explicitly stated in meetings about these criteria that 5 miles isn’t the furthest upstream to 
consider for protection of downstream criteria, but it was used to get a reasonable estimate of the impact of the 
rule. However, there have been multiple examples KDHE can cite of far greater reaches than that consideration 
was forced to be had. Of most recent memory and as an example, a metals TMDL from Missouri had to 
consider Oklahoma’s WQS after having gone through 15 miles of Kansas before reaching Oklahoma. EPA has 
stated that the Impact Analysis is a good representation of what to expect from the rule. KDHE disagrees with 
this assessment of the impact estimates being reasonable based on the 5 mile approach alone from our previous 
experience with having to protect downstream water quality as required in the CWA. Instead, KDHE expects 
the full impact analysis of this rule could easily be orders of magnitude greater than EPA has currently 
accounted for. 
The expectation of impact of this rule being orders of magnitude greater than EPA is considered reasonable 
by KDHE due to how EPA conducted the Impact Analysis for the 5 miles upstream approach. Specifically, 
“EPA did not derive economic analysis criteria for nutrients.” The rationale provided is that values for TP and 
TN applied nationwide is not appropriate. Considering the phrasing didn’t suggest that TP or TN would be 
excluded from translation in the rule as presented but instead that it would be too complicated to assess the 
impacts, it is rational to presume EPA anticipates the translation of narrative criteria to numeric nutrient values. 
If the furthest upstream extent of the watershed is applied for a loading perspective of nutrient pollution, then 
the 5 miles upstream extent is entirely meaningless and grossly under-represented by EPA even if they had 
considered the impact of numeric nutrient criteria like should have been done for a reasonable impact analysis 
of this rule as proposed. The scope of this nutrient criteria translation would readily invalidate the $15-30 
million figures provided as expected implementation costs. 
The ambiguity of the rule holds particularly prescient for Oklahoma to our South, but due to the upstream 
reaches requiring protection of downstream uses also presents a major portion of Kansas as potentially being 
upstream of tribal baseline standards. Ambiguity is the only term we can use to define the potential scope of 
this, as EPA has not accounted for the tribal lands that would have baseline standards applied in Oklahoma. 
KDHE is sympathetic to the difficulties around the numerous legal challenges and rulings related to tribal lands 
in Oklahoma in recent years. However, the rule as presented does not preclude EPA’s responsibility of applying 
and interpreting these baseline standards. Without knowing even which lands the WQS will be applied to, how 
could it be considered rational to estimate the potential impact of the rule as presented? KDHE supports the 
difficulties expressed by Oklahoma in the meetings for trying to get EPA to provide their expectation of which 
lands will or will not have these baseline WQS applied. 

 
 
In summary, KDHE posits that EPA has not considered the full ramifications of this rule as proposed. The 
actual costs will likely be magnitudes greater than currently estimated, the regional staff will have extra WQS 
duties in addition to figuring out where the applicable tribal lands lie along with upstream protections for all 
NPDES permits both adjacent to but also upstream of these standards, and cross-jurisdictional management 
between states, tribes, and the multiple regional offices has not been fleshed out. This rule as presented holds 
significant potential towards crippling much of the CWA programs nationwide while things are worked out 
depending on the extents EPA applies this rule left to their discretion. 
 
KDHE has provided feedback on various tribal related issues in recent years as it concerns the CWA. Tribal 
Reserved Rights is of recent memory, and KDHE has been made aware of a particular distressing example 
related to Tribe as a State (TAS) authority in Iowa in the past two years. The tribe gained TAS authority but did 
not adopt WQS. EPA Region 7 proceeded to adopt WQS as required under the CWA. In the process of so 
doing, EPA published the proposed standards in the Des Moines Register. Subsequently, the state of Iowa was 
surprised to find numeric nutrient criteria applicable to many of their NPDES permitted dischargers upstream of 
this tribal land. Upon further review of this scenario, there are two factors KDHE wishes to bring to EPA’s 
attention; the first as it relates to this rule, and the second as a call for standardization of public notification 
where it is currently lacking. 
The first consideration as it relates to this rule is that EPA is not holding itself to the same CWA obligations 
as states with a public hearing required for revision of the WQS along with a triennial review frequency. This 
has been observed in other comment letters, and KDHE is in support of EPA being held to the same 
requirements as currently operating WQS programs nationwide. Opening governmental actions, policies, and 
laws to public engagement is at the core of the CWA. KDHE recommends revision of the rule to allow and 
require for the availability of this public involvement and consideration in future revisions to these WQS. 
The second consideration stems from the publication of the aforementioned scenario in the Des Moines 
register. For states that have garnered various CWA authorities for WQS, TMDLs, etc., the state register is the 
commonly accepted, or usually specified by state law such as the case with Kansas, location for revisions to 
these programs to be presented. Notably, this restriction is not placed in the CFRs currently nor in the CWA for 
where tribal public hearings shall be published for the public to attend and provide comments nor any other 
entity in which the EPA is the designated authority of CWA programs. It is with KDHE’s strong urging that 
EPA consider this procedural loophole that has already presented surprise and confusion in Iowa before it 
contributes to further problems nationwide and has the potential for intentional obfuscation as well. As other 
states have mentioned on calls with EPA about this rulemaking but for different reasons, a standardized means 
of following revisions to baseline WQS, TAS changes, etc. should be done so it is clear and effective for all 
interested parties to follow these revisions. Government should not be run with surprise but through clear, 
openly communicated, and publicly engaged actions. 
 
KDHE recommends further consideration of the implementation impacts of this rule prior to final adoption 
by EPA. It is common practice with EPA to adopt numeric criteria and subsequently release technical support 
materials a year or two later. For states running their WQS programs, it is now common practice to defer 
adoption of the new criteria until these implementation procedures are made available and able to be discerned. 
The rule as proposed doesn’t have the option of adopting these criteria or not and waiting for implementation to 
be figured out before doing so. The affected tribes will have 90 days to defer or else baseline WQS are the law 
of the land, with no consideration for implementation being realistically worked out as currently proposed. The 

 
 
ramifications for tribal lands are beyond KDHE’s scope, but for what could be applied upstream to the state of 
Kansas, as discussed above, may be immeasurable but certainly hasn’t been measured reasonably by EPA yet. 
In order to meet EPA’s current target of formal adoption next year, KDHE proposes two potential solutions 
to simplify most of our concerns for baseline WQS specifically. One proposed solution KDHE has observed in 
other comments and discussions is defaulting to Option 3 by using a neighboring state’s WQS or tribal WQS in 
the works. The second proposed solution KDHE would like to present is instead of all 304(a) criteria, EPA start 
with the priority pollutants. The sheer ambiguity and potential scope of all 304(a) criteria is beyond what has 
been considered by EPA, but it is KDHE’s opinion that the desired improvements in management of water 
quality on lands without WQS would see significant jumps with the priority pollutants specifically as they are 
far more implementable and almost ubiquitously in practice in all states’ WQS currently. The CWA was put in 
place 50 years ago and much of the WQS progress during that time has been done in increments; simply 
skipping all 50 years can be considered ambitious but also reckless if not fully considered in scale. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment on the Baseline WQS. If you have any questions regarding 
these comments, or would like to discuss any of them, please feel free to contact me at (785) 296-5508 or 
Dane.Boring@ks.gov.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Dane Boring 
Policy Planning & Standards Unit Chief 
Kansas Department of Health & Environment – Bureau of Water

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0257 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
1410 N Hilton Street 
Boise, ID 83706 • (208) 373-0502 
Brad Little, Governor 
Jess Byrne, Director 
 
 
August 3, 2023 
 
EPA Docket Center 
Sara Hisel-McCoy 
Director, Standards and Health Protection Division 
Office of Water, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460 
 
Subject: Comments Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2016–0405, Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards 
for Indian Reservations 
 
Dear Director Hisel-McCoy: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to review and provide comments to the proposed rule for Federal 
Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations, dated May 5, 2023.  This proposed rule is very 
comprehensive and will have an enormous economic impact on the citizens of Idaho and the Idaho 
Department of Environmental Quality (IDEQ).  Although IDEQ agrees with the intent of the rule and that 
waters in our beautiful state lacking water quality standards pose a risk to all immediate and 
downstream waters users, however this proposed rule is flawed in its implementation and IDEQ does 
not feel that EPA adequately engaged with IDEQ or our stakeholders during the development.  IDEQ 
does not support the establishment of federal baseline water quality standards for Indian reservation 
waters.  Below we highlight a few of our main concerns. 
I. 
 EPA’s definition of reservation waters.   
Under the proposed rule, baseline water quality standards would apply to waters “within the borders of 
an Indian reservation” but goes on to state that “in accordance with judicial precedent, the term 
“reservation” includes both formal reservation and informal reservation such as trust land that has been 
validly set apart for use by the tribe even if such trust land is located outside the exterior boundaries of 
a formally designated reservation”1.  In the state of Idaho, we have five Tribes in which several have 
trust lands outside of reservations.   
In the Association of Clean Water Administrators (ACWA)/EPA listening session IDEQ participated in, EPA 
clearly admits that they are unclear as to the boundaries or lands that will be covered under this rule 
and each situation will be unique and will need to be “sorted out” on a permit-by-permit basis.  This lack 
of certainty adds to the time and expense of moving forward with regulatory decisions.  Highlighting the 
lack of clarity on trust lands, EPA went on to say that it does not determine reservation boundaries, and 
that “the responsibility lies elsewhere in the government.” However, it appears that even between 
agencies and states, data is inconsistent and has yet to be centralized. For example, data provided by 
 
1 56 FR 64876, 64881, December 12, 1991 

August 2023 
 
Page 2 of 4 
 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs in response to a 2018 Freedom of Information Request submitted by the 
Native Lands Advocacy Project, shows that Idaho has 1,057,430 acres of trust land,2 not including fee or 
restricted lands.  It took BIA nearly two years to fulfill this request for data, and there were hundreds of 
thousands of discrepancies between the area of land reported by BIA, and that recorded by the States.3 
In the preamble of the proposed rule, it states that EPA has the authority to treat an Indian tribe as a 
state (TAS) pertaining to water resources within the borders of an Indian reservation.  Clean Water Act 
(CWA) section 5184  defines TAS as all land within the limits of any Indian reservation under the 
jurisdiction of the United States Government, notwithstanding the issuance of any patent, and including 
rights-of-way running through the reservation.  EPA states that, under this language, tribes can only 
obtain TAS status over waters within the borders of their reservations, and conversely, tribes cannot 
obtain TAS under the CWA for water resources pertaining to any non-reservation Indian country.  
However, in this proposed rule, EPA then states that Indian reservation includes trust lands validly set 
aside for Indian tribes even if such lands have not formally been designated as an Indian reservation.  
These two statements appear to be, at least in part, inconsistent.  On the one hand, EPA states that TAS 
status will only apply to waters within the borders of a reservation, but on the other hand, appears to 
state that waters on trust lands, even if outside reservation borders may be included within the 
definition of water resources of an Indian reservation. 
IDEQ questions whether EPA is correct in its assertion that the revised interpretation will have no effect 
on existing state CWA programs and requests clarification on whether States will be preempted from 
applying State water quality law.  Under EPA’s current interpretation, there is no express delegation of 
authority to tribes.  Thus, prior to EPA approving TAS status for a tribe, tribal authority is limited to the 
tribes’ inherent authority to regulate non-tribal members.  With certain exceptions, tribes cannot 
regulate non-tribal members on non-tribal land within an Indian reservation.  States, on the other hand, 
generally have the authority to regulate non-tribal members on such land.  In addition, even when a 
tribe has the inherent authority to regulate non-tribal members on non-tribal land, States may have 
concurrent jurisdiction to apply state water quality law.    
Under EPA’s revised interpretation, section 518(e)5 provides an express delegation to Indian tribes to 
regulate all water resources within the borders of a reservation, even those waters on non-tribal 
member lands.  Under EPA’s revised interpretation, IDEQ will be preempted from applying state water 
quality law to non-members on non-tribal land, even prior to the approval of TAS status for a tribe.  If 
this is true, then EPA’s revised interpretation will certainly have an impact on existing state CWA 
programs.  IDEQ requests EPA clarify whether under the revised interpretation, States will be preempted 
from applying state water quality law to non-tribal members on non-tribal land within the borders of a 
reservation and if there is a preemption, whether the state is preempted prior to EPA approval of TAS 
status.   
 
 
 
 
2 https://data.nativeland.info/dataset/2019-tribal-land-ownership-by-state 
3Brewer, J. P., Carroll, S. R., Bartecchi, D., Chesnais, A. K., & Johnson, M. K. (2023). Life and times of data access: 
Regarding Native Lands. Environment and Planning F, 2(1–2), 305–315. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/26349825231164616 
4 https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2016-05-16/pdf/2016-11511.pdf 
5 https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2016-11511/p-114 

August 2023 
 
Page 3 of 4 
 
II. 
EPA’s role and responsibilities and implementation considerations. 
This section provides DEQ’s comments on EPA’s proposed rule implementation and lack of concrete 
language on which to provide meaningful comment. EPA did not adequately incorporate stakeholder 
involvement and input when developing tribal baseline water quality standards. Without allowing for 
upstream stakeholder engagement early in the process of permit development, the new tribal standards 
may lead to unnecessary conflict between upstream discharge permits and new standards.  Under the 
CWA, states have been increasingly required to provide more rule development and water quality 
standards implementation transparency, and public and stakeholder engagement throughout all 
programs.  However, this proposed rule does not require the same transparency from EPA.  EPA has not 
identified how TMDL’s, water quality assessments and listings, or other CWA programs will be 
developed on reservation waters and implemented or how the tribes and state will be part of the 
process.  
The intent of the “binding translation procedures” is unclear.  EPA “is relying on its role as both the 
promulgating entity and the primary implementation authority to allow a degree of site-specific tailoring 
with the regulatory construct of the water quality standards during subsequent implementation of the 
proposed rule.”  In other words, EPA will only develop the water quality criteria component of standards 
when implementing a TMDL, NDPES permit, or water quality certification. A situation which would never 
be approved in a state’s WQS package.  
Narrative criteria will be accompanied by a binding translation procedure for determining case-specific 
numeric values to protect the applicable designated use.  Again, the translation procedures are vague, 
and it is unclear how the process will be implemented for the development of NPDES permits limits, 
water quality assessment, or water quality certification development. States are unable to provide 
adequate feedback for implementation if there isn’t a clear process or procedure provided to comment 
on. During the ACWA/EPA listing session, EPA clarified that the first time a state would be able to review 
the binding translation and the resulting criteria would be when the NPDES permit is out for review, 
which is very late in the development process.  
Furthermore, EPA states it would maintain a website containing a publicly available list of all tribes with 
Indian reservations for purposes of this proposed rule.  It would also indicate which of those tribes are 
covered by baseline WQS, which are excluded from coverage, and which tribes already have CWA-
effective WQS in place. Updates and changes to permits will also be housed on this site. This is a large 
amount of information requiring frequent updates. This is not an effective way to inform states or 
stakeholders and would be difficult to maintain.  
During this same listening session, EPA clarified that they will not be reviewing the narrative standards 
or the translated criteria under a triennial review.  The CWA requires states and authorized tribes to 
periodically review and, as appropriate, adopt new or revised WQS to meet the requirements of the 
CWA6.  This appears to hold states to a higher regulatory burden than EPA is willing or able to 
implement. 
EPA “is not proposing to define cultural and traditional uses in more detail in this rule…”. This is another 
example of ambiguity that is nearly impossible for a state or stakeholder to provide meaningful 
feedback on. It is unclear how, by whom, or where the cultural and traditional use will be defined and 
implemented.  The proposed rule,7 recognizes tribal reserved rights to use and access natural and 
 
6 Water Quality Standards Handbook, Chapter 6: Procedures for Review and Revision of Water Quality Standards. 
7 EPA docket# EPA-HQ-OW-2021-079 

August 2023 
 
Page 4 of 4 
 
cultural resources but does not identify how it will identify and protect those tribal cultural and 
traditional uses and tribal reserved rights.  
IDEQ understands that EPA was deliberately vague as to how to designate and implement the protection 
of Outstanding Natural Resource Waters (ONRW).  IDEQ has a clear and transparent process as to how 
an ONRW is nominated and designated.  Since the ONRW would only apply within reservation 
boundaries for this rule, it is imperative that the process is clearly laid out so IDEQ can have a more 
predictive process as an upstream state. 
III. 
Economic Impact 
Idaho has many permitted dischargers upstream from reservation and trust lands.  The economic 
analysis that EPA conducted only included facilities with in a five-mile radius of reservation lands.  This is 
dramatically underestimated.  Much depends on the regulated constituent, and Idaho has many 
naturally occurring metals persistent in the watershed because of regional geology. Consequently, these 
will be detectable further than five miles.  For example, EPA is currently writing a TMDL for the Spokane 
River that crosses from Idaho to Washington state.  The Spokane reservation is 58 river miles from the 
Idaho border. Idaho will likely have to meet a much more restrictive PCB criteria than our own state’s 
approved standard and more stringent than even Washington state’s PCB criteria. EPA contends that for 
Washington State to meet the criteria at the border of the reservation, then too shall Idaho have to 
meet a more stringent criteria than state standards.  This will cause substantial expense both internally 
to IDEQ with updated permit development and review, and the permittees to adjust their treatment to 
accommodate stricter limits.  In addition, when stricter limits are required on an upstream permit, often 
there are not sufficiently sensitive test methods in place for monitoring some pollutants, again creating 
opportunities for compliance legal issues.   
In closing, during the meeting on July 13, 2023, hosted by ACWA, EPA stated that there will not be any 
additional funding for implementation of this rule.  This proposed rule will have a tremendous amount 
of additional work for EPA staff, who are already often behind schedule for current CWA program 
response.  IDEQ has concerns that the additional work this rule will entail, EPA staff will not have the 
ability to respond in a timely manner, negatively affecting Idaho citizens and stakeholders.   
 
Sincerely, 
Mary Anne Nelson 
Surface & Wastewater Division Administrator 
c: 
Beth Spelsberg, IDEQ

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0247 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0238 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
August 3, 2023 
 
Michael S. Regan 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center, Office of Water Docket 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405, Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for 
Indian Reservations.  
 
Administrator Regan, 
 
The United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations, (the “proposed rule”) presents novel and unique requirements 
which will press States into a quagmire of flawed regulatory burdens. These burdens will fall 
particularly hard on Idaho, whose boundaries include five federally recognized Indian tribes. Not 
only is the proposed rule bad policy, but it is also unlawful and exceeds statutory authority. Here 
again, EPA illegitimately asserts federal power with no statutory basis. The Clean Water Act 
(“CWA”) contains no language authorizing EPA’s astonishing power grab. Idaho herein comments 
on the important issues arising from EPA’s proposed action.1 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
I. 
Background 
 
EPA seeks to establish water quality standards (“WQS”) for waters on Indian reservations currently 
without EPA-approved WQS under the CWA. These WQS (“baseline WQS”) are intended to 
establish human health and environmental objectives as the basis for CWA protections. EPA 
intends for baseline WQS to apply to all waters of the United States in “Indian country.” EPA 
defines “Indian country” the same as 18 U.S.C. 1151,2 but provides automatic exclusions. In all, 
 
1 The first indication of EPA’s lack of respect for the role of the States—and contrary to language of the CWA—
throughout the proposed rule EPA capitalizes “tribe” and uses lower case for “states”. Apparently, this is an attempt 
to elevate tribal status above that of States by implication, in direct conflict with CWA’s treatment of those terms. 
 
2 (a) All land within the limits of any Indian reservation under the jurisdiction of the United States Government, 
notwithstanding the issuance of any patent, and, including rights-of-way running through the reservation; (b) all 
dependent Indian communities within the borders of the United States whether within the original or subsequently 
acquired territory thereof, and whether within or without the limits of a state; and (c) all Indian allotments, the Indian 
titles to which have not been extinguished, including rights-of-way running through the same 

2 of 9 
 
the proposed rule will apply to all waters of the United States within the limits of any Indian 
reservation under the jurisdiction of the United States, except on those reservations for which EPA 
or tribes have established WQS.  
 
The proposed rule would establish the following nationwide federal water quality standards for all 
waters of the United States within the limits of Indian reservations: (1) Designated uses consistent 
with the CWA including a new designated use that protects cultural and traditional uses; (2) 
narrative water quality criteria translated through binding EPA “options” to protect those new uses; 
(3) an antidegradation policy including requirements for the development of total maximum daily 
loads (“TMDLs”) and requirements for recognizing and revising impaired waters status; and, (4) 
a mixing zone policy and compliance schedule authorizing provision. See 88 Fed. Reg. 29496-01, 
129499, Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations. 
 
The proposed rule will have an enormous and negative economic impact on the citizens of Idaho 
and its agencies. The proposed rule is flawed, and the State of Idaho does not support the 
establishment of federal baseline water quality standards for waters on Indian reservations.   
 
II. 
The EPA lacks authority to adopt the proposed rule. 
 
EPA seeks to broadly promulgate baseline WQS for all waters on Indian reservations with no 
statutory authority to do so. EPA asserts that its authority for the proposed rule is supplied by CWA 
section 303(c)(4)(B). Specifically, the preamble to the proposed rule states that on January 18, 
2001,3  EPA administrator Carol Browner made a finding, under CWA section 303(c)(4)(B), that 
“water quality standards are necessary to meet the requirements of the Clean Water Act for all 
Indian country waters” without established WQS.  
 
CWA section 303(c)(4)(B) allows EPA to “promptly prepare and publish proposed regulations 
setting forth a revised or new water quality standard for the navigable waters. . . where the 
Administrator determines that a revised or new standard is necessary.” As more fully set forth 
below, EPA’s 2001 necessity determination is inadequate to justify the broad promulgation of WQS 
on all Indian reservations. See 40 C.F.R. § 131.22. Finally, EPA’s creation of a new designated use 
for cultural and traditional protection lacks statutory authority.  
 
A. Promulgating and implementing WQS for tribal waters exceeds EPA’s statutory 
authority. 
 
In 1987, Congress added Section 518 to the CWA, making tribes eligible for treatment as states 
(“TAS”) under the CWA. See 33 U.S.C. § 1377. Once authorized as a TAS, tribes would be granted 
regulatory power to, inter alia, establish water quality standards and certify compliance for federal 
license and permit holders, NPDES permitting, and CWA section 404 permitting. The proposed 
rule exceeds EPA’s CWA jurisdiction, because EPA seeks to promulgate tribal-specific WQS for 
waters on reservations even though those tribes have not obtained TAS authorization.  
 
3 This finding was included in a proposed rule, Federal Water Quality Standards for Indian Country and Other 
Provisions Regarding Federal Water Quality Standards, signed only two days before President George W. Bush was 
sworn in. The proposed rule was never published in the Federal Register, nor were public comments requested upon 
it. EPA’s claim that the proposal was withdrawn to “allow additional review” is dubious, at best.  

3 of 9 
 
 
Congress created a clear avenue for regulation of waters on reservations, CWA section 518, which 
contains specific directives to the EPA regarding the regulation of waters on reservations. The legal 
maxim, expressio unius est exclusio alterius, applies here, and the “EPA cannot rely on its general 
authority to make rules necessary to carry out its functions when a specific statutory directive 
defines the relevant functions of EPA in a particular area.”  Am. Petroleum Inst. v. U.S. E.P.A., 52 
F.3d 1113, 1119 (D.C. Cir. 1995).   
 
Section 518 describes three statutory directives to set tribal WQS—none of which enable EPA to 
jump the line and regulate waters on reservations. First, a tribe may negotiate a cooperative 
agreement with an adjoining State to apply that State’s standards. 33 U.S.C. § 1377(d); 56 Fed. 
Reg. at 64889. Second, the tribe may adopt the adjoining state’s standards. 56 Fed. Reg. at 64889. 
Finally, a tribe may adopt standards independently. Id.  
 
EPA now attempts to promulgate and implement WQS, in excess of its CWA jurisdiction, despite 
the clear grant of authority to the tribes to do so in Section 518. See Michigan v. E.P.A., 268 F.3d 
1075, 1082-87 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (EPA lacked general federal authority and jurisdiction in disputed 
Indian country because EPA's only authority to act for tribes under Clean Air Act (“CAA”) first 
required a finding of tribal jurisdiction based on TAS status under the CAA); see also 54 Fed. Reg. 
at 39103 (“EPA emphasizes that Federal promulgation is not consistent with the intent of CWA 
sections 303(c) and 518(e) to provide States, and Tribes qualifying for treatment as States, with 
the first opportunity to set standards)”. 
 
Moreover, EPA has not given any explanation for reversing its previous position that State WQS 
should be the logical starting point for reservation WQS. In promulgating “Amendments to the 
Water Quality Standards Regulation That Pertain to Standards on Indian Reservations,” EPA 
“assume[d] that existing State standards are applicable to reservation waters.” 56 Fed. Reg. at 
64891 (citing 54 Fed. Reg. 39104). In relation to federal promulgation of tribal WQS, “EPA re-
assert[ed] its belief that the standards of the adjacent State will be a logical beginning step for EPA 
if for no other reason than the consistency required by 40 CFR 131.10(b),” and clarified that 
Federal promulgation of standards occurs only as “a last resort”—that is, when “it finds a particular 
need” Id.  
 
The proposed rule, however, finds no particularized need justifying its broad-sweeping proposed 
action to treat all waters on reservations the same without regard for the unique topography, 
hydrology, geology, climate, and the resulting rivers, streams, and lakes that make up the water 
bodies within individual reservations. The power to promulgate a particular standard, one case at 
a time, does not encompass the power to promulgate every type of WQS in innumerable cases, 
nationwide, over an EPA-estimated 76,000 miles of rivers and streams and 1.9 million acres of 
lakes, reservoirs, and other open surface waters. In the absence of finding a “particular need” to 
set reservation WQS, EPA unjustifiably seizes authority for WQS promulgation from the tribes 
and States. 
 
 

4 of 9 
 
B. EPA’s creation of a new cultural designated use exceeds its CWA authority. 
 
Identifying designated uses is the first step in establishing WQS, and the proposed rule creates a 
new designated use to protect cultural and traditional uses of on-reservation waters. The CWA 
grants States (and authorized tribes) authority to determine designated uses—EPA has no CWA 
authority to create new designated uses.  
 
The Act prescribes that WQS, which include designated uses and water quality criteria to protect 
those uses, “shall be such as to protect the public health or welfare, enhance the quality of water 
and serve the purposes of this chapter,” and “shall be established taking into consideration their 
use and value for public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, 
and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and also taking into consideration their use and 
value for navigation.” 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(2)(A). If adopting new or revised designated uses other 
than the uses specified in CWA section 101(a)(2),4 or removing designated uses, States must 
submit documentation justifying how their consideration of the use and value of water for those 
uses appropriately supports the State's action. See 40 C.F.R. § 131.10. 
 
Offering guidance on CWA section 101(a)(2), EPA has identified uses of waters that are considered 
desirable to maintain water quality for the protection and propagation of fish, shellfish, wildlife, 
and recreation water when considering the use and value of State waters. These uses5 align with 
the CWA. While States are free to develop and adopt any use classification system they see as 
appropriate, see 40 CFR 131.10(a), no such authority exists for the EPA to create new designated 
uses without clear textual authority in the CWA6 and none exists.  
 
EPA states: “CWA section 303(c)(2)(A) provides that uses are to protect the “public health or 
welfare”” and because “[c]ultural and traditional uses serve to protect the health and welfare of 
Tribal members exercising such uses,” that such uses are “within the purposes enumerated in the 
Act.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 29503. Under the Act, WQS are intended to protect, inter alia, public health 
and welfare “taking into consideration their use and value for public water supplies, propagation 
of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and also 
taking into consideration their use and value for navigation.” 33 U.S.C. §1313 (c)(2)(A) (emphasis 
added). In the proposed rule, EPA works backwards from the statutory scheme. Instead of CWA’s 
process of identifying a designated use and then setting standards to protect it, EPA starts with the 
goal of protecting tribal culture and fabricates a designated use based on policy absent from the 
 
4 “[T]he protection and propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and provides for recreation in and on the water.” 
 
5 See EPA Water Quality Standards Handbook at 2, EPA-823-B-12-002 (2012) (public water supplies, propagation of 
fish and wildlife, recreation, agriculture and industrial purposes, and navigation: public water supplies; protection and 
propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife; recreation; agriculture; industry; navigation; coral reef preservation; 
marinas; groundwater recharge; aquifer protection; and, hydroelectric power). 
 
6 EPA has stated that any “Federal proposed rulemaking would likely be very straightforward, all streams would be 
classified fishable/swimmable and the criteria to protect the uses would be those guidance values established by EPA 
under section 304(a) of the Act. Any changes in a final rule would depend on information submitted during the public 
comment period.” 56 Fed. Reg. at 64891. Yet, by the proposed rule, EPA has neglected the straightforward approach 
of adopting existing classifications—opting instead for the creation of a new, statutorily unauthorized designated use 
classification.  
 

5 of 9 
 
CWA. Cultural and traditional use is simply not an enumerated purpose of the CWA, and EPA 
cannot make it so by agency fiat. 
 
EPA relies on CWA section 303(c)(2)(A) as authority for EPA setting new designated uses. Section 
303(c)(2)(A) provides that “[w]henever the State revises or adopts a new standard... [those] 
standards shall be such as to protect the public health or welfare, enhance the quality of water and 
serve the purposes of this chapter.” (emphasis added). Section 303(c)(2)(A) provides authority to 
the States (or TAS) to create new standards consisting of designated uses and water quality criteria 
to protect those uses—it is not a grant of authority to the EPA to create designated uses binding on 
States and tribes. Thus, even if cultural and traditional use is a proper “other purpose” or use under 
CWA section 303(c)(2)(A), only the States are empowered to establish that designated use, not the 
EPA. 
 
Finally, EPA fails to explain why a “cultural and traditional use” serves to protect the health and 
welfare of tribal members. EPA fails to justify creating a new designated use, when the existing 
uses of public water supplies, protection and propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife, or 
recreation currently protect public health and welfare and are intended to do so. Federal creation 
of a designated use divorced from the text of the CWA lacks any statutory authority.7 
 
The CWA does not prescribe precisely what designated uses a State or TAS must select, it merely 
grants the right to do so, while considering public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, 
and recreational, agricultural, industrial, and navigational purposes. The proposed rule, without 
any statutory authority to do so, commandeers that right, precluding the discretion the CWA grants 
to Idaho. 
 
C. EPA is not authorized to require ESA protections. 
 
The proposed rule’s narrative criteria requires that “[A]ll waters shall be free from conditions that 
would likely jeopardize the continued existence of any threatened or endangered species listed 
under the Federal Endangered Species Act or result in the destruction or adverse modification of 
such species' critical habitat.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 29505. The CWA does not provide EPA authority to 
mandate the protection of endangered species under the Endangered Species Act. To the extent 
EPA is required to consult pursuant to section 7(a)(2) of the Endangered Species Act, EPA has not 
done so yet—nor has EPA provided a mechanism for such consultation as a part of setting baseline 
WQS or amending that baseline.  
 
III. 
There are no regulatory gaps in WQS on reservations. 
 
EPA asserts a Baseline WQS Rule is required because there is a regulatory absence of WQS in 
effect on Indian reservations under the CWA. See 88 FR at 29499 (“the majority of Indian 
reservations do not have this foundational protection laid out by Congress in the CWA for their 
waters”). EPA contends that “[t]he lack of CWA-effective WQS for most Indian reservations means 
that those waters do not have the human health and environmental objectives in place that form 
 
7 EPA’s concomitant efforts to force States to identify, create, and protect tribal designated uses, see 87 Fed. Reg. 
74361-01, is a similar attempt to usurp Congressional authority and rewrite the purpose and scope of the CWA. 

6 of 9 
 
the basis for CWA protections,” and that “promulgation of baseline WQS would safeguard water 
quality until Tribes obtain TAS and adopt CWA WQS themselves.” Id.  
 
EPA wrongly concludes that no WQS apply on Indian reservations for CWA purposes. The CWA 
is a comprehensive nationwide environmental regulatory structure that does not omit waters on 
Indian reservations from the scope of State WQS protections. See 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251, 1313; see 
also 57 Fed. Reg. 60848, 60849 (Dec. 22, 1992) (EPA acknowledgment that CWA is designed to 
ensure that “all waters” are sufficiently clean); id. at 60851 (EPA's initial efforts under the 1972 
CWA aimed to expand coverage to “all interstate and intrastate surface waters”). 
 
The CWA requirement that States promulgate WQS for all intrastate waters is unambiguously 
comprehensive and necessarily includes all waters on Indian reservations within state boundaries. 
See Thomas v. Jackson, 581 F.3d 658, 661 (8th Cir. 2009) (CWA requires each State to establish 
WQS for waterbodies “within the state’s boundaries”); National Wildlife Federation v. Browner, 
127 F.3d 1126, 1127 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (CWA requires state WQS for “every” body of water within 
a State); Friends of Merrymeeting Bay v. Olsen, 839 F.Supp.2d 366,370 (D. Me. 2012) (CWA 
requires States to establish WQS for “all” of their waterbodies); see also 33 U.S.C. § 1370 (nothing 
in the CWA “shall. . . be construed as impairing or in any manner affecting any right or jurisdiction 
of the States with respect to the waters (including boundary waters) of such States”). 
 
The CWA’s plain requirement that States promulgate WQS for all intrastate waters, including 
waters within Indian reservations, is also supported by the Supreme Court’s decision in Federal 
Power Commission v. Tuscarora Indian Nation, 362 U.S. 99, 116 (1960) (“a general statute in 
terms applying to all persons includes Indians and their property interests”), as well as a subsequent 
Court of Appeals decision in the analogous water regulatory context of the Safe Drinking Water 
Act. Phillips Petroleum Co. v. U.S. E.P.A., 803 F.2d 545, 555-57 (10th Cir. 1986) (SDWA, which 
establishes a “national policy with respect to clean water,” applies to Indian lands consistent with 
Tuscarora rule and EPA’s contemporaneous interpretations of the SDWA; to hold otherwise would 
contradict the clear meaning and purpose of the SDWA by creating a “vacuum of authority” and 
“leaving vast areas of the nation devoid of protection”). 
 
EPA’s own WQS regulations and historical guidance on WQS also emphasize the role of States in 
comprehensively promulgating WQS for all intrastate waters. See 40 C.F.R. §§ 131.1, 131.2, 
131.3(j), 131.4, 131.8, 131.10; Questions and Answers on Water Quality Standards Under PL 92-
500, U.S. EPA, Office of Water, November 1972, question no. 4 (WQS apply to all interstate and 
intrastate waters), no. 6 (States must establish WQS for all intrastate waters); Questions & Answers 
on: Water Quality Standards, U.S. EPA, Office of Water, December 1983, question no. 2 (WQS 
are established by States), no. 9 (WQS apply to waters of the United States), no. 22 (all States have 
WQS)); Introduction To Water Quality Standards, U.S. EPA, Office of Water, September 1988, 
Section I, question no. 7 (WQS should be adopted for each waterbody within a State's boundaries), 
no. 8 (States adopt WQS), no. 10 (WQS apply to all waters of the United States); Water Quality 
Standards Handbook: Second Edition, with update # I, U.S. EPA, Office of Water, August 1994 
(select portions only), Introduction (1972 CWA amendments extended the previously established 
program of WQS for interstate waters to one requiring WQS for all intrastate and surface waters). 
 

7 of 9 
 
Finally, as discussed in section II.A supra, it has been EPA’s “belief that the standards of the 
adjacent State will be a logical beginning step for EPA if for no other reason than the consistency 
required by 40 CFR 131.10(b).” 56 Fed. Reg. at 64891. That is, “existing State standards are 
applicable to reservation waters,” id. (citing 54 Fed. Reg. 39104), no regulatory gap exists for 
Indian reservations, and, contrary to EPA’s assertion, those waters do indeed “have the human 
health and environmental objectives in place that form the basis for CWA protections,” by way of 
State promulgated WQS.  
 
IV. 
The proposed rule is vague and ambiguous. 
 
Uncertainty surrounds the legal boundaries of many tribal lands in the West. How will EPA 
determine the boundaries of reservations and trust lands, particularly where those boundaries are 
subject to ongoing dispute? Additionally, non-tribal ownership of lands within reservation 
boundaries are often subject to state rather than tribal laws. How will EPA develop and enforce 
WQS standards across lands that alternate between tribal and non-tribal ownership? In Idaho, there 
are significant outstanding issues regarding the borders of Indian reservations, as well as issues of 
land patents and rights-of-way running through reservations. Additionally, there are concerns 
about how the baseline WQS will impact Idaho’s ability to apply State water quality laws to non-
tribal members on tribal lands. The proposed rule fails to address these issues, leaving the extent 
of the rule’s applicability vague and ambiguous. 
 
Additionally, EPA’s proposed “cultural and traditional uses” are so tribe-specific that a national 
catch-all designation of “cultural and traditional uses” appears so vague as to have little meaning. 
Cultural and ceremonial differences between tribes and groups within tribes also can create 
challenges in their implementation. It is not clear how these uses would be defined in rule or 
implemented in practice. EPA does not even attempt to define cultural and traditional uses, 
recognizing the ambiguity of the term. The outcome of this will potentially be a very confusing 
and inconsistent administrative framework for state regulators, regulated entities, and impacted 
citizens. 
 
The proposed rule discusses the negative impacts of suppressed fish consumption rates, describing 
the “suppression effect” as when the “fish consumption rate for a given tribe reflects a current level 
of consumption that is artificially diminished relative to the tribe’s heritage fish consumption rate.” 
88 Fed. Reg. at 29521. EPA’s reliance on the undefined “suppression effect” creates additional 
problems. EPA’s hope to achieve heritage consumption rates through water quality standards 
ignores the myriad causes outside the scope of the CWA that have reduced fish consumption rates 
among tribes.8 
 
The intent of the “binding translation procedures” is unclear. EPA “is relying on its role as both the 
promulgating entity and the primary implementation authority to allow a degree of site-specific 
tailoring with the regulatory construct of the water quality standards during subsequent 
implementation of the proposed rule.” In other words, EPA will only develop the water quality 
 
8 EPA asserts that its proposed rule will “promote[] tribal sovereignty over tribes’ water resources.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 
29521. While tribes may apply for TAS status to regulate water quality, States and not tribes retain sovereignty control 
over water resources. See 33 U.S.C. § 1251(g).  

8 of 9 
 
criteria component of standards when implementing a TMDL, NDPES permit, or water quality 
certification. This would never be approved in a State’s WQS package. 
 
The proposed rule’s “narrative criteria” will be accompanied by a binding translation procedure 
for determining case-specific numeric values to protect the applicable designated use. The 
translation procedures are vague, and it is unclear how the process will be implemented for the 
development of NPDES permits limits, water quality assessment, or water quality certification 
development. 
 
The proposed rule’s narrative criteria state that “all waters shall maintain a level of water quality 
at the pour points to downstream waters that provide for the attainment and maintenance of the 
water quality standards.” 88 Fed. Reg. 29505 (emphasis added). EPA defines “pour points” as “the 
points of entry into downstream water bodies.” Id. This definition does not exist in the CWA, nor 
does the Act imply that EPA should legislate this amendment to the Act by agency edict.9  
Moreover, in Idaho, there are significant outstanding issues regarding the borders of Indian 
reservations, as well as issues of land patents and rights-of-way running through reservations. The 
proposed rule’s ill-defined “pour point” does nothing to address these concerns, and will only 
create regulatory confusion.  
 
Finally, the proposed rule’s narrative criteria recommends that in addition to site-specific 
conditions based on a sound scientific rationale, “indigenous knowledge” should be considered. 
88 Fed. Reg. at 29507. EPA relies on a November 30, 2022 internal memorandum as its basis for 
“indigenous knowledge”. This document is not an agency interpretation and has not undergone 
rulemaking—yet, EPA relies on it for general applicability. The CWA does not provide for the 
consideration of indigenous knowledge in setting water quality standards. EPA is therefore, 
without authority to rely on such factors.  
 
V. 
The proposed rule fails to account for the conflict resolution provided by the CWA. 
 
EPA’s regulations under 40 CFR § 131.7 provide a mechanism for resolving disputes between 
States and Indian tribes with TAS status that arise as a result of differing water quality standards 
on common bodies of water. Eligibility for EPA’s § 131.7 dispute resolution depends on six criteria, 
including §131.7(b)(2) which requires the tribe to be “eligible to the same extent as a state for 
purposes of water quality standards,” and §131.7(b)(5) which requires the WQS to not only be 
approved by EPA, but also to be adopted pursuant to the respective state and tribal laws. Tribes 
without TAS authority as required under (b)(2), and tribes that have not adopted EPA’s proposed 
baseline WQS pursuant to that tribe’s laws as required under (b)(5) would appear to fall outside 
the 40 CFR §131.7 dispute mechanism. Will there still be an available avenue to resolve 
prospective state-tribal differences in WQS that result in unreasonable consequences? If not, does 
 
9 The proposed rule creates water quality criteria that maintains water quality at the pour point and “provide[s] for the 
attainment and maintenance of water quality standards” for downstream waters. 88 Fed. Reg. at 29505. Requiring 
maintenance of WQS at these “pour points” will create a patchwork of compliance zones as waters move across Idaho 
lands, into reservations, and out again. The “pour point” language will therefore, dramatically increase the stringency 
of compliance with downstream WQS. The existing approach, requiring WQS compliance at downstream States is 
more diffuse, offers regulatory clarity, and complies with the language of the CWA.  

9 of 9 
 
EPA have the necessary authority to develop appropriate regulations to address disputes over 
baseline WQS? EPA has failed to answer these important questions.  
 
VI. 
The proposed rule circumvents cooperative federalism and usurps the role of Idaho 
under the CWA 
 
The proposed tribal-based WQS requirements infringe upon the distinct and exclusive role of 
States (and authorized tribes) in promulgating WQS for all intrastate waters under the CWA and 
its principles of cooperative federalism. See 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251(b), 1313, 1370; 40 C.F.R. §§ 131.1, 
131.2, 131.3, 131.4, 131.8, 131.10. They are also inconsistent with existing EPA guidance, 
including EPA’s 2000 Human Health Methodology, which gives States the authority and flexibility 
to choose the populations that the States wish to protect and to choose among a range of acceptable 
parameters (including FCRs and cancer risk levels) when developing HHC—which are risk 
management decisions left to the discretion of the States and those tribes with TAS authorization 
for WQS purposes. Under no circumstances should EPA take action that restricts or diminishes in 
any way the role and flexibility of States (and authorized tribes) under the CWA and EPA’s existing 
guidance.  
 
CONCLUSION:  
A Better Way Forward 
 
State WQS apply to all waters of the United States within each State's boundaries, including waters 
on Indian reservations. The EPA recently promulgated rules making TAS application and approval 
easier. While tribes undergo this process, waters on reservations remain covered by State standards.  
 
Idaho has spent more than 30 years establishing science-based WQS that recognize its unique 
topography, hydrology, geology, climate, rivers, streams, and lakes that make up Idaho’s water 
bodies. These standards have been reviewed and approved by EPA on a periodic basis, making 
them CWA-effective. EPA-approved State WQS provide a much stronger baseline for developing 
tribal WQS and are better tailored to fit tribes within Idaho, rather than EPA's proposed broad-
brush. 
 
 
Respectfully, 
 
 
____________________ 
Raul Labrador 
Idaho Attorney General

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0215 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Proposed Rule to Establish Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservation Waters 
Mille Lacs Band Comments 
2 
August 1, 2023 
 
 
FILED: Ray.James@epa.gov 
 
James Ray, Program Analyst  
Office of Water, Tribal Water Quality Standards Program 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW (Mail Code: 4203M) 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
 
Re: 
Proposed Rule to Establish Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian 
Reservation Waters 
 
 
Hello Mr. Ray: 
 
Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe (Band) is a federally-recognized Anishinaabe Tribe, located 
in east-central Minnesota, with our reservation established under the 1855 Treaty of Washington 
(10 Stat. 1165) with treaty and reserved rights in the 1837 Treaty of St. Peters (7 Stat. 536) and 
1842 Treaty of La Pointe (7 Stat. 591) treaty-ceded territories spanning from east central 
Minnesota, across northern Wisconsin, and into western portion of the upper peninsula of 
Michigan, including the portions of Lake Superior in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan. A 
portion of our Reservation in Mille Lacs County is within the Minneapolis–St. Paul–
Bloomington MN–WI Metropolitan Statistical Area (Twin Cities) containing two of our nine 
statutory communities, while seven of our other statutory communities are located in Aitkin and 
Pine Counties, along with our Urban Service Area located in the heart of the Twin Cities.  With 
this diverse perspective of having an urban, suburban, and rural mix of our communities, we 
thank the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Office of Water for this opportunity for 
us to provide our Tribal perspective and comments to the Proposed Rule to Establish Federal 
Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservation Waters. 
 
We commend the EPA for upholding its federal fiduciary responsibilities to Tribes by 
proposing this rule, such that there would be no regulatory gap within Indian Country.  By 
having this regulatory gap filled, we are ensured that all legal tools afforded to the Tribes to 
protect our waters are made available.  However, this will create a dizzying patchwork of 
different regulations applying to different areas of the Tribe’s land-holdings if Tribal 
jurisdictional lands and lands surrounding them have different water quality standards.  

Proposed Rule to Establish Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservation Waters 
Mille Lacs Band Comments 
Unfortunately, no matter what the EPA does, in the current framework ofland titles, we cannot 
escape this unfortunate circumstance. But, we can bring about some consistency on application 
of this rule with how other federal agencies implement their programs by having this rule to 
include all lands with titles held by Tribes in addition to the Tribe's formal Indian Reservation, 
its off-Reservation Trust lands and allotments. 
Tribes, due to our strong connection to our lands and waters, as demonstrated by Tribes 
who already have their federally-approved water quality standards in place, either meet or exceed 
in their water quality protection when compared to the jurisdiction(s) surrounding them. So, at 
the bare minimum, the water quality standards for Tribes who do not yet have standards put in 
place should meet their neighbor's standards; if there are differing standards among the Tribe's 
neighbors, then the most protective standard should be implemented. But even with this 
approach, Tribes must be given the option to explicitly request for certain standards be 
implemented that are more stringent. 
Some Tribes, such as with the Band, already have certain narrative and numeric standards 
enshrined in our Tribal laws. However, these standards have not been adopted as our federal 
water quality standards. Whep determining each Tribe's baseline water quality standards, EPA 
must be cognizant of our Tribal laws, and any standards applied to our waters must not violate 
our Tribal laws. Consequently, EPA must have all five options provided in the proposed rule to 
tailor an appropriate baseline water quality standard to each of the Tribes who do not yet have 
federally-approved water quality standards. 
We would like to again thank the EPA for this opportunity for us to provide you with our 
thoughts and ideas regarding the Proposed Rule to Establish Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservation Waters. If you have questions or would like to continue this 
discussion, please feel free to contact us and request a formal government-to-government 
consultation. 
1 
Sincerely, 
!!jpptrft L> 
Commissioner of Natural Resources 
cc: 
Susan Klapel, Executive Director, Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe DNR 
Perry Bunting, Director of Environmental Programs, Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe DNR 
Chad Weiss, Water Resource Manager, Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe DNR 
2

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0220 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
EPN Comments on EPA’s Proposed Federal Baseline
Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations
Docket No.: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405
July 28, 2023
Founded in 2017, the Environmental Protection Network (EPN) harnesses the expertise of almost
600 former Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) career staff and confirmation-level appointees from
Democratic and Republican administrations to provide the unique perspective of former regulators and
scientists with decades of historical knowledge and subject matter expertise.
EPN commends EPA for proposing federal baseline water quality standards for Indian Reservations. EPA
has spent decades encouraging the more than 300 eligible Tribes to apply for Treatment as a State (TAS),
but only 84 Tribes have applied and been approved to administer a water quality standards program. Only
47 tribes with approved TAS applications have approved water quality standards. This incredibly slow pace
of tribal-initiated water quality standards has resulted in over 76,000 miles of rivers and streams and 1.9
million acres of lakes and reservoirs to be without water quality standards in 2023, affecting over half a
million people. The lack of clear, enforceable human health and environmental standards in these waters is
unacceptable in the 21st century.
EPN provides comments on the proposed designated uses, narrative criteria, antidegradation policy, mixing
zone policy, compliance schedule authorization provision, designated use and variance procedures, CWA
section 404 amendments, and the rule’s effective date.
Designated Uses
EPN agrees that EPA should promulgate aquatic life, primary contact recreation, and cultural/traditional
uses for all waters in Indian Reservations. We agree that cultural/traditional uses should be left open for
each Tribe to define on a site-specific basis, since these uses will be unique for each Tribe and may require
different levels of protection from aquatic life and primary contact recreation. EPN urges EPA to add the
public water supply use to the designated uses promulgated for all waters in Indian Reservations. We believe
it is critical that this rule provides the standards needed to ensure Indian Reservation waters are a source of
safe food and drinking water. EPA should promulgate the public water supply use and not delay by requiring
Tribes to request this use. Tribes can use this rule’s effective procedure for revising any designated use if the
public water supply use is unattainable on a site-specific basis.
Narrative Criteria
EPN commends EPA for proposing narrative criteria instead of numeric criteria for tribal waters.
Scientifically defensible water quality criteria require consideration of site-specific water chemistry
parameters (e.g., pH, hardness, dissolved organic carbon) that affect the toxicity of metals and other
pollutants to aquatic species. Water quality standards for aluminum, ammonia, cadmium, chromium III and
VI, copper, lead, nickel, silver, zinc, and pentachlorophenol must be based on these site-specific parameters.
In addition, all the human health criteria designed to protect fish consumers must reflect each Tribe’s fish
consumption rates which may vary significantly from the consumption rates of non-tribal populations.

EPN agrees that EPA’s proposal of five types of narrative criteria covers all the types of pollution that can
prevent the attainment of designated uses in both tribal waters and downstream state or tribal waters. EPN
agrees that EPA’s proposed rule has identified the best options for translating these narrative standards into
numeric values and requiring robust public review of the resulting numeric standards. We concur that EPA
should be responsible for translating the narrative criteria, assuming that is done in consultation and
coordination with the Tribe(s) involved. We also concur that EPA should be responsible for resolving
differences between upstream states and these tribal water quality standards.
Antidegradation Policy
EPN agrees with the antidegradation policy EPA has proposed for Existing Uses attained on or after
November 28, 1975; High Quality Waters exceeding the quality necessary for 101(a)(2) uses; and
Outstanding National Resource Waters (ONRWs) with exceptional recreational, ecological, or cultural
significance.
For High Quality Waters, EPN agrees that the Regional Administrator should only consider the lowering of
water quality if a Tribe agrees in writing to a lowering after public engagement because it is necessary to
accommodate important economic and social development in the area where the waters are located. We
agree that any lowering must still protect existing uses and that no lowering can be approved unless statutory
and regulatory requirements of existing point sources and all tribal-required, cost-effective, and reasonable
best management practices for nonpoint source pollution are achieved. EPA asks for comment on whether
third parties should be allowed to do a socio-economic analysis to assess the importance of lowering water
quality. EPN recommends that EPA prohibit conduct of these analyses by third parties who would gain
financially from the lowering of water quality in order to prevent the development of biased analyses.
For ONRWs, EPN agrees that any person or entity should be able to nominate a waterbody for this
designation and that any culturally significant waterbody should be eligible in addition to
recreationally/ecologically significant waters. EPN further agrees that the antidegradation policy for
ONRWs should prohibit any permanent lowering of water quality, allowing only short-term, temporary
changes in water quality if necessary.
Mixing Zone Policy
EPN agrees with EPA’s proposed policy prohibiting mixing zones for the discharge of bioaccumulative
pollutants, pathogens, and pathogen indicators without adequate information that the designated uses will
be protected. Clearly, such pollutants can have significant adverse health impacts far beyond a mixing zone
and should not be allowed unless farfield impacts are shown to be inconsequential. For other types of
pollutants, EPN agrees that the Regional Administrator should have the authority to establish a mixing zone
on a case-by-case basis where necessary. EPN agrees that the rule’s proposed mixing zone size, shape, and
critical low flows all reflect best available science to minimize the impact of such zones. We urge the
Regional Administrators to ensure that wherever mixing zones are allowed, the outfall design should
maximize initial mixing.
Compliance Schedule Authorizing Provision
2

EPN agrees with EPA’s proposal that the authorizing provision require dischargers to comply as soon as
possible with any water quality-based effluent limit (WQBEL) in a permit reissued or modified on or after
the effective date of this final rule. It is critical that these tribal water quality standards be reflected in permit
limits without delay.
Designated Use and Variance Procedures
EPA requests comment on whether the final rule should include a provision that a Tribe must request in
writing any designated use revision less stringent than the baseline use promulgated by EPA. EPN
recommends that EPA include in the final rule provisions requiring a Tribe to request in writing a less
stringent use designation or a variance from any baseline water quality standard. We believe that these
significant revisions to water quality protection require a formal request from a Tribe and that the resulting
use attainability analyses, use and value demonstrations, and variance analyses be subject to public review
and comment before the Regional Administrator approves a designated use revision or water quality
standard variance.
CWA Section 404 Amendments
EPN agrees that EPA should amend 40 CFR § 230.10 (b)(1) to clarify that 404 permits need to ensure
compliance with federally promulgated water quality standards, including the baseline standards for Indian
reservations, in addition to state water quality standards. EPN also agrees that EPA should amend 40 CFR §
233.51 (b)(3) to clarify that EPA’s right to review 404 permit applications may not be waived for permits
with a reasonable potential to adversely impact waters of another state or waters subject to federally
promulgated water quality standards, including the baseline standards for Indian reservations.
Effective Date of Baseline Water Quality Standards
EPN agrees with EPA’s proposal to require that these baseline standards go into effect 120 days after the
final rule has been published in the Federal Register. It is critical that publicly transparent water quality
standards be established as quickly as possible in tribal waters once the rule has been finalized. EPN further
agrees with EPA’s proposal to limit Tribes’ ability to request exclusion of their waters from these baseline
standards to no later than 90 days after the final rule is published in the Federal Register. Tribes have the
ability to request exclusion from the moment this rule was proposed until 90 days after final rule
publication.
Conclusion
EPN commends EPA for proposing baseline water quality standards that can be customized for each Tribe
based on the best available science, local water quality and tribal traditions, and statutory requirements
regarding designated uses, protective criteria, and implementation procedures. It has taken far too long for
these critically important standards to be established for the thousands of miles of streams and rivers and
millions of acres of lakes and reservoirs in Indian reservations throughout the country. EPN urges EPA to
finalize these standards as quickly as possible.
3

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0241 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
August 3, 2023 
 
Via Regulations.gov 
 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center (Mail Code 2822IT) 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
  
Re:  
Public Comments on Proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian 
Reservations and Trust Lands; Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405  
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
The Center for Biological Diversity (“Center”) offers the following comments to the Environmental 
Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) proposal to establish federal baseline water quality standards (“WQS”) 
for over 250 Tribes.  
 
Water pollution is a pervasive issue in many Indigenous communities. As the proposed rule 
recognizes, water quality, aquatic community health, and human health are intimately connected. 
Clean water on Tribal lands is essential not just as a source of sustenance, but also for cultural, 
medicinal, and spiritual reasons. The Center supports efforts by EPA to work with Tribes to improve 
water quality by working to close existing regulatory gaps and provide a greater opportunity for Tribes 
to influence federal environmental regulatory policy and processes. Too many people have gone for 
too long without basic clean water protections.  
 
For the benefit of Tribal waters, ecosystems, and aquatic and aquatic-dependent wildlife, including 
culturally significant wildlife such as salmon and steelhead, EPA must commit to consulting under 
Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act (“ESA”) in undertaking this rulemaking. Congress enacted 
the ESA in response to growing concern over the extinction of plants, fish, and wildlife, and 
recognized that certain species “have been so depleted in numbers that they are in danger of or 
threatened with extinction.” 16 U.S.C. § 1531(a)(2). Endangered and threatened species are often 
sensitive to water contamination and are likely to be affected by actions that effect water quality. Such 
effects, even if beneficial, require consultation under the ESA.   
 
According to EPA, this rule will establish WQSs for approximately 76,000 miles of rivers and streams 
and 1.9 million acres of lakes, reservoirs, and other open surface waters within reservations. Those 
improved water quality protections are necessary. However, because approximately 99 endangered and 
threatened aquatic species and likely many more aquatic-dependent species also depend on these 
waters for their continued survival, consultation under Section 7 of the ESA is required. EPA cannot 
insure that its action will not jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered or threatened 

 
2 
species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of critical habitat without engaging in 
Section 7 consultation. To fulfill its duty under the ESA, EPA must, therefore, consult. 
 
I. Legal Background 
a. Endangered Species Act 
 
In 1973, Congress took the greatest step of any nation, then or since, to protect imperiled species and 
their ecosystems by passing the ESA. Tenn. Valley Auth. v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153, 180 (1978). The 
purpose of the Act is “to provide a means whereby the ecosystems upon which endangered species and 
threatened species depend may be conserved, [and] to provide a program for the conservation of such 
endangered species and threatened species.” 16 U.S.C. § 1531(b). As the Supreme Court has 
explained, “Congress has spoken in the plainest of words, making it abundantly clear that the balance 
has been struck in favor of affording endangered species the highest of priorities.” Tenn. Valley, 437 
U.S. at 194. The ESA vests primary responsibility for administering and enforcing the statute with the 
Secretaries of Commerce and Interior, who have delegated this responsibility to the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service (“Services”). 50 C.F.R. § 402.01(b). 
 
To fulfill the substantive purposes of the ESA, Section 7(a)(2) requires all federal agencies, including 
EPA, “in consultation with and with the assistance of [the Services], [to] insure that any action 
authorized, funded, or carried out by such agency . . . is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence 
of any endangered species or threatened species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of 
[critical] habitat of such species.” 16 U.S.C. § 1536(a)(2). Agency “action” is broadly defined as: “all 
activities or programs of any kind authorized, funded, or carried out, in whole or in part, by Federal 
agencies in the United States or upon the high seas,” including “actions intended to conserve listed 
species or their habitat,” “the promulgation of regulations,” and “actions directly or indirectly causing 
modifications to the land, water, or air.” 50 C.F.R. § 402.02. All affirmative and discretionary agency 
actions are subject to Section 7 consultation requirements. 50 C.F.R. § 402.03.   
 
Federal agencies must consult with the Services “at the earliest possible time” whenever their actions 
“may affect” a listed species or designated critical habitat. 50 C.F.R. § 402.2; 50 C.F.R. § 402.14(a) 
and (b). The courts have made abundantly clear that the “may affect” threshold is very low. A “may 
affect” determination is required when any “possible effect, whether beneficial, benign, adverse, or of 
an undetermined character” occurs. Center for Biological Diversity v. BLM, 698 F.3d 1101, 1122 (9th 
Cir. 2012) (emphasis added). A “no effect” determination is made when there is no effect at all to the 
listed species. See, e.g., National Ass’n v. Defenders of Wildlife (2007); Citizens for Better Forestry v. 
U.S. Dept of Agriculture, 481 F. Supp. 2d 1059 (N.D. Cal. 2007); Growth Energy v. EPA, 5 F.4th 1, 
27-30 (D.C. Cir. 2021); 50 C.F.R. § 402.14(b). If the Services do not concur with the agency’s “not 
likely to adversely affect” finding, then formal consultation is required. 50 C.F.R. § 402.14(a)-(b). 
 
b. Clean Water Act 
 
Congress enacted the Clean Water Act (“CWA”) “to restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and 
biological integrity of the Nation’s waters” through reduction and eventual elimination of the discharge 
of pollutants into those waters. 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a). The CWA sets forth the interim goal of achieving 
water quality, wherever attainable, that provides both for both (i) the protection and propagation of 
fish, shellfish, and wildlife and (ii) recreation in and on the water. 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a), (a)(2). To 

 
3 
achieve these goals, the CWA establishes a system of regulating water pollution discharges through 
effluent limitations, discharge permitting, and source performance standards. 16 U.S.C. §§ 1342(a), 
1311, 1314, 1316.  
 
WQSs “are the foundation of the water quality-based pollution control programs required by the 
CWA.” 88 Fed. Reg. 29,496 (May 5, 2023). They describe the desired condition of the waterbody, its 
designated uses, the water quality criteria necessary to protect those uses, and an antidegradation 
policy to maintain its quality. 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c). All WQSs under the CWA must protect existing 
uses in a waterbody, and those “uses” often include supporting species that are listed as threatened or 
endangered under the ESA. 33 U.S.C. § 1313. These standards are the basis for other CWA programs 
such as the NPDES Program under Section 402, Section 303(d) water body assessments and 
determinations of TMDLs, Section 401 certifications of Federal licenses and permits, and Section 404 
permits for dredge or fill material. 33 U.S.C. §§ 1342, 1313(d), 1341, 1344.  
 
Currently, the only EPA-approved WQS for Indian country waters fall into one of three categories: (1) 
where Tribes have been authorized to administer their own WQSs, (2) where States have been 
authorized to implement WQSs and other CWA programs in Indian country, and (3) where the EPA 
has promulgated Federal WQSs for a reservation or Indian trust land. To date, only 47 Tribes have 
been authorized to administer their CWA programs and EPA has approved their WQSs, 4 states have 
authorization to administer CWA on Indian country, and the EPA has promulgated federal WQS for 1 
reservation, leaving the majority of Tribes (approximately 250) without CWA protections.  
 
II. Where the WQSs Would Apply 
 
On April 27, 2023, the EPA Administrator signed a proposed rule to promulgate federal baseline 
WQSs for waters on over 250 Indian reservations that do not presently have WQSs in effect. 88 Fed. 
Reg. 29,496. The proposed rule states that while EPA still prefers for Tribes to seek authorization to 
set their own WQSs, federal WQSs are needed in the meantime to safeguard water quality on 
reservations. 88 Fed. Reg. 29,499. 
 
EPA estimates that its “proposed action will protect an estimated 76,000 miles of rivers and streams 
and 1.9 million acres of lakes and reservoirs on Indian reservations that lack Clean Water Act 
standards.” 88 Fed. Reg. 29,499. The reservations that would be affected by the rule are home to 
approximately 550,000 people who currently live without the “foundational protections laid out by 
Congress in the CWA for their waters.” 88 Fed. Reg. 29,499. 
 
III. Argument 
a. Promulgating WQS is an affirmative, discretionary agency action requiring 
consultation under the ESA  
 
The ESA is clear. Federal agencies must consult with the Services “at the earliest possible time” 
whenever their “actions” “may affect” a listed species or designated critical habitat. 50 C.F.R. § 
402.14. “[T]he term ‘agency action’ is to be construed broadly,” Karuk Tribe of Cal. v. U.S. Forest 
Serv., 681 F.3d 1006, 1021 (9th Cir. 2012) (en banc), so long as “there is discretionary Federal 
involvement or control.” 50 C.F.R. § 402.03. The Ninth Circuit has interpreted agency action to have 
occurred “whenever an agency makes an affirmative, discretionary decision,” meaning that the agency 

 
4 
“affirmatively authorized, funded, or carried out the underlying activity.” Karuk Tribe, F.3d at 1011, 
1021. The same court elaborated that Section 7 consultation is required for agency actions where the 
agency has “some discretion to influence or change the activity for the benefit of a protected species.” 
Id. 
 
EPA’s proposed action to promulgate WQSs for waters on over 250 Indian reservations is a 
discretionary, affirmative agency action that may affect threatened and endangered species and their 
critical habitats. According to EPA, in promulgating WQSs for approximately 250 Tribes, the 
proposed action will develop numeric limits for specific pollutants across 76,000 miles of rivers and 
streams and 1.9 million acres of lakes, reservoirs, and other open surface waters. Comparing threatened 
and endangered species range and habitat data against these waterways, the Center estimates that this 
action may affect approximately 99 threatened and endangered aquatic species and their critical 
habitats, and likely many more aquatic-dependent species. Those aquatic species include: 
 
Table 1: Threatened and Endangered Aquatic Species Who May Be Affected by Proposed WQSs 
Scientific Name 
Common Name 
Status 
Reservation/Trust Land 
Medionidus 
acutissimus 
Alabama 
moccasinshell 
Threatened 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
 
Pseudemys 
alabamensis 
Alabama red-
bellied turtle 
Endangered 
Mississippi Choctaw Reservation 
Scaphirhynchus 
suttkusi 
Alabama sturgeon 
Endangered 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Oncorhynchus 
apache 
Apache trout 
Threatened 
San Carlos Reservation 
Anaxyrus 
californicus 
Arroyo toad 
Endangered 
Agua Caliente Indian Reservation, Barona 
Reservation, Capitan Grande Reservation, 
Ewiiaapaayp Reservation, Inaja and 
Cosmit Reservation, La Jolla Reservation, 
Los Coyotes Reservation, Mesa Grande 
Reservation, Pala Reservation, Pauma and 
Yuima Reservation, Pechanga 
Reservation, Rincon Reservation, San 
Pasqual Reservation, Santa Ysabel 
Reservation, Soboba Reservation, Sycuan 
Reservation, Viejas Reservation 
Acipenser 
oxyrhynchus 
oxyrhynchus 
Atlantic sturgeon 
(Chesapeake Bay 
DPS) 
Endangered 
Pamunkey Reservation 
Lepidomeda 
mollispinis 
pratensis 
Big Spring 
spinedace 
Threatened 
Moapa River Indian Reservation 
Glyptemys 
muhlenbergii 
Bog Turtle 
Threatened 
Oneida Nation Reservation, Tonawanda 
Reservation 
Gila elegans 
Bonytail 
Endangered 
Chemehuevi Reservation, Colorado River 
Indian Reservation, Fort Mojave 
Reservation, Uintah and Ouray 

 
5 
Reservation 
Pyrgulopsis 
bruneauensis 
Bruneau Hot 
springsnail 
Endangered 
Duck Valley Reservation 
Salvelinus 
confluentus 
Bull Trout 
Threatened 
Blackfeet Indian Reservation, Hoh Indian 
Reservation, Jamestown S'Klallam 
Reservation, Kootenai Reservation, Lower 
Elwha Reservation, Muckleshoot 
Reservation, Nez Perce Reservation, 
Nisqually Reservation, Nooksack 
Reservation, Quileute Reservation, 
Quinault Reservation, Shoalwater Bay 
Indian Reservation, Skokomish 
Reservation, Stillaguamish Reservation, 
Tulalip Reservation, Yakama Nation 
Reservation 
Rana draytonii 
California red-
legged frog 
Threatened 
Auburn Rancheria, Berry Creek 
Rancheria, Big Sandy Rancheria, Chicken 
Ranch Rancheria, Enterprise Rancheria, 
Jackson Rancheria, Lytton Rancheria, 
Manchester-Point Arena Rancheria, Mesa 
Grande Reservation, North Fork 
Rancheria, Picayune Rancheria, Santa 
Ynez Reservation, Santa Ysabel 
Reservation, Shingle Springs Rancheria, 
Stewarts Point Rancheria, Table Mountain 
Rancheria, Tuolumne Rancheria 
Gila nigrescens 
Chihuahua chub 
Threatened 
Fort Sill Apache Indian Reservation 
Oncorhynchus 
tshawytscha 
Chinook salmon  
Threatened 
Chemehuevi Reservation, Colorado River 
Indian Reservation, Fort Mojave 
Reservation, Uintah and Ouray 
Reservation (California Coast DPS); 
Redding Rancheria (Central Valley spring 
run DPS); Jamestown S'Klallam 
Reservation, Lower Elwha Reservation, 
Muckleshoot Reservation, Nisqually 
Reservation, Nooksack Reservation, Port 
Madison Reservation, Sauk-Suiattle 
Reservation, Skokomish Reservation, 
Squaxin Island Reservation, Stillaguamish 
Reservation, Tulalip Reservation (Puget 
Sound DPS) 
Rana chiricahuensis Chiricahua leopard 
frog 
Threatened 
Fort Sill Apache Indian Reservation, San 
Carlos Reservation, Tohono O'odham 
Nation Reservation, Tonto Apache 
Reservation, Yavapai-Apache Nation 
Reservation, Zuni Reservation 

 
6 
Novisuccinea 
chittenangoensis 
Chittenango ovate 
amber snail 
Threatened 
Oneida Nation Reservation 
Oncorhynchus keta 
Chum salmon  
Threatened 
Jamestown S'Klallam Reservation, 
Skokomish Reservation (Hood Canal 
summer run DPS) 
Oncorhynchus 
kisutch 
Coho salmon  
Threatened 
(Central 
California 
Coast ESU 
is 
Endangered) 
Manchester-Point Arena Rancheria, 
Stewarts Point Rancheria (Central 
California Coast ESU); Coos, Lower 
Umpqua, and Siuslaw Reservation, 
Coquille Reservation, Cow Creek 
Reservation, Siletz Reservation (Oregon 
Coast ESU) 
Ptychocheilus 
lucius 
Colorado 
pikeminnow 
Endangered 
Fort Mojave Reservation, Uintah and 
Ouray Reservation 
Medionidus 
parvulus 
Coosa 
moccasinshell 
Endangered 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Chasmistes cujus 
Cui-ui 
Endangered 
Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 
Eremichthys acros 
Desert dace 
Threatened 
Summit Lake Reservation 
Cyprinodon 
macularius 
Desert pupfish 
Endangered 
Salt River Reservation, San Carlos 
Reservation, Torres-Martinez Reservation 
Cyprinodon 
diabolis 
Devils Hole pupfish Endangered 
Timbi-Sha Shoshone Reservation 
Thaleichthys 
pacificus 
Eulachon 
Threatened 
Quinault Reservation 
Oxytropis 
campestris var. 
chartacea 
Fassett's locoweed 
Threatened 
Red Cliff Reservation 
Hamiota altilis 
Finelined 
pocketbook 
Threatened 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Rorippa gambellii 
Gambel's 
watercress 
Endangered 
Inaja and Cosmit Reservation, Santa Ynez 
Reservation 
Thamnophis gigas 
Giant garter snake 
Threatened 
Auburn Rancheria, Colusa Rancheria, 
Enterprise Rancheria 
Gila intermedia 
Gila chub 
Endangered 
San Carlos Reservation, Tohono O'odham 
Nation Reservation, Yavapai-Apache 
Nation Reservation, Yavapai-Prescott 
Reservation 
Poeciliopsis 
occidentalis 
Gila topminnow 
(incl. Yaqui) 
Endangered 
San Carlos Reservation 
Oncorhynchus gilae Gila trout 
Threatened 
Fort McDowell Yavapai Nation 
Reservation, Salt River Reservation, San 
Carlos Reservation, Tonto Apache 
Reservation, Yavapai-Apache Nation 
Reservation, Yavapai-Prescott 
Reservation 
Acipenser 
Gulf sturgeon 
Threatened 
Mississippi Choctaw Reservation, Poarch 

 
7 
oxyrinchus desotoi 
Creek Reservation 
Lampsilis higginsii 
Higgins eye 
(pearlymussel) 
Endangered 
Ho-Chunk Nation Reservation, Prairie 
Island Indian Community, Santee 
Reservation 
Crenichthys baileyi 
grandis 
Hiko White River 
springfish 
Endangered 
Ely Reservation 
Solidago 
houghtonii 
Houghton's 
goldenrod 
Threatened 
Little Traverse Bay Reservation, Sault 
Ste. Marie Reservation 
Lilaeopsis 
schaffneriana var. 
recurva 
Huachuca water-
umbel 
Endangered 
Pascua Pueblo Yaqui Reservation, San 
Carlos Reservation, Tohono O'odham 
Nation Reservation 
Gila cypha 
Humpback chub 
Threatened 
Havasupai Reservation, Uintah and Ouray 
Reservation 
Brychius 
hungerfordi 
Hungerford's 
crawling water 
beetle 
Endangered 
Grand Traverse Reservation, Little 
Traverse Bay Reservation 
Potamilus inflatus 
Inflated heelsplitter 
Threatened 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Leptoxis foremani 
Interrupted 
Rocksnail 
Endangered 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Oncorhynchus 
clarkii henshawi 
Lahontan cutthroat 
trout 
Threatened 
Bridgeport Reservation, Dresslerville 
Colony, Reno-Sparks Indian Colony, 
South Fork Reservation, South Fork 
Reservation, Summit Lake Reservation, 
Washoe Ranches Trust Land, Woodfords 
Community, Yomba Reservation 
Lepidomeda vittata 
Little Colorado 
spinedace 
Threatened 
Zuni Reservation 
Oncorhynchus 
aguabonita whitei 
Little Kern golden 
trout 
Threatened 
Tule River Reservation 
Tiaroga cobitis 
Loach minnow 
Endangered 
San Carlos Reservation, Yavapai-Apache 
Nation Reservation, Zuni Reservation 
Deltistes luxatus 
Lost River sucker 
Endangered 
Klamath Reservation, XL Ranch 
Rancheria 
Margaritifera 
hembeli 
Louisiana pearlshell Threatened 
Jena Band of Choctaw Reservation 
Isoetes 
louisianensis 
Louisiana quillwort 
Endangered 
Mississippi Choctaw Reservation 
Arenaria paludicola 
Marsh Sandwort 
Endangered 
Muckleshoot Reservation, Nisqually 
Reservation, Santa Ynez Reservation 
Moapa coriacea 
Moapa dace 
Endangered 
Moapa River Indian Reservation 
Rana muscosa 
Mountain yellow-
legged frog 
Endangered 
Agua Caliente Indian Reservation, 
Morongo Reservation, San Manuel 
Reservation, Tule River Reservation 
Thamnophis 
rufipunctatus 
Narrow-headed 
gartersnake 
Threatened 
San Carlos Reservation, Yavapai-Apache 
Nation Reservation 

 
8 
Acipenser 
medirostris 
North American 
green sturgeon 
Threatened 
Coos, Lower Umpqua, and Siuslaw 
Reservation, Coquille Reservation, Hoh 
Indian Reservation, Lower Elwha 
Reservation, Quileute Reservation, 
Quinault Reservation, Shoalwater Bay 
Indian Reservation, Smith River 
Rancheria, Trinidad Rancheria, Yurok 
Reservation (southern DPS) 
Rana pretiosa 
Oregon spotted frog Threatened 
Nisqually Reservation, Nooksack 
Reservation, Yakama Nation Reservation 
Pleurobema 
perovatum 
Ovate clubshell 
Endangered 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Cyprinodon 
radiosus 
Owens pupfish 
Endangered 
Fort Independence Reservation, Lone Pine 
Reservation 
Gila bicolor ssp. 
snyderi 
Owens Tui Chub 
Endangered 
Fort Independence Reservation, Lone Pine 
Reservation 
Gila robusta jordani Pahranagat 
roundtail chub 
Endangered 
Ely Reservation 
Empetrichthys latos Pahrump poolfish 
Endangered 
Ely Reservation, Goshute Reservation, 
Las Vegas Indian Colony 
Oncorhynchus 
clarkii seleniris 
Paiute cutthroat 
trout 
Threatened 
Washoe Ranches Trust Land, Woodfords 
Community 
Arctostaphylos 
pallida 
Pallid manzanita 
Threatened 
Lytton Rancheria 
Scaphirhynchus 
albus 
Pallid sturgeon 
Endangered 
Crow Creek Reservation, Fort Berthold 
Reservation, Iowa (KS-NE) Reservation, 
Lower Brule Reservation, Omaha 
Reservation, Santee Reservation, 
Winnebago Reservation, Yankton 
Reservation 
Notropis simus 
pecosensis 
Pecos bluntnose 
shiner 
Threatened 
Mescalero Reservation 
Gambusia nobilis 
Pecos gambusia 
Endangered 
Mescalero Reservation 
Pseudemys 
rubriventris bangsi 
Plymouth Redbelly 
Turtle 
Endangered 
Mashpee Wampanoag Trust Land 
Crenichthys 
nevadae 
Railroad Valley 
springfish 
Threatened 
Duckwater Reservation 
Xyrauchen texanus 
Razorback sucker 
Endangered 
Chemehuevi Reservation, Colorado River 
Indian Reservation, Fort Mojave 
Reservation, San Carlos Reservation, 
Uintah and Ouray Reservation, Yavapai-
Apache Nation Reservation 
Verbena californica 
Red Hills vervain 
Threatened 
Chicken Ranch Rancheria 
Graptemys 
oculifera 
Ringed map turtle 
Threatened 
Mississippi Choctaw Reservation 
Hybognathus 
Rio Grande Silvery 
Endangered 
Pueblo de Cochiti, Jemez Pueblo, Jicarilla 

 
9 
amarus 
Minnow 
Apache Nation Reservation, San Felipe 
Pueblo, San Felipe Pueblo/Santa Ana 
Pueblo joint-use area, San Felipe 
Pueblo/Santo Domingo Pueblo joint-use 
area, San Ildefonso Pueblo, Santo 
Domingo Pueblo, Ysleta del Sur Pueblo, 
Zia Pueblo 
Streptocephalus 
woottoni 
Riverside fairy 
shrimp 
Endangered 
Morongo Reservation, Pechanga 
Reservation, Soboba Reservation 
Pleurocera 
foremani 
Rough hornsnail 
Endangered 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Branchinecta 
sandiegonensis 
San Diego fairy 
shrimp 
Endangered 
Barona Reservation, Capitan Grande 
Reservation 
Catostomus 
santaanae 
Santa Ana sucker 
Threatened 
San Manuel Reservation 
Leptodea leptodon 
Scaleshell mussel 
Endangered 
Winnebago Reservation 
Aeschynomene 
virginica 
Sensitive joint-
vetch 
Threatened 
Pamunkey Reservation 
Pacifastacus fortis 
Shasta crayfish 
Endangered 
Big Bend Rancheria, Montgomery Creek 
Rancheria, Pit River Trust Land, Roaring 
Creek Rancheria\ 
Plethobasus 
cyphyus 
Sheepnose Mussel 
Endangered 
Ho-Chunk Nation Reservation, Klamath 
Reservation, XL Ranch Rancheria 
Rana sierrae 
Sierra Nevada 
Yellow-legged Frog 
Endangered 
Greenville Rancheria, North Fork 
Rancheria 
Epioblasma 
triquetra 
Snuffbox mussel 
Endangered 
Menominee Reservation, Stockbridge 
Munsee Community 
Kinosternon 
sonoriense 
longifemorale 
Sonoyta mud turtle 
Endangered 
Pascua Pueblo Yaqui Reservation, 
Tohono O'odham Nation Reservation 
Epioblasma 
othcaloogensis 
Southern acornshell Endangered 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Pleurobema 
decisum 
Southern clubshell 
Endangered 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Pleurobema 
georgianum 
Southern pigtoe 
Endangered 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Cumberlandia 
monodonta 
Spectaclecase 
(mussel) 
Endangered 
St. Croix Reservation 
Meda fulgida 
Spikedace 
Endangered 
San Carlos Reservation, Tonto Apache 
Reservation, Yavapai-Apache Nation 
Reservation, Zuni Reservation 
Oncorhynchus 
mykiss 
Steelhead 
Threatened 
Coyote Valley Reservation (Central 
California Coast DPS); Redding 
Rancheria (Central Valley DPS); Yakama 
Nation Reservation (Middle Columbia 
River DPS); Blue Lake Rancheria, 

 
10 
Laytonville Rancheria, Manchester-Point 
Arena Rancheria, Round Valley 
Reservation (Northern California DPS); 
Jamestown S'Klallam Reservation, Lower 
Elwha Reservation, Muckleshoot 
Reservation, Nisqually Reservation, 
Nooksack Reservation, Sauk-Suiattle 
Reservation, Skokomish Reservation, 
Squaxin Island Reservation, Stillaguamish 
Reservation, Tulalip Reservation (Puget 
Sound DPS); Nez Perce Reservation 
(Snake River Basin DPS); Grand Ronde 
Community (Upper Willamette River 
winter run DPS) 
Popenaias popeii 
Texas hornshell 
Endangered 
Kickapoo Reservation 
Eucyclogobius 
newberryi 
Tidewater goby 
Endangered 
Big Lagoon Rancheria, Blue Lake 
Rancheria, Elk Valley Rancheria, Lytton 
Rancheria, Manchester-Point Arena 
Rancheria, Resighini Rancheria, Resighini 
Rancheria, Rohnerville (Rancheria) Trust 
Land, Smith River Rancheria, Stewarts 
Point Rancheria, Table Bluff Reservation, 
Trinidad Rancheria, Yurok Reservation 
Notropis topeka 
Topeka shiner 
Endangered 
Flandreau Reservation 
Ptychobranchus 
greenii 
Triangular 
Kidneyshell 
Endangered 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Tulotoma 
magnifica 
Tulotoma snail 
Threatened 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Epioblasma 
metastriata 
Upland combshell 
Endangered 
Poarch Creek Reservation 
Zapada glacier 
Western glacier 
stonefly 
Threatened 
Blackfeet Indian Reservation 
Lepidomeda 
albivallis 
White River 
spinedace 
Endangered 
Ely Reservation 
Crenichthys baileyi 
baileyi 
White River 
springfish 
Endangered 
Ely Reservation 
Acipenser 
transmontanus 
White sturgeon 
Endangered 
Kootenai Reservation 
Graptemys 
flavimaculata 
Yellow-blotched 
map turtle 
Threatened 
Mississippi Choctaw Reservation 
Catostomus 
discobolus yarrowi 
Zuni bluehead 
Sucker 
Endangered 
Zuni Reservation 
 
EPA also has “some discretion to influence or change the activity for the benefit of a protected 
species” in promulgating Tribal WQSs. Karuk Tribe, F.3d at 1011, 1021. Indeed, the EPA names the 
protection and propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife as a designated use for the WQSs and sets 

 
11 
one of the narrative criteria as “all waters to be free from conditions that would likely jeopardize the 
continued existence of any threatened or endangered species.” 88 Fed Reg. 29,503, 29,505. Even 
further, WQSs under the CWA must protect existing uses in a waterbody, and those “uses” often 
include supporting species that are listed as threatened or endangered under the ESA. 33 U.S.C. § 
1313.   
 
The protection and restoration of aquatic ecosystems is a key component of EPA’s objectives in setting 
WQS for Tribes, and of the CWA as a whole. EPA, “EPA Proposes to Establish First-Time Clean 
Water Act Protections for Over 250 Tribes,” https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-proposes-
establish-first-time-clean-water-act-protections-over-250-tribes (May 3, 2023); 33 U.D.C. §1251(a). 
EPA and the CWA recognize that the health of aquatic ecosystems and human health go hand-in-hand. 
Tribes in particular depend on healthy aquatic ecosystems due to their communities’ often higher rates 
of fish consumption and uses of these waters and ecosystems for cultural practices. Ensuring adequate 
protections for the most vulnerable species will thus have the co-benefit of protecting other critical 
human uses. With such broad implications for threatened and endangered species and their critical 
habitats, it is imperative that EPA consult under the ESA with the expert wildlife agencies (the 
Services).  
 
b. EPA agrees that it is required to consult on WQSs 
 
In 2001, EPA and the Services signed a “Memorandum of Agreement Between the Environmental 
Protection Agency, Fish and Wildlife Service and National Marine Fisheries Service Regarding 
Enhanced Coordination Under the Clean Water Act and Endangered Species Act.” 66 Fed. Reg. 36 
(“MOU”). The agreement was “designed to enhance coordination between [the] agencies” and 
“integrate [their] programs” under the CWA and ESA, “thereby enhancing protection and promoting 
the recovery of threatened and endangered species and their supporting ecosystems.”  Id. In the 
preamble of the MOU, EPA states that it “now consults with the Services under Section 7 of the ESA 
on EPA’s promulgation and approval of water quality standards.” Id. Later, it states, “EPA 
promulgation of State or Tribal water quality standards is a Federal rule-making process and EPA will 
comply with the consultation requirements of Section 7 of the ESA with any promulgation.” Id. at 
11,215 (emphasis added).  
 
Since 2001, EPA’s practice has been to consult under the ESA in setting WQSs. See, e.g., Defendant’s 
Opposition to Plaintiff’s Motion for Summary Judgment and Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment, 
Ctr. for Biological Diversity v. United States EPA, No. CV-22-00138-38-TUC-JCH, 19 (Apr. 7, 2023); 
EPA Office of Science and Technology, Strategy for Water Quality Standards and Criteria, 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2018-10/documents/strategy-wqs-criteria.pdf, 22 (2002) 
(describing EPA’s obligations under the ESA to consult with the Services whenever it approves state 
or tribal WQSs or promulgates federal standards, specifically for the aquatic life water quality criteria 
EPA agreed to in the 2001 MOU).  
 
Indeed, as the 2001 MOU confirms, EPA agrees that consultation must be done at “the earliest possible 
time.” 50 C.F.R. § 402.14. In the MOU, for example, EPA confirms its understanding “that early 
involvement of the Services in CWA activities is important to ensuring that species protection 
concerns are addressed effectively in the water quality standards and permitting programs. The 
Services have substantial expertise that can help improve decision making by EPA, States, and Tribes. 

 
12 
Obtaining their expertise early in the regulatory process helps ensure that their views are meaningfully 
considered and that the broadest range of management options are available to ensure the protection of 
species.” 66 Fed. Reg. 11,203. The Center agrees. EPA cannot ensure meaningful protection of 
endangered species without involving the expert Services in developing these WQS. Without early 
involvement of the Services, as required under the ESA and acknowledged by the EPA, EPA falls 
short in its critical goal to protect and enhance Tribal waters and aquatic ecosystems.  
 
c. Consultation will benefit EPA’s and Tribe’s cultural objectives in setting WQS for 
Tribal waters 
 
Consultation will aid EPA in achieving the objectives it has set through this rulemaking by ensuring 
adequate protections are put in place for endangered or threatened species that carry cultural 
significance for some Tribes, like salmon and steelhead. See “Sociocultural Significance of Salmon to 
Tribes and First Nations,” Pacific Salmon Commission, https://www.psc.org/news-
announcements/sociocultural-significance-of-salmon-to-tribes-and-first-nations/ (Feb. 16, 2022); 
Harriet V. Kuhnlein and Murray M. Humphries, “Traditional Animal Foods of Indigenous Peoples of 
Northern North America: Trout,” Centre for Indigenous People’s Nutrition and Environment, 
http://traditionalanimalfoods.org/fish/freshwater/page.aspx?id=6151#rain-e (last accessed Aug. 3, 
2023). As established in the MOU, consultation in circumstances such as this “will ensure a consistent 
approach to evaluating the effects of pollutants on species and identifying measures that may be 
needed to better protect them” and “will also ensure better consideration of effects on species whose 
ranges cross State boundaries.” 66 Fed. Reg. 11,121. In particular, the promulgation of WQSs that will 
apply across Tribal waters must consider the cumulative and indirect effects of this action on 
threatened and endangered species and their critical habitats. Section 7 consultation on the proposed 
WQSs is therefore critical to ensure appropriate and meaningful protections will be implemented 
across all affected waters to protect migratory and broad-ranging species such as salmonids.  
 
Indeed, in comments to the EPA ahead of the proposed rule’s publication, several Tribes expressed the 
need for the baseline WQS to include protections for culturally significant fish resources. See, e.g., 
Region 10 Regional Tribal Operations Committee Comment Letter, Doc. ID EPA-HQ-OW-2016-
0405-0180 (Aug. 13, 2021); Nez Perce Tribe of Idaho Comment Letter, Doc. ID EPA-HQ-OW-2016-
0405-0188 (Oct. 28, 2021). The EPA Region 10 Tribal Consortium, for example, argued that WQS 
should be regionally tailored to reflect the ecological needs of different aquatic species. Specifically, 
the letter noted that salmon species “have unique temperature requirements, toxic pollutants, and 
dissolved oxygen that waterways elsewhere in the United States do not have.” Region 10 Letter at 2. 
The group further advocated for classifying tribal fishing as a designated use and establishing WQS 
that are protective of fish habitat, shellfish, and riparian ecosystems that water temperature and flow 
standards necessary for fish and ecosystem health. Id. Through Section 7 consultation with the 
Services, EPA could better understand the needs of different species and better tailor its proposed rule 
to address the needs of species, ecosystems, and the people who depend on them. 
 
d. Consultation is especially important here since EPA has not consulted on the water 
quality criteria it will use to generate its numeric standards 
 
EPA proposes several options to translate the narrative water quality criteria to numeric limits for 
specific pollutants. 88 Fed. Reg. 29,506. The first two options are to base the numeric criteria, in whole 

 
13 
or in part, on EPA’s Section 304(a) criteria for different pollutants. Id. EPA, however, has yet to 
complete any ESA consultation on any of its Section 304(a) water quality criteria. This means that the 
Services have not yet had a chance to ensure that these criteria are adequately protective of species and 
their critical habitats. EPA cannot doubly avoid its responsibility to consult on these significant 
programs that will directly affect water quality and the ecosystems species need to survive. The ESA 
requires more. Tenn. Valley Auth., 437 U.S. at 184, 185; 16 U.S.C. § 1536(a)(2).  
 
e. Consultation can be conducted concurrently with this action  
 
Nothing in this letter should be taken as advocating for further delay in establishing these needed water 
quality protections. Rather, consultation will enhance the efficacy of the rule and is mandated to occur 
within strict timeframes that should not delay the implementation of the proposed WQS. For actions 
that are expected to adversely affect ESA-listed species or designated habitat, formal consultations 
must be completed within 90 days of initiation, unless the agencies agree upon a short extension. 50 
C.F.R. § 402.14(e). A biological opinion must be delivered within 45 days thereafter with the potential 
for a 10-day extension or upon consent of the applicant. Id. § 402.14(e), (g)(5). If the action is 
determined to be one that is not likely to adversely affect listed species or designated critical habitat, 
then informal consultation may instead be appropriate. Informal consultation follows an even shorter 
timeframe. It generally must be completed within 60 days of initiation and can be extended up to 120 
days in total. Id. § 402.13(c)(2). Given these strict time limits, neither avenue should delay EPA’s 
schedule for rulemaking. See generally U.S. Fish and Wildlife Serv. & Nat’l Marine Fisheries Serv., 
Endangered Species Consultation Handbook, Index.2964 (ECF No. 35-3).  
 
IV. Conclusion 
 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments. Should you have any questions or 
wish to discuss these comments further, please do not hesitate to contact Hannah Connor at 
hconnor@biologicaldiversity.org. 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Clara Derby, Law Clerk 
Hannah Connor, Environmental Health Deputy Director 
Center for Biological Diversity

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0235 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0259 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Phoenix Office 
1110 W. Washington St. Phoenix, AZ 85007 
602-771-2300 
azdeq.gov 
Southern Regional Office 
400 W. Congress St. Suite 433 Tucson, AZ 85701 
520-628-6733 
Katie Hobbs 
Governor 
Karen Peters 
Director 
 
August 3, 2023 
 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Attn: Administrator Michael S. Regan 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
 
RE:  
Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
 
Dear Administrator Regan:  
 
The Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) appreciates the opportunity to provide 
comments on EPA’s proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards: Tribal Reservations 
rules and supports protecting all surface waters within Arizona’s borders.  
 
As a member of the Association of Clean Water Administrators (ACWA), ADEQ supports the 
comments submitted by ACWA on this proposed rule. ADEQ would like to especially echo the 
comments from ACWA and other states regarding implementation of the rule by EPA. ADEQ is 
very concerned that EPA has not completed scoping the level of effort and estimated resources 
needed to implement the proposed rule. In Arizona, effective implementation of this rule will 
require an extensive collaborative effort by the EPA, ADEQ and tribes.  
 
Arizona has 22 federally recognized Native American tribes that represent more than 296,000 
people. A total of 20 reservations cover more than 30,938 square miles (27%) of the state, ranging 
in size from the very large Navajo Nation reservation, which is the size of West Virginia, to the 
Tonto Apache reservation which covers about 85 acres. Of the 22 tribes, eight have treatment as 
state (TAS) status and can develop their own surface water quality standards; and only four have 
EPA-approved standards. These tribes are the Hopi, Hualapai, Navajo, and White Mountain 
Apache, which cover 19,702 sq. mi. of the state. That leaves 11,236 sq. mi. (10%) in Arizona 
without the protection of surface water quality standards. 
 
In addition to the spatial scale issues above, tribal lands are sometimes commingled with public 
and private lands in Arizona; such as in the Phoenix metropolitan area and some cities along the 
Colorado River. Tribal lands are also part of a “checkerboard” of public, private and tribal land 
south of Winslow in northern Arizona. While the total number of waters on which federal standards 
apply depends on the final dispensation of the Supreme Court ruling on Sackett v. EPA, there are 
at least 99 Arizona surface waters that cross reservation boundaries that will likely be affected. Of 
those waters, there are currently 33 federal Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 

Page 2 of 2 
(AZPDES) permits. An additional 238 surface waters with 74 more AZPDES permits lie within a 
five-mile buffer of the tribal reservation boundaries.  
 
During recent virtual meetings with states and tribes, EPA stated that no funding was attached to 
this proposed rule. Given that EPA Region 9 has yet to issue final action on water quality standards 
submitted by ADEQ to the agency in November of 2019 due to inadequate staffing, ADEQ is not 
confident that EPA has the ability to fully support tribes and states in the effort to establish baseline 
water quality standards.  
 
Additionally, as pointed out by other states and ACWA, the proposed rule also needs to define a 
resolution process for inconsistencies between state and tribal baseline water quality standards. A 
cursory review of the current tribal standards in Arizona found that significant inconsistency 
between numeric criteria already exists; adding additional standards across all tribes will add 
another level of complexity if these issues are not resolved in the process of establishing baseline 
standards.  
 
Given EPA Region 9 capacity and the complexity of applying standards in a state where 
reservation and historic tribal lands are often intermingled with public and private land, ADEQ 
urges EPA to establish a clear, concise and effective implementable approach to the rule before 
finalization.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration,  
 
 
Trevor Baggiore 
Water Quality Division Director 
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0243 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
SEMINOLE TRIBE OF FLORIDA 
 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
DEPARTMENT 
 
WHITNEY SAPIENZA 
Director  
 
6363 Taft Street, Suite 309 
Hollywood, FL 33024 
T:  954-965-4380 extension 10627 
whitneysapienza@semtribe.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MARCELLUS W. OSCEOLA, JR., Chairman 
 
VACANT, Vice Chairman 
 
LARRY HOWARD, Brighton Councilman 
 
CHRISTOPHER OSCEOLA, Hollywood Councilman 
 
MARIANN BILLIE, Big Cypress Councilwoman 
 
LAVONNE ROSE, Secretary 
 
PETER A. HAHN, Treasurer 
August 3, 2023 
 
Uploaded to Federal Rulemaking Portal: www.regulations.gov/commenton/EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0057 and 
sent by electronic mail to ray.james@epa.gov 
 
James Ray 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Science and Technology, Standards and Health Protection Division  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue N.W. (MC 4305T) 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE:   EPA Proposed Rule on Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards: Indian 
Reservations Docket ID No.: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0057 
 
Please accept these comments on behalf of the Seminole Tribe of Florida (“Seminole Tribe”) on the 
U.S.  Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards: Indian 
Reservations (“Proposed Rule”).  The Seminole Tribe is a federally recognized Indian Tribe 
organized pursuant to Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, 25 U.S.C. Section 461 et 
seq. (2022) (as amended).  The Seminole Tribe was granted treatment as a state (“TAS”) on June 1, 
1994, under Clean Water Act (“CWA”) Section 518(e) for administering the CWA Water Quality 
Standards (“WQS”) program.  The Seminole Tribe has EPA-approved WQS in effect for the 
“surface waters, including wetlands, within the exterior boundaries of the Tribe’s Big Cypress and 
Brighton Reservations.” Seminole Water Commission Rules, Chapter B, Part 11.2.  The Seminole 
Tribe also has other reservations and trust lands that do not yet have established WQS to which the 
Proposed Rule would apply.  Consequently, the Seminole Tribe is closely following the development 
of the Proposed Rule.  
 
The Seminole Tribe appreciates EPA’s responsiveness to other Tribes’ input during pre-proposal 
consultation regarding the need for more exceptions to the baseline standards.  The Proposed Rule 
includes automatic and case-by-case exclusions from the baseline standards, both of which the 
Seminole Tribe supports. First, the Seminole Tribe supports the proposed automatic exclusion from 
baseline standards in instances where EPA has approved applicable Tribal WQS. This automatic 
exclusion would apply to the Seminole Tribe’s Big Cypress and Brighton Reservations. 

 
 
Second, the Seminole Tribe supports the proposed case-by-case exclusion from baseline WQS 
(“Additional Option for Case-by-Case Exclusions From Application of the Baseline Water Quality 
Standards” Proposed Rule, pt. IV, B) because, as EPA recognizes, baseline standards may not be 
appropriate for some tribes that currently do not have approved WQS for some or all of their 
reservation waters.  The case-by-case exclusion would capture tribes who are currently developing 
WQS for reservation waters; tribes that need additional time to gather more information about 
baseline WQS and prepare for partnership with EPA; and where baseline WQS are not consistent 
with tribal priorities at this time. Proposed Rule, pt. IV, B.  This proposed case-by-case exclusion 
from baseline WQS supports tribal sovereignty by allowing tribes to have a greater role in setting 
WQS on their lands.  Additionally, as noted in section IV.B of the Proposed Rule, the case-by-case 
exclusion is consistent with former EPA Administrator Carol Browner’s January 18, 2001, 
determination, which was the impetus for the Proposed Rule: 
 
[E]xcept where the Tribe wants to have its Indian country waters excluded 
from this rule and the Tribe and/or EPA has or intends to develop a plan for 
establishing water quality standards under the Clean Water Act within a 
reasonable time . . . the EPA Administrator finds under the Clean Water Act sections 
303(c)(4)(B) and 501(a) that water quality standards are necessary to meet the requirements of the 
Clean Water Act for all Indian country waters where EPA has not either (1) promulgated other 
Federal water quality standards or (2) explicitly found State or Tribal jurisdiction to adopt water 
quality standards (and Tribal or State standards are in effect) under the Clean Water Act.  
 
The Seminole Tribe’s Environmental Resource Management Department (“ERMD”) is currently 
working on its plan for establishment of water quality standards for the remainder of the Seminole 
Tribe’s applicable waters and therefore does not want them to be set by EPA under the Proposed 
Rule. The Tribe plans to submit an application for exemption from the Rule, once it is final. 
Therefore, the Seminole Tribe supports keeping in the Proposed Rule the ability of Tribes to be 
exempt from the Rule by utilizing the case-by-case exclusion. Accordingly, the Seminole Tribe 
supports the adoption of the exemption process in the final rule. 
The Seminole Tribe looks forward to continued coordination and consultation on the Proposed 
Rule.  If you have any questions regarding this letter, please contact me at 954-965-4380 extension 
10627. 
 
Respectfully, 
 
 
 
Whitney Sapienza, Director 
Environmental Resource Management Department 
Seminole Tribe of Florida 
 
c.  
Jim Shore, Esquire, General Counsel, Seminole Tribe of Florida  
   
Paul Backhouse, Ph.D. RPA, Senior Director, H.E.R.O. – Seminole Tribe of Florida 
            Stacy Myers, Senior Scientist/Liaison, H.E.R.O. – Seminole Tribe of Florida 
            Michelle Diffenderfer, Esquire – Lewis, Longman & Walker, P.A. 
Chris Johns, Esquire – Lewis, Longman & Walker, P.A.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0262 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Department of Law 
 
 
OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
 
 
1031 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 200 
Anchorage, AK 99501 
Main: 907-269-5100 
Fax: 907-276-3697
 
August 3, 2023 
 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Attn: Administrator Michael S. Regan 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
 
Re: 
Dkt. No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
 
The undersigned States appreciate the opportunity to comment on the 
Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”)’s proposal, Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations, 88 Fed. Reg. 29496 (May 5, 2023) (“Proposed 
Rule”), which would establish nationally applicable “baseline” federal water quality 
standards (“WQS”) under the Clean Water Act (“CWA”) for navigable waters on most 
“reservations.” We urge EPA to withdraw the Proposed Rule and to apply State-
promulgated water quality standards over the waters covered by this rule, as Congress 
intended.   
 
BACKGROUND 
 
In 1987, Congress amended the Clean Water Act to allow Tribes to be treated like 
States for some provisions of the CWA upon meeting certain requirements.1 Tribes with 
treatment-as-States (“TAS”) status have authority to establish WQS, administer permits, 
 
1  
The EPA Administrator may treat a Tribe as a State “only if” the following 
conditions are met: “(1) the Indian [T]ribe has a governing body carrying out substantial 
governmental duties and powers; (2) the functions to be exercised by the Indian [T]ribe 
pertain to the management and protection of water resources which are held by an Indian 
[T]ribe, held by the United States in trust for Indians, held by a member of an Indian tribe 
if such property interest is subject to a trust restriction on alienation, or otherwise within 
the borders of an Indian reservation; and (3) the Indian [T]ribe is reasonably expected to 
be capable, in the Administrator’s judgment, of carrying out the functions to be exercised 
in a manner consistent with the terms and purposes of this chapter and of all applicable 
regulations.” 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e).   

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 2 of 20 
 
and manage nonpoint source pollutants.2 Tribes that have not attained TAS status have no 
such authority. EPA’s role in the world of WQS is twofold: (1) to serve as a “backstop,”3 
stepping in only when a State or TAS Tribe is failing to meet the requirements of the 
Clean Water Act;4 and (2) to “support”5 States and TAS Tribes by providing technical 
services like § 304(a) national recommended water quality criteria for use by States and 
TAS Tribes when setting WQS.6  
 
The Proposed Rule would establish the following federal water quality standards 
for all navigable waters in non-TAS Tribal reservations,7 nationwide: 
 
 “Designated uses consistent with the CWA protection and 
restoration goals for aquatic life and users of surface water” 
including “a designated use that protects cultural and traditional 
uses”; 
 “water quality criteria to protect those uses” in narrative form, to 
be translated later by EPA using one of five binding “options”; 
 
2  
33 U.S.C. §§ 1313, -1315, -1318, -1319. 
3  
Nw. Env’t Advocs. v. EPA, 2021 WL 2206497, at *2 (W.D. Wash. 2021); Gulf 
Restoration Network v. McCarthy, 783 F.3d 227, 230 (5th Cir. 2015) (EPA has 
“secondary” role). 
4  
See CWA § 303(c)(4)(B); 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(4)(B). 
5  
CWA § 101(b); 33 U.S.C. § 1251(b) (“It is further the policy of the Congress to 
support and aid research relating to the prevention, reduction, and elimination of 
pollution and to provide Federal technical services and financial aid to State and 
interstate agencies and municipalities in connection with the prevention, reduction, and 
elimination of pollution.”). 
6  
CWA § 304(a); 33 U.S.C. § 1314(a); see City of Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 
415, 425 (10th Cir. 1996) (“Congress clearly intended the EPA to have a limited, non-
rulemaking role in the establishment of water quality standards by states and tribes[.]”). 
7  
EPA notes exceptions in “a few instances” in Footnote 4 of the Proposed Rule, 
including specified Tribes in Maine, potentially some Tribes in Oklahoma, and one Tribe 
in Washington.  88 Fed. Reg. at 29498. EPA also indicates that Tribes may request to be 
excluded from the Proposed Rule if they act within a very short time frame following 
finalization of the rule (90 days). 88 FR at 29502.  

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 3 of 20 
 
 “an antidegradation policy with associated implementation 
procedures,” including requirements for the development of total 
maximum daily loads (“TMDLs”) and requirements for 
recognizing impaired waters and revising this status; and  
 “general WQS polic[i]es such as a mixing zone policy and 
compliance schedule authorizing provision.”8 
 
The Proposed Rule’s water quality criteria are in narrative form. EPA would not translate 
this narrative criteria into numeric criteria until implementation, when it would, on a site-
specific basis, select from 5 translation “options” to use to promulgate numeric criteria. 
The resulting numeric criteria would inform NDPES permits, EPA-issued § 401 
certifications, and § 404(c) vetoes over upstream projects.9  
 
The Proposed Rule rests on an assertion of authority under CWA § 303(c)(4)(B),10 
which requires EPA to first make a determination that a new or revised standard is 
necessary to meet the requirements of the CWA (a “necessity determination”11).   
 
EPA’s necessity determination is factual.  In the Proposed Rule, EPA discusses a 
gap in CWA protections, explaining that “[w]hile more than 300 Tribes within Indian 
reservations are eligible to apply for TAS, only 84 Tribes have applied and been 
approved to administer a WQS program”12 and that “[t]he lack of CWA-effective WQS 
for most Indian reservations means that those waters do not have the human health and 
environmental objectives in place that form the basis for CWA protections.”13  EPA 
estimates, accordingly, that roughly “76,000 miles of rivers and streams” and “1.9 million 
acres of lakes, reservoirs, and other open surface waters” are presently unprotected by the 
CWA.14  EPA notes the unprecedented speed at which Tribes are currently attaining TAS 
status (27, or approximately 33% of TAS Tribes, attained TAS status in the last 6 years), 
and the fact that “Tribal interest in obtaining TAS and adopting their own WQS has 
increased in recent years.”15  Yet, then EPA states that “acquiring TAS authorities and 
adopting WQS is a time and resource-intensive process,” and that “[a]t the current pace, 
it could take more than a decade for CWA-effective WQS to be put in place for all Indian 
 
8  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29499.   
9  
Id. at 29506–29508, 29522–29523. 
10  
Id. at 29500. 
11  
EPA has rebranded this an “Administrator’s Determination” in the Proposed Rule. 
12  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29499. 
13  
Id. 
14  
Id. 
15  
Id.  

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 4 of 20 
 
reservations”16 which is why, EPA concludes, the Proposed Rule is necessary.  In other 
words, EPA believes that: (1) there is a gap in CWA protections over waters on 
reservations of non-TAS Tribes; (2) this gap exists because Tribes are not attaining TAS 
Status fast enough; and (3) it is EPA’s prerogative to promulgate comprehensive, 
nationwide water quality criteria to fill this gap.   
 
DISCUSSION 
 
EPA is charged with protecting human health and the environment under the 
authority conferred and circumscribed by Congress. In the WQS context, Congress has 
required EPA to play a supportive role to States as they protect the health of their 
environment while juggling multiple other policy considerations, like protecting the 
health of their economy and providing for the overall well-being of their people. In its 
1987 amendments, Congress carved out a similar role for EPA vis-a-vis Tribes who have 
met Congress’s TAS requirements. The Proposed Rule upsets this considered division of 
responsibility. For reasons detailed below, EPA lacks authority to promulgate this rule 
and it is arbitrary and capricious.  
 
1. 
EPA lacks authority to promulgate this rule. 
 
The Proposed Rule relies on the authority conferred by CWA § 303(c)(4). This 
provision requires that the EPA Administrator “promptly prepare and publish proposed 
regulations setting forth a revised or new water quality standard for the navigable waters 
involved” in two situations: 
 
(A) 
if a revised or new water quality standard submitted by such 
State under paragraph (3) of this subsection for such waters is 
determined by the Administrator not to be consistent with the 
applicable requirements of this chapter; or  
(B) 
in any case where the Administrator determines that a revised 
or new standard is necessary to meet the requirements of this 
chapter. 
 
 
16  
Id. 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 5 of 20 
 
The Proposed Rule invokes only subsection (B).17 To lawfully invoke this power, EPA 
must make a “necessity determination.”18 Assuming a valid necessity determination, EPA 
is “subject to the same policies, procedures, analyses, and public participation 
requirements established for States in these regulations” when promulgating WQS.19 
 
 
As detailed below, the Proposed Rule: (a) disregards Congress’s intent that State 
WQS apply in Tribal navigable waters until Tribes attain TAS status and promulgate 
Tribe-specific WQS; (b) exceeds Congress’s limited grant of power to EPA under 
§ 303(c)(4)(B); and (c) rests on a demonstrably false necessity determination. 
 
a. 
EPA disregards Congress’s intent that State WQS apply in Tribal 
navigable waters until Tribes attain TAS status and promulgate Tribe-
specific WQS.  
 
States have spent more than 50 years establishing science-based water quality 
standards that recognize each State’s unique topography, hydrogeology, geology, climate, 
and the resulting rivers, streams, and lakes that make up the State’s surface waters. Not 
only is relying on State WQS to protect reservation waters sensible, adherent to 
cooperative federalism precepts, and consistent with EPA past policy—it is required by 
the CWA. Congress has plenary authority over Indian affairs,20 which includes Tribal 
navigable waters regulatable under the CWA. Determining which WQS Congress 
intended to apply to non-TAS reservation waters is a straightforward matter of statutory 
construction.   
 
 
17  
EPA points to a previous EPA’s Administrator’s necessity determination. 88 Fed. 
Reg. at 28955. Since this determination never made it past the draft stage before being 
withdrawn, EPA is for all practical purposes simply re-adopting this previous statement 
as its own. EPA cannot evade accountability by pointing to something that was never 
finalized. 
18  
Gulf Restoration Network, 783 F.3d at 230. 
19  
Id. at 231. 
20  
Haaland v. Brackeen, 143 S. Ct. 1609, 1629 (June 15, 2023) (“Congress’s power 
to legislate with respect to Indians is well established and broad.”). 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 6 of 20 
 
The CWA’s comprehensive nationwide environmental regulatory structure does 
not omit Tribal waters from the scope of State-promulgated WQS protections.21 Under 
the CWA, States have the primary right, responsibility, and authority to plan for the 
development and use of water resources and to create, review, and revise WQS for “all 
intrastate waters.”22 The CWA requirement that States promulgate WQS for all intrastate 
waters, by its plain language, is necessarily inclusive of all Tribal reservation waters 
within State boundaries.23   
 
Supreme Court precedent supports this reading. In Federal Power Commission v. 
Tuscarora Indian Nation, the Supreme Court recognized that “a general statute in terms 
applying to all persons includes Indians and their property interests.” 24 The analogous 
context of the Safe Drinking Water Act, which establishes “national policy with respect 
to clean water,” was broadly held to apply to Tribal lands consistent with Tuscarora rule, 
prior to Congress’s amendment explicitly stating so.25 EPA’s own WQS regulations and 
 
21  
PUD No. 1 of Jefferson Cnty. v. Wash. Dep’t of Ecology, 511 U.S. 700, 700 
(1994); 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251, 1313; see also 57 Fed. Reg. 60848, 60849 (Dec. 22, 1992) 
(EPA acknowledgment that CWA is designed to ensure that “all waters” are sufficiently 
clean); id. at 60851 (EPA’s initial efforts under the 1972 CWA aimed to expand coverage 
to “all interstate and intrastate surface waters”). 
22  
33 U.S.C. §§ 1251(b), 1313(a)–(c); Following enactment of PL 92-500 in 1972, 
the CWA required states to promulgate WQS for all intrastate waters of the United States 
by specific benchmarked deadlines in the early 1970s. 33 U.S.C. § 1313(a)–(b). See also 
PUD No. 1, 511 U.S. at 704 (stating that the CWA is a “comprehensive water quality 
statute” that establishes “distinct roles for the Federal and State Governments” and 
“requires each State, subject to federal approval, to institute comprehensive water quality 
standards establishing water quality goals for all intrastate waters”); Coeur Alaska, Inc. v. 
Southeast Alaska Conservation Council, 557 U.S. 261, 299 n.2 (2009). 
23  
See Thomas v. Jackson, 581 F.3d 658, 661 (8th Cir. 2009) (CWA requires each 
state to establish WQS for waterbodies “within the state’s boundaries”); National Wildlife 
Federation v. Browner, 127 F.3d 1126, 1127 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (CWA requires state WQS 
for “every” body of water within a state); Friends of Merrymeeting Bay v. Olsen, 839 
F.Supp.2d 366, 370 (D. Me. 2012) (CWA requires states to establish WQS for “all” of 
their waterbodies); see also 33 U.S.C. 1370 (nothing in the CWA “shall . . . be construed 
as impairing or in any manner affecting any right or jurisdiction of the States with respect 
to the waters (including boundary waters) of such States.”). 
24  
362 U.S. 99, 116 (1960). 
25  
Phillips Petroleum Co. v. EPA, 803 F.2d 545, 555–57 (10th Cir. 1986). 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 7 of 20 
 
historical guidance on WQS, too, emphasize the role of States in comprehensively 
promulgating WQS for all intrastate waters.26   
 
Examining the timing of CWA amendments confirms this understanding. The 
CWA required States to comprehensively promulgate WQS for intrastate waters by 
specific benchmarked deadlines in the early 1970s. The CWA’s Tribal TAS provisions 
were added later, in 1987, and only thereafter permitted eligible Tribes, if approved for 
TAS by EPA, to be treated as if they were States for WQS purposes on a prospective 
basis.27 Congress’s intent was plainly for State WQS to protect all navigable waters 
unless and until Tribes attain TAS status and promulgate Tribe-specific WQS. Congress 
did not mistakenly legislate a “gap” in coverage into the CWA, consisting of non-TAS 
waters. 
 
 
EPA’s § 303(c)(4)(B) power is narrow and limited, and cannot support such a 
broad and sweeping rule. Invocation of this power requires a valid necessity 
determination, which EPA has not made. Congress’s intent is that State WQS apply until 
TAS Tribes promulgate Tribe-specific WQS, which EPA is not free to disregard. 
 
b. 
The Proposed Rule exceeds EPA’s power under § 303(c)(4)(B). 
 
In 1989, EPA undertook a rulemaking to establish the criteria and procedures by 
which a Tribe can qualify for TAS status.  Speaking about federal promulgation of water 
quality standards, EPA stated in this rulemaking that: 
 
 
26  
See 40 C.F.R. §§ 131.1, 131.2, 13 l.3(j), 131.4, 131.8, 131.10; see Questions and 
Answers on Water Quality Standards Under PL 92-500, U.S. EPA, Office of Water 
(1972), available at https://tinyurl.com/39dbv5w2, question no. 4 (WQS apply to all 
interstate and intrastate waters), no. 6 (states must establish WQS for all intrastate 
waters); no. 8 (states set WQS and EPA may promulgate WQS only when states fail to 
timely adopt WQS consistent with CWA), no. 9 (WQS are approved for all states), and 
Chronological Timetable of Events and Requirements (outlining deadlines in 1972–1973 
for the promulgation of all intrastate WQS)); see Questions & Answers on: Water Quality 
Standards, U.S. EPA, Office of Water (1983), available at https://tinyurl.com/476j6av8, 
question no. 2 (WQS are established by states), no. 9 (WQS apply to waters of the United 
States), no. 22 (all states have WQS)); Introduction To Water Quality Standards, U.S. 
EPA, Office of Water (1988), available at https://tinyurl.com/4yyknxn5, Section I, 
question no. 7 (WQS should be adopted for each waterbody within a State’s boundaries), 
no. 8 (states adopt WQS), no. 10 (WQS apply to all waters of the United States). 
27  
33 U.S.C. § 1377(e); 40 C.F.R. §§ 131.4, 131.7, 131.8. 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 8 of 20 
 
EPA emphasizes that [f]ederal promulgation is not consistent with the intent of 
CWA sections 303(c) and 518(e) to provide States, and Tribes qualifying for 
treatment as States, with the first opportunity to set standards.28 
 
The relevant statutes have not been materially revised since EPA made this statement. In 
2014, this time to a federal judge, EPA stated that its §303(c)(4)(B) power “is . . . used 
only when the State has made every other effort” to comply with CWA requirements and 
the State “will not, or cannot, act”:  
 
Unlike the authorities in CWA section 303(a) and (b) and (c)(1)-(3), 
which form the basic framework of the WQS program under the 
CWA, the section 303(c)(4)(B) necessity determination is an 
extraordinary authority that is judiciously and rarely used when the 
State has made every other effort to comply with the CWA under the 
preferred procedures of CWA section 303(c)(3), and EPA believes 
that the State either will not, or cannot, act.29 
 
EPA explained to the court that such an approach “is consistent with the cooperative 
federalism embodied in the Act, and as reflected in the legislative history.”30 That is why, 
EPA told the court, “[t]he section 303(c)(4)(B) authority . . . is used only in unusual 
circumstances.”31 
 
Far from demonstrating that non-TAS Tribes “will not, or cannot, act,” EPA 
acknowledges that Tribes are actively applying for TAS status and that twenty-seven 
Tribes have been approved in the last six years.32 The fact that 33% of all TAS Tribes 
have been approved in the last six years demonstrates that Tribes “can,” and “will” attain 
TAS status and promulgate Tribe-specific WQS. There is no indication that all non-TAS 
Tribes are unwilling or unable to act. As such, any rule covering all aspects of WQS, 
 
28  
EPA, Amendments to the Water Quality Standards Regulations That Pertain to 
Standards on Indian Reservations, 54 Fed. Reg. 39098-01, 39103 (September 22, 1989). 
29  
United States’ Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment: Combined Memorandum in 
Opposition to Plaintiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment and in Support of Cross-Motion 
for Summary Judgment, Puget Soundkeeper Alliance v. EPA, No. 2:13-cv-01839-JCC, at 
5 (W.D. Wash. Mar. 24, 2014) (emphasis added). 
30  
Id. at 5 (quoting H.R. Rep. No. 92-911, at 105, reprinted in 1A Federal Water 
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 at 792 (Comm. Print 1973)). 
31  
Id. at 9. 
32  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29499 (stating that “Tribal interest in obtaining TAS and adopting 
their own WQS has increased in recent years” and this interest has resulted in 27 Tribes 
attaining TAS status in the last six years). 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 9 of 20 
 
applicable to all non-TAS reservations, nationwide, cannot rationally be described as 
“judicious” or a “tool of last resort.” 
 
Section 303(c)(4)(B)’s limited applicability is plain from the text. The grant of 
power applies to “any case” and extends only to the promulgation of “a revised or new 
water quality standard.” “Case,” “a,” and “standard” are all singular. Seemingly 
recognizing this, EPA previously stated that “[a] necessity determination would have to 
identify a particular standard that requires revision to meet the requirements of the 
Act.”33 The power to promulgate a particular standard in one case at a time does not 
encompass the power to promulgate every type of WQS in innumerable cases, 
nationwide, over an EPA-estimated 76,000 miles of rivers and streams and 1.9 million 
acres of lakes, reservoirs, and other open surface waters.34     
 
c. 
EPA’s “necessity determination” rests on a false premise. 
 
EPA cannot lawfully invoke its § 303(c)(4)(B) power until it makes a valid 
“necessity determination.” In the Proposed Rule, EPA estimates that 76,000 miles of 
rivers and streams and 1.9 million acres of lakes, reservoirs, and other open surface 
waters (EPA’s estimation of non-TAS reservation waters) constitute a gap of waters 
presently unprotected by the CWA.35 This is false. EPA (again) contradicts itself: in the 
Proposed Rule, EPA explains that “EPA is typically the NPDES permitting authority in 
Indian country” and “[i]n the absence” of WQS established by TAS Tribes, “EPA permit 
writers have utilized various tools to write protective NPDES permits, such as relying on 
downstream state WQS to inform relevant permit limits.”36 In other words, EPA is the 
entity charged with implementing NPDES for non-TAS reservation waters, and EPA 
acknowledges that its NPDES permits do not leave these waters unprotected.37 Rather, 
these permits incorporate State WQS—or, “at a minimum,” EPA’s 304(a) national 
 
33  
United States’ Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment: Combined Memorandum in 
Opposition to Plaintiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment and in Support of Cross-Motion 
for Summary Judgment, Puget Soundkeeper Alliance v. EPA, No. 2:13-cv-01839-JCC, at 
8 (W.D. Wash. Mar. 24, 2014) (emphasis added). 
34  
See 88 Fed. Reg. at 29499. 
35  
Id. (“50 years after enactment of the CWA, the majority of Indian reservations do 
not have this foundational protection laid out by Congress in the CWA for their waters.”). 
36  
Id.   
37  
If EPA’s NDPES permits are leaving Tribal waters unprotected, EPA should 
review its own permitting policies, or address those State WQS considered to be 
“unprotective” of tribal waters on a case-by-case basis. Developing a national rule is an 
incongruous solution. 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 10 of 20 
 
numeric recommendations.38 While, as described in Section 1(a) of this Letter, the former 
is lawful and the latter is not, both work to protect non-TAS reservation waters. 
 
But-for the Proposed Rule, in other words, reservation waters will remain 
protected under the CWA—by EPA’s application of State WQS or EPA’s 304(a) national 
recommended criteria in NPDES permits and § 401 certifications.39   
 
2. 
The Proposed Rule is arbitrary and capricious.  
 
The Administrative Procedure Act requires EPA “to engage in reasoned 
decisionmaking, and directs that agency actions be set aside if they are arbitrary or 
capricious.”40 Courts will evaluate whether the Proposed Rule “was based on a 
consideration of the relevant factors and whether there has been a clear error of 
judgment.”41 Among other things, EPA must show that it “examined the relevant data 
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for [its] decision, including a rational 
connection between the facts found and the choice made.”42  “Unsubstantiated or bare 
assumptions” are not enough.43  
 
The Proposed Rule would not survive arbitrary-and-capricious review.   
 
 
38  
EPA Region 9, EPA’s Water Quality Certifications on Tribal Lands of the Pacific 
Southwest at 2 (Nov. 2016), available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016-
11/documents/wqc_fact_sheet_november_2016_0.pdf.  EPA elaborates that “[t]his 
national framework protects different water uses with different criteria for specific 
substances.”  
39  
EPA has expressly stated that State WQS may inform § 401 certifications.  EPA 
Region 9, EPA’s Water Quality Certifications on Tribal Lands of the Pacific Southwest at 
2 (Nov. 2016), available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016-
11/documents/wqc_fact_sheet_november_2016_0.pdf. 
40  
Dep’t of Homeland Sec. v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal., 140 S. Ct. 1891, 1905 
(2020) (cleaned up). 
41  
Id. (cleaned up). 
42  
Dep’t of Com. v. New York, 139 S. Ct. 2551, 2569 (2019) (cleaned up). 
43  
Nat. Res. Def. Council v. EPA, 31 F.4th 1203, 1207 (9th Cir. 2022) (cleaned up). 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 11 of 20 
 
a. 
The Proposed Rule unlawfully vests policy-decisionmaking power in 
EPA.  
 
EPA’s Proposed Rule covers all three major WQS components: (i) designated 
uses, (ii) water quality criteria, and (iii) antidegradation requirements.44 EPA has made 
several clear errors of judgment in each. 
 
i. 
Designated Uses 
 
Designated uses “establish, and communicate to the public, the environmental 
management objectives and water quality goals for a state or authorized Tribe’s 
waters.”45 EPA proposes to establish three designated uses for all non-TAS reservation 
waters: (1) cultural and traditional uses; (2) aquatic life; and (3) primary contact 
recreation.46 Under the Proposed Rule, these three uses would apply to all covered waters 
until EPA revises a specific water’s designation.47 The Proposed Rule does not require 
consideration of whether these uses are attainable.  
 
(1) 
Cultural and Traditional Use 
 
The Proposed Rule creates a new classification entitled cultural and traditional 
use. Neither this classification, nor permission to create this classification, appears 
anywhere in the CWA. 48 EPA’s implementing regulations contain no such classification. 
In the Proposed Rule, EPA offers only a circular definition of this new classification, 
providing, in full: 
 
 
44  
The Proposed Rule goes even further and advances additional general WQS 
policies including a mixing zone policy, which this Letter does not get into.  
45  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29502–03. 
46  
Id. at 29522. 
47  
Id. at 29526. 
48  
EPA ties this new use to a provision of the CWA with the thinnest of threads, 
stating only that “[c]ultural and traditional uses serve to protect the health and welfare of 
Tribal members exercising such uses and are thus within the purposes enumerated in the 
Act.”  88 Fed. Reg. at 29503. The States respect the freedom of all individuals to engage 
in religious and spiritual practices, including those involving water. The States do not, 
however, believe that Congress intended EPA to police the religious, spiritual, or cultural 
uses of water. EPA’s job is more secular, and more limited to helping States and TAS 
Tribes reduce pollution in their navigable waters to improve physical health.  

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 12 of 20 
 
Cultural and traditional uses. Protection of cultural and traditional 
uses of reservation waters.49   
 
EPA further states that such uses “can include a variety of uses specific to the ceremonies 
and traditions of each Tribe, and each use may require different levels of protection.”50 
Apparently envisioning this designation to function as some sort of catch-all, EPA lastly 
states that “Tribal treaty or other reserved rights to fish, hunt, and/or gather on Indian 
reservations could generally be protected by such cultural and traditional designated uses, 
to the extent they are not protected by an aquatic life use or primary contact recreation 
use.”51 Other than hinting at the potentially vast coverage of this designation, the 
Proposed Rule provides little clue as to how EPA will apply this standard during 
implementation, including what data EPA will rely on (heritage or historic data, for 
example). And the Proposed Rule departs from EPA’s own regulations, which predicate 
new use designations on a reviewable use-attainability analysis.52   
 
Whatever uses this new category might encompass, Congress has chosen to 
protect them under another Act—the National Historic Preservation Act,53 which 
establishes a comprehensive cultural and historic resource protection and preservation 
program at the national level. Nowhere in that Act or in the CWA is there a hint of 
congressional intent that EPA should play a role in the identification and protection of 
cultural and traditional resources through a mechanism such as this.  
 
With only a circular definition, and absolutely no standards or guidelines, EPA 
writes itself a blank check to require extremely (perhaps impossibly) stringent WQS for 
all waters covered by the Proposed Rule. Once a designation is made, a Tribe may only 
“request” that EPA revise the designation—actual power to revise the designation, once 
established, would reside exclusively with EPA.54 EPA provides no rational justification 
for this new designation use, points to no authority for its creation, and offers no good 
reason why EPA should be the one making such important policy decisions. Congress has 
 
49  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29503.    
50  
Id. 
51  
Id. 
52  
40 C.F.R. § 131.10(g), (j). 
53  
54 U.S.C. §§ 300101 et seq. 
54  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29526 (“The Regional Administrator may upon request of a Tribe 
for its reservation waters, or based on the Regional Administrator’s identification, revise 
one or more designated uses in paragraph (c) of this section and associated criteria, add 
additional designated uses and associated criteria where such revisions will more 
appropriately reflect the Tribe-specific use and value of waters covered by paragraph (a) 
of this section, or establish water quality standards variances . . . .”). 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 13 of 20 
 
already determined that these policy decisions lie with the States and the TAS Tribes 
except in very rare circumstances. 
 
(2) 
Aquatic Life Use 
 
EPA’s selection of the aquatic life classification, while a recognizable 
classification, is similarly inappropriate. By EPA’s description, this classification would 
protect all covered waters for human consumers of fish, shellfish, and other aquatic life. 
In other words, EPA would give itself the power to establish human health criteria for all 
non-TAS Tribes with reservations covered by the Proposed Rule. By giving itself the 
option to impose a high fish consumption rate (an important component of the human 
health criteria formula), EPA lays another foundation for imposing extremely stringent 
WQS. While the States agree that waters that are used by consumers of fish, shellfish, 
and other aquatic life should be protected, EPA has provided no indication that every 
water covered by the Proposed Rule contains fish and other consumable aquatic life. 
Moreover, Congress intended that this type of protection first be set by States, and then 
by Tribes with TAS status. Not by EPA.   
 
(3) 
Primary Contact Use 
 
The primary contact use designation “protects people from illness due to activities 
involving the potential for ingestion of, or immersion in, water” and usually is reserved 
for bodies of water that people use to “swim, water-ski[], skin-div[e], surf[], or other 
activities likely to result in immersion.”55 This designation can be contrasted to a 
secondary contact recreation classification, which is protective when immersion is 
unlikely (e.g., when a water is used for boating, wading, and rowing.)56 In its Water 
Quality Standards Handbook, EPA offers States and TAS Tribes four options to choose 
among when deciding whether and which waters to protect for use as recreation, and 
which level (primary, secondary, or subcategories of either) to protect under.57 These 
options provide States and TAS Tribes the flexibility to protect waters consistent with 
their unique circumstances, values, and other policy goals. While being swimmable is a 
long-term policy goal we can all get behind, it may not be necessary in every 
circumstance. Flexibility for policymakers is key. 
 
 
55  
EPA Water Quality Standards Handbook, EPA-823-B-17-001. EPA Office of 
Water, at 2.3.1 (2017), available at https://www.epa.gov/wqs-tech/water-quality-
standards-handbook (hereinafter “EPA WQS Handbook”). 
56  
Id.   
57  
Id. 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 14 of 20 
 
Designated use classifications reflect the type of decisionmaking that Congress 
intended to be exercised by States and Tribes with TAS status—not EPA.58 EPA provides 
little to no explanation for applying all three designations to all covered waters, and 
further giving itself the ability to create numeric criteria applicable to each designation, is 
arbitrary and capricious and beyond EPA’s authority.   
 
ii. 
Water Quality Criteria 
 
EPA’s Proposed Rule makes water quality criteria decisions for non-TAS Tribes. 
EPA’s decisions to (a) promulgate narrative,59 as opposed to numeric, criteria in this 
rulemaking; and (b) give itself 5 “options” for translating this narrative criteria into 
numeric criteria when implementing this rule, function together to allow EPA unchecked 
discretion to promulgate extremely stringent standards.  
 
EPA’s proposed narrative criteria include requirements that discharges be free 
from pollutants at levels preventing attainment of designated uses; free from substances 
forming “objectionable” deposits, color, odor, etc., or matter that floats to form a 
“nuisance”; free from conditions likely to jeopardize threatened or endangered species; 
and discharged at levels that do not violate applicable downstream WQS.60 EPA lays out 
5 “options” that EPA may select from when translating narrative into numeric criteria. 
The process of translation would be completed by EPA outside of this rulemaking.   
 
Option 1 allows EPA to use the national recommended water quality criteria 
published under section 304(a), which are already in numeric form. Option 2 starts with 
the national recommended criteria, with an important addition: EPA may “modif[y]” 
these criteria “to reflect site-specific conditions and aquatic communities.” Buried in the 
list of conditions EPA may take into account under Option 2 are: “[a] fish consumption 
rate protective of Tribal fish consumers”; and “[o]ther scientifically defensible 
 
58  
To the extent EPA seeks to rely on a “general Trust responsibility,” it cannot: the 
Supreme Court has explicitly stated that “the Federal Government must expressly accept 
trust responsibilities in a treaty, statute, or regulation that contains rights-creating or duty-
imposing language.” Arizona v. Navajo Nation, 143 S. Ct. 1804, 1815 (June 22, 2023) 
(internal quotations omitted). EPA makes no effort to identify specific language imposing 
a trust responsibility related to WQS for each non-TAS Tribes whose lands are covered 
by the Proposed Rule.  
59  
“Narrative criteria are qualitative descriptions of the conditions necessary to 
protect a water body’s designated use, while numeric criteria—expressed as levels, 
concentrations, toxicity units or other values—are quantitative descriptions of those 
conditions.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 29504.   
60  
Id. at 29506.  

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 15 of 20 
 
assessments, for example . . . those related to Endangered Species Act consultation.”61 
Option 3 allows EPA to adopt WQS submitted by TAS Tribes that are already pending 
approval, or to adopt State WQS. Option 4 is limited to the Great Lakes System, and 
Option 5 is a catch-all, stating in full: “EPA may rely on existing CWA implementation 
provisions to translate applicable narrative criteria, as necessary.” 
 
Two legal flaws with this approach are immediately apparent. First, none of these 
options require the application of State-promulgated water quality criteria. They are 
therefore not lawful under the CWA.62 Second, EPA disregards its own regulation 
allowing use of narrative standards in only two instances: (1) to supplement numeric 
criteria; or (2) in situations where numeric criteria cannot be determined.63 EPA offers no 
explanation for this deviation. 
 
The remaining flaws are also immediately apparent. Option 1 appears to be 
already used by EPA in the NPDES permitting process, and doesn’t explain the need to 
expend agency time and resources into promulgating this rule. Option 1 is perhaps a red 
herring.  
 
 
Option 2 raises a red flag, and is likely EPA’s preferred option. Indeed, EPA 
shows its hand in the environmental justice section of the Proposed Rule, where it 
explains that this rule “is likely to reduce existing disproportionate and adverse effects on 
Indigenous people” specifically because it gives EPA the “flexibilit[y] allowing for the 
consideration of Tribe-specific fish consumption rates when translating narrative criteria 
into numeric values” which EPA may avail itself of “to address disproportionate and 
adverse effects to Indigenous people.”64 Option 2, in conjunction with EPA’s newly 
created ability to designate waters for consumption of aquatic life, is how EPA gets there. 
Nothing in the Proposed Rule would prevent EPA from applying Option 2 in most, or 
every, instance. In practice, this means that EPA may select a high fish consumption rate 
to generate stringent numeric criteria, which are then applied to all water covered by the 
Proposed Rule. Further, subsistence use is a condition that States do, or can, account for 
 
61  
Id. at 29506. 
62  
See Section 1(a) of this Letter. 
63  
40 C.F.R. part 131.11(b)(2) (emphasis added).  
64   
88 Fed. Reg. at 29521.   

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 16 of 20 
 
in their HHC (as EPA suggested the State of Alaska do65), and is something that Tribes 
may consider once they have attained TAS status. Additionally, Option 2 appears to vest 
in EPA some type of discretionary power to implement the Endangered Species Act. This 
power, of course, was never granted to EPA. The State of Alaska can attest to the use and 
abuse of the Endangered Species Act to stop projects, and is not eager to experience more 
at the hands of EPA.   
 
Options 3, 4, and 5 are no better. Option 3 simply allows EPA to short-circuit the 
TAS WQS approval process, and should be disallowed on that basis. Option 4, which is 
region-specific, is inappropriate in a nationwide rule. The catch-all provision of Option 5 
has hardly any accompanying explanation, and should not exist.  
 
iii. 
Anti-Degradation Requirements 
 
State-established WQS must include an antidegradation policy, which is “a policy 
requiring that state standards be sufficient to maintain existing beneficial uses of 
navigable waters, preventing their further degradation.”66 Existing uses must be 
maintained unless the State or a TAS Tribe makes a finding that allowing for lower water 
quality is “necessary to accommodate important economic or social development in the 
area in which the waters are located[.]”67 In its Water Quality Standards Handbook, EPA 
notes that “[a]ntidegradation . . . is a policy that allows public decisions to be made on 
important environmental actions.” Waters can be protected at levels of Tier 1 (existing 
uses), Tier 2 (high-quality waters), and Tier 3 (Outstanding Natural Resource Waters 
(“ONRWs”)). Tier 3 designations, in particular, can be exceedingly controversial. EPA’s 
Water Quality Standards Handbook recognizes some States’ concern that “the Tier 3 
ONRW provision [i]s so stringent that its application would likely prevent States from 
taking actions in the future that were consistent with important social and economic 
development on, or upstream of, ONRWs” and that “[t]his concern is a major reason that 
 
65  
See Michael Szerlog, Acting Dir. Ltr. from EPA to DEC Re: EPA Response to 
Alaska Human Health Criteria Development Letter at 3 (July 3, 2023) (stating that 
“adopting statewide HHC that are protective of subsistence fishing would be a reasonable 
approach[]”); id. at 8 (“EPA recommends that DEC select the inputs to derive revised 
HHC for Alaska, particularly the FCR and cancer risk level inputs, with protection of 
subsistence consumers as the focus. More specifically, this would mean selecting an FCR 
that represents a value at the high end (e.g., 90th percentile) of the state’s subsistence 
population, rather than a mean or median, paired with a cancer risk level of 10-5 or 10-
6.”). 
66  
PUD No. 1 of Jefferson County, 511 U.S. at 705. 
67  
40 C.F.R. part 131.12(a)(2).   

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 17 of 20 
 
relatively few water bodies are designated as ONRWs.”68 The process of designating Tier 
3 waters is laden with value- and policy judgments.69 
 
Regarding Tier 2 designations, EPA’s Proposed Rule appears to allow EPA, 
without Tribal input, to make an initial designation of a covered water as Tier 2.70 A 
Tribe may not lower the protection of a Tier 2 water unless (1) the Tribe provides written 
consent, (2) the EPA Regional Administrator agrees, and (3) the EPA Regional 
Administrator memorializes his agreement in a “finding” indicating that “such a lowering 
is necessary to accommodate important economic or social development in the area in 
which the waters are located.”71 Such a finding can “only” be made if the Regional 
Administrator determines that it is supported by socio-economic and alternatives 
analyses.72 But why does EPA—a federal agency with one narrow mission—get to 
decide what types of “economic or social development” are “important” for the 
community this affects? EPA’s mission, and expertise, is limited to environmental 
protection. EPA has no expertise on economic or social development, and has no place 
making decisions like this, which Congress reserved for States and TAS Tribes. 
 
Regarding Tier 3 designations, the Proposed Rule allows “any person or entity,” 
including non-Tribal members and EPA, to nominate bodies of water on reservations for 
Tier 3 status using a new basis of “cultural significance.”73 Under the Proposed Rule, 
agreement from both the Tribe and EPA are required to designate a water as Tier 3. Once 
made, a Tier 3 designation can only be undone if the Tribe agrees in writing and the EPA 
 
68  
EPA WQS Handbook at § 4.2. 
69  
In the past several Alaska legislative sessions, for example, bills have been 
introduced in the Alaska State Legislature that would vest exclusive authority to make 
Tier 3 designations in the Legislature. 
70  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29523 (“In determining which waters will receive high quality 
water protection consistent with paragraph (e)(2) of this section [laying out general policy 
of Tier II protection], the Regional Administrator will identify high quality water on a 
parameter-by-parameter basis.”).  
71  
Id.   
72  
Id. at 29524 (“The Regional Administrator shall make a finding that a lowering of 
high water quality is necessary to accommodate important social and economic 
development in the area in which the water is located only if the information in paragraph 
(f)(3)(i) of this section supports such a conclusion and the Tribe has provided written 
agreement.”); see also id. (“If compliance with the highest statutory and regulatory 
requirements for all new and existing point sources and all Tribal-regulated cost-effective 
and reasonable best management practices for non-point sources cannot be assured, the 
Regional Administrator will not allow a lowering of high water quality.”) 
73  
Id. at 29524–29525. 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 18 of 20 
 
Administrator makes a specific finding similar to that required for Tier 2. This suffers 
from the same fundamental flaw as the Tier 2 process: EPA asserts policymaking power 
that it does not have. As a practical matter, this means that EPA can singlehandedly 
prevent a water from being de-designated by declining to make the requisite finding. If a 
Tribe is ever inclined to develop its land on or upstream of a Tier 3 body of water, the 
Tribe’s economic future will be at the mercy of EPA.   
 
Perhaps most irrationally, EPA fails to explain why under a “baseline” rule, EPA 
is protecting anything beyond Tier 1 existing uses. Providing designation and revision 
processes for Tiers 2 and 3 is entirely inconsistent with a rulemaking aimed at creating 
only a baseline layer of protection. 
      
In a scheme where Congress left primary responsibility for land- and resource-use 
decisions to States and TAS Tribes—those juggling multiple policy considerations 
including but not limited to water protection—EPA has no place deciding what types of 
economic or social development are “important” enough to justify a lowering of WQS.     
  
The Proposed Rule additionally gives EPA control over impaired designations on 
covered waters and TMDL establishment under CWA § 303(d). A TMDL calculates the 
amount of a pollutant that a water body can assimilate in one day from all sources of 
pollution within the watershed, point and non-point, and still meet water quality 
standards. The TMDL then allocates to total limit of pollutants allowable from point and 
non-point source discharges, respectively. After a TMDL has been developed, effluent 
limitations in NPDES permits must be consistent with the assumptions and requirements 
underlying the allocated limits. To comply with the more stringent effluent limitations 
that often result from this process, point source dischargers frequently must implement 
more stringent controls, which can impose significant additional costs and disincentive to 
develop. EPA asserts, without citation, that it has the power to establish impaired water 
lists and TMDLs for non-TAS Tribes. Neither § 303(d) nor 40 CFR 130.7 confer 
authority to EPA for assessment and identification of impaired waters. This is a decision 
with significant economic effects that, again, is not EPA’s to make.  
 
b. 
The Proposed Rule is fiscally irresponsible. 
 
Alarmingly, EPA has based its entire economic analysis on the use of Option 1, 
not Option 2. Because the cost to upstream permittees skyrockets under Option 2 as 
compared to Option 1, basing costs only on Option 1 is inaccurate and misleading.   
 
As a practical matter, translating narrative criteria into numeric criteria applicable 
to specific Tribal navigable waters will require a far greater capacity in terms of staff, 
time, and data collection than EPA has. Unlike States, Tribes may not have water quality 
experts on staff to assist EPA. EPA admits as much in the Proposed Rule, recognizing 
that “there is a general lack of Federal funding to support operation and maintenance 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 19 of 20 
 
(O&M) of . . . wastewater facilities” that stand to be affected by this rule.74 EPA further 
estimates that “some Tribal communities”—potentially those in Alaska, who experience 
some of the worst wastewater and other critical infrastructure issues—“may need to 
contribute toward O&M needs, which are estimated to range from approximately $50,000 
to $500,000 aggregate per year.”75 EPA suggests that perhaps Tribes can “impos[e] an 
additional burden on ratepayers” to cover this increase.76 But the suggestion that Tribes 
should simply have “ratepayers”—i.e., Tribal members—absorb this added cost is 
absurd. How are Tribes supposed to create job opportunities for their members with an 
EPA set on thwarting development, and thus job creation, at every turn?     
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The undersigned States promulgate WQS with the goal of protecting the general 
well-being of our people, which includes the health of our environment and the health of 
our economy. TAS Tribes may make WQS decisions that are similarly informed by 
multiple values, policy preferences, and goals. States and TAS Tribes are directly 
accountable to their constituents; EPA is not. EPA is charged with one goal: protect 
human health and the environment. Congress’s considered division of roles in the CWA 
reflect these fundamental differences. EPA is not free to rewrite these roles.  
 
Congress did not give EPA the power asserted by the Proposed Rule. 77 Section 
303(c)(4)(B) is a limited backstop power exercisable only when a State or TAS Tribe is 
failing to meet CWA requirements. This has not happened. Section 303(c)(4)(B) provides 
EPA limited power to promulgate “a particular standard.” This has not been adhered to. 
The “gap” premise that EPA relies on is so demonstrably false that it hints at something 
more: one would be forgiven for suspecting that this rule might truly be aimed at giving 
 
74  
Id. at 29522 
75  
Id.  
76  
Id.  
77  
The Proposed Rule, if finalized, will also violate the major question doctrine.  See 
W. Virginia v. E.P.A., 142 S. Ct. 2587, 2607–09 (2022) (major questions doctrine 
provides that for issues of major national significance, a regulatory agency must have 
clear statutory authorization from Congress to take certain actions and cannot rely on its 
general agency authority). 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 20 of 20 
 
EPA a blank check to issue overly stringent NPDES permits,78 deny § 401 
certifications,79 and buttress § 404(c) vetoes of non-Tribal projects.80   
 
The undersigned States respectfully request that EPA withdraw this rule. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Treg Taylor  
Alaska Attorney General 
 
 
 
Raul R. Labrador 
Idaho Attorney General 
 
 
 
Kris Kobach 
Kansas Attorney General 
 
 
Lynn Fitch 
Mississippi Attorney General 
 
 
 
Mike Hilgers 
Nebraska Attorney General  
 
 
 
Drew Wrigley 
North Dakota Attorney General 
 
 
Alan Wilson 
South Carolina Attorney General  
 
 
Marty Jackley 
South Dakota Attorney General 
 
 
 
78  
EPA’s intent to use this as a mechanism for greater EPA control over development 
is express: “In short, implementing CWA-effective WQS in Indian reservation waters 
would provide a strong basis for NPDES permit limits and other controls that is not 
presently available to protect such waters.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 29521. 
79  
Id. at 29516 (“[I]f the proposed baseline WQS are finalized, the Administrator 
would be able to rely on the baseline WQS among other water quality requirements when 
deciding whether to grant or deny section 401 certifications, or to develop conditions.”) 
80  
Indeed, EPA expressly threatens to use its 404(c) veto power whenever it believes 
that activities governed by a 404 permit “cause or contribute” to a violation of EPA’s 
new standards and the Corps disagrees after EPA provides comments to the Corps. Id. at 
29515.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0260 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Coalition Comments 
 
1 
 
August 3, 2023 
 
The Honorable Radhika Fox  
Assistant Administrator  
Office of Water  
Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
 
 
 
 
Re:  
Proposed Rule, Environmental Protection Agency; Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations (88 Fed. Reg. 29,496-29,526, May 5, 2023) 
 
 
Dear Assistant Administrator Fox: 
 
The undersigned national trade associations (the Coalition) representing businesses in the 
agriculture, construction, energy, manufacturing, and mining sectors as well as the broad 
business community, appreciate the opportunity to comment on this proposed rule (88 FR 29496 
(May 5, 2023)) and to offer our input. Coalition members would be directly affected by the 
proposed rulemaking through changes to the water quality standards program and associated 
state and tribal treatment as a state (TAS) programs that are likely to result from the imposition 
of national baseline standards, including impairment designations, changes to existing water 
quality criteria, and discharge permit conditions. The Coalition supports sustainable regulation to 
uphold our shared environmental, social, and economic priorities. The Coalition also supports 
efforts to promote tribal self-determination and believes empowering tribes through the 
Congressionally approved TAS process provides the greatest potential for long term water 
quality improvements. Unfortunately, the proposed rule would not achieve these important goals, 
as it is not sustainable or implementable. If finalized as proposed, it will not create the desired 
human health or water quality outcomes. It may also unnecessarily hinder the development of 
our members’ important off-reservation projects that are essential to the nation’s long-term 
social, economic, and environmental needs. 
 
First, the proposal lacks a legal basis under the Clean Water Act (CWA). The authority that the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA or the Agency) claims supports the rule has not actually 
been provided by Congress. Second, even if Congress has granted EPA the authority it asserts, 
the proposed framework does not meet the minimum substantive or procedural requirements of 
the CWA or EPA’s water quality standards regulations. Finally, the proposed rule does not 
provide information or explanation sufficient for the public to understand the proposal or to 
make informed comments. For all these reasons, described in detail below, the Coalition urges 
EPA to withdraw the proposed rule. At a bare minimum, EPA must conduct significantly more 
outreach to states, tribes, and the regulated community on the proposed requirements and the 
consequences of their implementation before considering a supplemental proposal.  
 

 Coalition Comments 
 
2 
 
The Coalition appreciates the opportunity to provide these public comments and we look forward 
to further engagement on this important topic. 
 
1. Absent TAS approval, EPA has no authority under CWA section 303(c)(4)(B) to 
establish water quality standards on tribal reservations. 
 
EPA’s purported authority for the proposed rule lies in an Administrator’s Determination that 
was made in 2001, pursuant to CWA section 303(c)(4)(B). However, section 303(c)(4)(B) does 
not authorize EPA to make an Administrator’s Determination for waters on tribal reservations 
where TAS has not been granted. Thus, the 2001 Administrator’s Determination was beyond 
EPA’s authority and can have no legal effect. Even if EPA issued a new Administrator’s 
Determination to support the proposal, to the extent it purported to exert CWA authority over 
non-TAS tribes or reservations, it would be beyond EPA’s authority. The proposal goes well 
beyond what Congress established in the CWA and, if finalized, would be unlawful. 
 
As EPA acknowledges throughout the proposal, CWA section 303 sets out detailed requirements 
for states to establish, maintain, and update water quality standards; to evaluate the quality of its 
waters against those standards; and to develop total maximum daily loads where waters are not 
meeting the applicable standards. Section 303 does not mandate similar actions by tribes. Indeed, 
section 303 does not include a single mention of tribes and therefore does not create any 
mandatory duties for tribes outside of the TAS context. 
 
Section 518 of the CWA was enacted in 1987 to give federally recognized tribes the ability to 
obtain “treatment as a state” (referred to as TAS). Act of Feb. 4, 1987, Pub.L. No. 100-4, tit. V, § 
506, 101 Stat. 76 (codified as amended at 33 U.S.C. § 1377). If a tribe pursues this opportunity 
under CWA section 518, it may take on the same CWA obligations as states including 
establishing water quality standards under section 303, certifying discharges from federally 
permitted projects under section 401, and issuing discharge permits under sections 402 and 404. 
To obtain TAS a tribe must make certain demonstrations mandated by the CWA and EPA 
regulations, develop a program that meets the federal minimum standards, and then obtain EPA’s 
approval. 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e); see also City of Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F. 3d 415, fn 8 (10th 
Cir. 1996) (“To qualify as a state under the Act, an Indian tribe must submit an application to the 
EPA which includes: a statement that the tribe is recognized by the Secretary of the Interior; a 
descriptive statement demonstrating that the tribal governing body is currently carrying out 
substantial government functions over a defined area; a description of the tribe's authority to 
regulate water quality over certain waters; a description of the tribe's capability to administer an 
effective water quality standards program; and any additional documentation which the 
Administrator deems necessary to support a tribal application. 40 C.F.R. § 131.8 (1995).”). 
 
Pursuant to CWA section 518(e), EPA “is authorized to treat an Indian tribe as a State for 
purposes of [CWA] title II and [CWA] sections 104, 106, 303, 305, 308, 309, 314, 319, 401, 
402, 404 and 406 of this Act to the degree necessary to carry out the objectives of this section, 
but only if…”  the tribe receives TAS authority from EPA. 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e) (emphasis 
added). In other words, CWA section 303 does not apply to tribes or tribal lands unless that tribe 
has obtained TAS authority from EPA. In stark contrast to the text of the CWA, the proposed 

 Coalition Comments 
 
3 
 
baseline water quality standards would apply only to tribal reservations where TAS has not been 
granted. 
 
The proposed rule is contrary to and conflicts with the text and structure of the CWA, including 
sections 303 and 518(e). Congress did not grant EPA authority to regulate tribal reservation 
lands or waters unless those tribes obtain TAS authority under section 518(e). Under the 
proposal, EPA purports to grant itself authority that Congress did not provide in the CWA. If the 
Agency proceeds to finalize this rule, it has an obligation to explain how section 518(e) does not 
preclude this action entirely and explain whether the Agency is relying on a source of authority 
within the CWA other than the 2001 Administrator’s Determination.  
 
2. The proposed framework is unlawful under CWA section 303.  
 
Even if EPA can overcome the foundational lack of legal authority to promulgate this rule, the 
proposed framework and structure create additional and no less significant legal infirmities. 
Although EPA asserts that it is proposing a “baseline water quality standard” for tribal 
reservations, the proposal would actually create an entirely new federal framework that would 
displace state and TAS tribal authority. The proposal undermines the water quality standards 
program and creates significant uncertainty for both the regulated community and regulators. As 
discussed further below, states and TAS tribes are the primary authority for water quality 
standards, not EPA. Even setting that aside, the proposal does not actually propose applicable 
water quality criteria, rather it gives EPA unfettered authority to set numeric criteria in the future 
with no transparency or rulemaking procedure. EPA has not sufficiently explained its rationale 
for the proposal, nor has EPA provided any evidence that Congress intended to create such 
sweeping federal authority when it enacted the CWA. If finalized as proposed, the rule will be 
arbitrary, capricious, and an abuse of discretion. 5 U.S.C. § 706. 
 
a. Congress gave States and TAS tribes primary authority to establish water quality 
standards, not EPA. 
 
Section 303 of the CWA sets out detailed requirements for states to establish, maintain, and 
update water quality standards; to evaluate the quality of its waters against those standards; to 
develop total maximum daily loads where waters are not meeting the applicable standards; and 
implement a continuing planning process to protect and maintain water quality. 33 U.S.C. § 
1313(a), (c), (d), (e); 40 CFR Part 131. As explained above, those same CWA obligations apply 
to tribes, but only after they have received TAS authority. 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e). So, states and 
TAS tribes have obligations to establish, maintain, and update water quality standards under 
CWA section 303. EPA’s role under section 303 is to review state and TAS tribal water quality 
standards, determine if they comply with the requirements of the CWA, and either approve or 
disapprove those standards. 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(2)(A); 40 C.F.R. § 131.5(a). If EPA disapproves 
a state or TAS tribal standard, EPA is required to propose a federal standard that complies with 
the CWA. 33 U.S.C. §1313(c)(3); 40 C.F.R. § 131.5(b). EPA’s role under section 303 is plainly 
one of oversight—to ensure that state and TAS tribal water quality standards comply with the 
CWA. Nothing in the CWA indicates that Congress intended CWA section 303(c)(4)(B) to 
convert EPA’s oversight authority into primary authority over tribal reservation lands where no 
TAS authority has been granted.  

 Coalition Comments 
 
4 
 
 
EPA’s role in promulgating water quality standards in CWA Section 303(c)(4)(B) is secondary 
to the states’ role. See 33 U.S.C. § 1313(a), (c)(1), (c)(2)(A); see City of Arcadia v. U.S. Env't 
Prot. Agency, 411 F.3d 1103, 1106 (9th Cir. 2005) (“The CWA operates on a principle of 
cooperative federalism where states take the lead in setting [water quality standards].”); Natural 
Res. Def. Council, Inc. v. EPA, 16 F.3d 1395, 1401 (4th Cir. 1993) (“While the states and EPA 
share duties in achieving [the CWA’s] goal, primary responsibility for establishing appropriate 
water quality standards is left to the states.  EPA sits in a reviewing capacity of the state-
implemented standards, with approval and rejection powers only” (citations omitted).)  EPA’s 
role under CWA section 303(c) is limited to serving as a “back stop” when states fail to submit 
water quality standards that comply with federal standards or otherwise violate the CWA. Gulf 
Restoration Network v. McCarthy, 783 F.3d 227, 231 (5th Cir. 2015). This oversight or backstop 
authority applies to tribes only after EPA has granted TAS authority and the tribe has affirmative 
responsibility to establish water quality standards that comply with the CWA. EPA has not 
provided any explanation or legal analysis that would overcome this and other longstanding 
precedent that confirms the primary role of states and TAS tribes to establish water quality 
standards, and the limited role for EPA to provide oversight where a state or TAS tribe fails in its 
CWA obligations.  
 
EPA’s own water quality standards handbook reinforces EPA’s understanding of its limited role 
to ensure that states and TAS tribes meet their obligations under the CWA. See, e.g., U.S. EPA 
Water Quality Standards Handbook (2017), section 1.5 (“The CWA requires states and 
authorized tribes to adopt new or revised WQS and then submit them to the EPA for review and 
approval or disapproval action. The EPA has the authority and duty under CWA Section 
303(c)(3) to approve or disapprove new or revised WQS.”). When a state or TAS tribe fails in its 
duties and EPA disapproves a water quality standard, section 303(c)(4)(A) requires EPA to 
promulgate a replacement federal water quality standard that is consistent with the CWA.  Id. at 
section 1.5.2 (“In the case of disapproval, the EPA must promptly propose federal WQS under 
Section 303(c)(4)(A) and promulgate such WQS within 90 days of proposal, provided that the 
state or tribe does not make appropriate corrections within 90 days. The EPA may approve some 
provisions and not others within the same WQS submission.”). Section 303(c)(4)(B) similarly 
allows EPA to step in when a state or TAS tribe is not performing its obligations under the 
CWA. This section of the CWA is intended, and has been used by EPA for 50 years, to authorize 
the Agency to determine, in specific cases, that a new or revised water quality standard is 
necessary. Id. at section 1.5.2 (“The EPA may also promulgate a new or revised federal WQS 
where the Administrator determines under Section 303(c)(4)(B) that such a WQS is necessary to 
meet the requirements of the CWA, and no WQS have been submitted for the EPA to disapprove 
under Section 303(c)(4)(A). This situation could occur, for instance, if the EPA determines that 
particular WQS provisions are missing from a state’s or tribe’s currently applicable WQS 
or that the current WQS do not otherwise meet the requirements of the CWA.”) (emphasis 
added). 
  
For the first time in 50 years, the proposed rule would authorize EPA to set nationally applicable 
water quality standards based on newly asserted authority in 303(c)(4)(B) that is untethered from 

 Coalition Comments 
 
5 
 
its oversight role of state and TAS tribal programs.1 This would be a remarkable expansion of 
EPA’s authority and raises concerns that after more than five decades administering the CWA, 
EPA has now “‘claimed to discover in a long-extant statute an unheralded power’ representing a 
‘transformative expansion in its regulatory authority,’” W. Virginia v. Env't Prot. Agency, 142 S. 
Ct. 2587, 2610 (2022), which has never applied nationwide.  EPA’s reliance on section 
303(c)(4)(B), 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(4)(B), as support for expanding its authority to promulgate 
nationally applicable water quality standards has parallels to the Agency’s invocation of 
“newfound power in the vague language of an ancillary provision of the Act” that the Supreme 
Court rejected in W. Virginia.  Id.; see also Biden v. Nebraska, 600 U.S. __, 143 S. Ct. 2355, 
2373 (2023) (discussing W. Virginia).     
 
In this case, the statute clearly provides states and TAS tribes with the primary role of 
establishing water quality standards and limits EPA’s role to oversight of those programs. Yet, 
EPA’s new interpretation of section 303(c)(4)(B) would authorize the Agency to promulgate 
nationally applicable water quality standards outside of its oversight role. EPA’s assertion of this 
new and extraordinary authority could be used to completely overtake established state and TAS 
tribal water quality standards programs, upending the cooperative federalism foundation of the 
CWA.  
 
The proposed rule’s departure from longstanding Agency practice also raises concerns in light of 
Sackett v. EPA, 598 U.S. ___, 143 S. Ct. 1322 (May 25, 2023) and Solid Waste Agency of 
Northern Cook Cty. v. Army Corps of Engineers, 531 U.S. 159, 168 (2001) (SWANCC).  In both 
cases, the Supreme Court rejected an interpretation of a provision of the CWA that would 
“significantly alter the balance between federal and state power and the power of the 
Government over private property.”  Sackett, 143 S. Ct. at 1341 (quoting United States Forest 
Service v. Cowpasture River Preservation Assn., 590 U. S. ___, 140 S.Ct. 1837, 1849-1850 
(2020)); see also SWANCC, 531 U.S. at 172-74.  The Court requires a clear statement of 
congressional intent before assuming that Congress would have delegated authority to the 
Agency to alter that balance. 143 S. Ct. at 1341-42; see also SWANCC, 531 U.S. at 172-74. No 
such clear statement is present here. 
  
Indeed, the CWA is clear that states and TAS tribes have primary authority to establish, 
maintain, and update water quality standards. EPA may promulgate federal water quality 
standards, but only if a state or TAS tribe establishes standards that do not comply with the CWA 
or if they fail to establish required standards altogether. Yet the proposed rule would 
significantly expand EPA’s authority, allowing the Agency to promulgate nationally applicable 
water quality standards outside of its oversight authority, and on tribal reservations where a tribe 
 
1 EPA began to pursue the prospect of claiming this novel authority in 2001 when the EPA 
Administrator signed a proposed rule with an Administrator’s Determination that tribal baseline 
standards are “necessary.” 88 FR at 29499. However, the Agency never published its proposed 
rule in the Federal Register or otherwise presented its position or analysis in writing for public 
comment, so the Agency’s legal analysis was never tested through public comment, APA 
rulemaking, or judicial review. As such, for all intents and purposes, this proposed rule is the 
first time EPA’s interpretation of 303(c)(4)(B) has been presented to the public for consideration 
and comment. 

 Coalition Comments 
 
6 
 
has no TAS authority. The proposed rule is well beyond the authority Congress provided to EPA 
in the CWA and therefore cannot be finalized. 
 
b. The proposed narrative “water quality criteria” does not satisfy the requirements 
of EPA’s existing regulations. 
 
EPA’s regulations at 40 CFR Part 131 provide substantive and procedural requirements that 
states and TAS tribes must meet when promulgating water quality standards. In addition to 
lacking authority or precedent under the CWA, EPA’s proposed rule also does not comport with 
the Agency’s own regulations and requirements.   
 
As the proposal correctly explains, water quality standards have three components: 1) designated 
uses; 2) applicable criteria; and 3) antidegradation policies. 88 FR at 29497. But EPA’s proposed 
rule only presents designated uses, antidegradation policies, and placeholder narrative standards. 
Pursuant to the proposal, the applicable CWA criteria—the numeric criteria generated through 
the “binding translations”—will be established at some point in the future, by an EPA Regional 
Administrator, without any rulemaking procedures or transparency. Proposed 131.XX (d)(2). 
This feature of the proposal is contrary to both the substantive and procedural requirements in 
EPA’s regulations. Nothing in the CWA authorizes EPA to circumvent its own regulatory 
requirements or its Administrative Procedure Act (APA) notice and comment rulemaking 
obligations as EPA’s proposal would allow.  
 
EPA’s existing regulations also require states and TAS tribes to submit water quality standards 
packages for EPA approval. These packages must include use designations, the methods used 
and analyses conducted to support the water quality standards revisions, water quality criteria 
sufficient to protect the designated uses, an antidegradation policy, certification by the state 
Attorney General or other appropriate legal authority within the state that the water quality 
standards were duly adopted pursuant to state law, and other general information “which will aid 
the Agency in determining the adequacy of the scientific basis of the standards…as well as 
information on general policies applicable to state standards which may affect their application 
and implementation.” 40 CFR § 131.6 (a)-(f). Yet the proposed rule itself does not meet these 
minimum requirements, which are required of states and TAS tribes. The proposal provides no 
description of methods or analysis that EPA utilized to support the proposed standards, and it 
fails to include the actual water quality criteria that will be applicable where the rule would 
apply. The proposal also does not include any information to aid the public in understanding “the 
adequacy of the scientific basis of the standards…as well as information on general policies 
applicable to state standards which may affect their application and implementation” as required 
in 40 CFR § 131.6(a)-(f). Based on the lack of analysis, including a lack of explanation of the 
supposed scientific basis for the proposed rule, it appears that EPA would hold states and TAS 
tribes to a far higher standard than EPA is setting for itself.  
 
The proposed rule fails to comply with EPA’s own substantive and procedural requirements for 
water quality standards and submissions by states and TAS tribes and is therefore arbitrary and 
capricious and an unlawful exercise of agency discretion.   
 

 Coalition Comments 
 
7 
 
c. The proposed “binding translations” are an unlawful backdoor to establish 
numeric criteria without the required rulemaking. 
 
Existing EPA regulations also set forth the form that water quality criteria must take. The 
regulations provide that states and TAS tribes should “Establish numerical values based on: (i) 
304(a) Guidance, (ii) or 304(a) Guidance modified to reflect site-specific conditions; or (iii) 
Other scientifically defensible methods” and states should “Establish narrative criteria or criteria 
based on biomonitoring methods where numerical criteria cannot be established or to supplement 
numerical criteria.” 40 CFR § 131.11(b).  
 
The proposed rule purports to establish narrative criteria for tribal reservation waters covered by 
the proposal. But the proposal does not state whether the narrative criteria are being established 
because numerical criteria “cannot be established,” as EPA’s regulation directs. More 
importantly, EPA admits that the proposed narrative criteria will not be the applicable criteria for 
CWA purposes. Rather, the actual applicable criteria that will be used to develop permit 
discharge limits, evaluate waters for impairments, and that will be used to establish TMDLs, will 
be based on the “binding translation methods” that are to be established in the future without the 
required APA rulemaking. 88 FR at 29504, 29506, 29508; Proposed 131.XX (d). 
 
The proposed rule states, “The Regional Administrator shall utilize one of the options set forth in 
this paragraph (d)(2) to derive numeric translations of the narrative criteria in paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section for all purposes under the [CWA] section 303(c) for specific parameters as 
necessary to protect applicable designated uses…” Proposed 131.XX (d) (emphasis added). To 
be clear, under the proposed rule EPA Regional Administrators are not authorized to administer 
or implement the narrative criteria that EPA has presented for public comment. Rather, the 
Regional Administrators are required to translate the narrative criteria into numeric criteria, and 
those are the applicable criteria that will be used “for all purposes under the CWA.” Id. The 
proposed narrative criteria are just a stalking horse and the real CWA criteria will be the numeric 
limits that are later developed with “binding translations” that are established without public 
participation or APA rulemaking. 
 
The proposal presents five options available to Regional Administrators to conduct the “binding 
translations” of the narrative criteria: 1) use EPA’s CWA 304(a) recommended criteria, 2) use 
EPA’s CWA 304(a) recommended criteria modified to reflect site-specific conditions, 3) use 
water quality standards “adopted by the Tribe or CWA-effective water quality standards 
applicable in an adjacent or other relevant state(s) or Tribe(s) that are based on sound scientific 
rationale…”, 4) where applicable use provisions to be protective of the Great Lakes System, and 
5) if options 1-4 are not applicable, the Regional Administrator “shall rely on existing CWA 
implementation provisions” to derive numeric translations. Proposed 131.XX (d)(2). Translation 
options 1-3 are seriously flawed and must not be finalized.2  
 
2 Proposed translation options 4 and 5 are based on existing EPA procedures, both formal and 
informal. It should be noted that just because a procedure or practice is existing or longstanding, 
even if it has been promulgated by rule, does not mean it is lawful or consistent with the CWA. 
To the extent that existing procedures authorize states, TAS tribes or EPA to establish generally 
applicable numeric water quality criteria without going through APA rulemaking, those 

 Coalition Comments 
 
8 
 
 
Tellingly, translation options 1 and 2 are taken directly from EPA’s existing regulations that 
instruct states how to establish numeric water quality standards that would be promulgated 
and submitted for EPA review under the CWA. See 40 CFR § 131.11(b) (states should 
“Establish numerical values based on: (i) 304(a) Guidance, (ii) or 304(a) Guidance modified to 
reflect site-specific conditions…”). Under CWA section 304(a), Congress instructed EPA to 
develop criteria that reflects the latest scientific knowledge that could be provided to states and 
TAS tribes as recommendations for how to develop their own numeric criteria.3 EPA’s section 
304(a) criteria are highly complex and technical, and they are not self-implementing. When a 
state or TAS tribe adopts 304(a) criteria, or a modified version based on site-specific conditions, 
it must do so through a rulemaking process and then submit those criteria for EPA approval 
before they are effective for CWA purposes. 40 CFR Part 131. Under the proposed rule, 
translation options 1 and 2 give EPA Regional Administrators the opportunity to unilaterally 
administer these complex, and often controversial,4 section 304(a) criteria on tribal lands by 
calling them a “translation” of narrative criteria. Even more disconcerting, Regional 
Administrators are given the option of determining whether and how to modify the section 
304(a) criteria based on site-specific criteria, and the proposal makes no effort to explain the 
scope or extent of the “site” or the process EPA would undertake to develop “site-specific” 
criteria. Again, this is a process, when undertaken by a state or a TAS tribe that can take years of 
public engagement and rulemaking. Under the proposal all of this would be done by the EPA 
Regional Administrators without any public notice, comment, stakeholder engagement, or 
rulemaking procedures.  
 
Translation option 3 is an obvious and unlawful work-around of EPA’s own TAS program that 
would seriously undermine the CWA. As EPA knows, tribes that wish to administer a water 
quality standards program must receive TAS authority, and then its water quality standards must 
be established through a public process and approved by EPA, just like a state. Only after these 
rigorous procedures will a water quality standard become effective for CWA purposes. However, 
under the proposal, an EPA Regional Administrator could “translate” baseline narrative criteria 
using a non-TAS, non-CWA tribal standard that has not gone through any public process and 
that has not been subject to EPA review. Under the proposal, that tribal standard would be 
selected by the EPA Regional Administrator and automatically become the applicable criteria 
“for all purposes under the CWA.”  
 
procedures are legally vulnerable and should be reconsidered and made consistent with the CWA 
and APA rulemaking requirements.  
3 https://www.epa.gov/wqc/basic-information-water-quality-criteria 
4 As an example, in 2015 the State of Washington adopted EPA’s 304(a) human health criteria, 
modified with state-specific information, after a years-long state rulemaking process. In 2016, 
EPA partially disapproved the state’s criteria, asserting it did not meet the CWA requirements, 
and published federal criteria in its place. In 2019, EPA reconsidered its prior disapproval, 
approved Washington’s 2015 criteria, and withdrew the federal criteria. Then in 2021, EPA 
again reconsidered its prior decision, rescinded the approval of Washington’s 2015 criteria, and 
repromulgated federal criteria that would apply in Washington.  

 Coalition Comments 
 
9 
 
 
EPA acknowledges in the proposal that it is concerned that more tribes have not obtained TAS, 
and its apparent solution is to allow tribes to set water quality criteria applicable for CWA 
purposes without the TAS process.  But EPA’s frustration is not a valid basis to create new 
authority that would be needed for this proposed regulation to be legal. The proposed regulatory 
text underscores the illegality of EPA’s proposed rule—under translation option 3, the Regional 
Administrator can choose either a standard “adopted by a tribe” or a “CWA-effective water 
quality standard” from another state or TAS tribe. Footnote 5 of the proposed rule preamble also 
confirms that some tribes may have water quality standards established under tribal law, but 
“Such standards are not effective for CWA purposes, however, until they are approved by EPA. 
40 CFR 131.21.” 88 FR at 29498. EPA has not provided any explanation or rationale for why a 
non-TAS, non-CWA tribal standard that would not otherwise be effective for CWA purposes, 
could be used as a “translation” under the proposal and become the CWA-applicable water 
quality standard, all without any public process or demonstration that the tribal standard meets 
the requirements of the CWA and EPA’s regulations.  
 
To further confirm that the establishment of the truly applicable numeric water quality criteria 
would be done without any public input or process, proposed section 40 CFR 131.XX (d)(vi) 
requires EPA Regional Administrators to “maintain and make available to the public for 
informational purposes a list of numeric translations…” 88 FR at 29523 (emphasis added). In 
other words, if a person might be subject to one or more translated numeric standards, those 
standards would be available for review on EPA’s website after they are established, but a person 
would have no opportunity to review or comment on proposed translations. Because they were 
not promulgated under the APA, the EPA may even argue that the public could not challenge 
these numeric criteria as final agency actions under the APA, despite their use for all CWA 
purposes. EPA does not have the authority to exempt itself from the APA’s requirements and 
achieve such a result by fiat. 
 
The foregoing demonstrates that the proposed narrative criteria are merely placeholders for 
future numeric criteria that EPA would establish and administer through its own internal 
“binding translation” process. The proposed rule indicates that some aspects of the proposal are 
intended increase transparency for stakeholders (88 FR at 29504); however, the proposed 
“binding translation” framework would significantly undermine transparency and prevent 
stakeholders from participating in the water quality standards setting process. The proposed rule 
is arbitrary, capricious, and unlawful. 
 
d. The rationale supporting the translation framework is lacking and insufficient for 
APA purposes. 
 
As EPA explains, the Agency’s preference is for “Tribes to obtain TAS and develop WQS 
tailored to the Tribe’s individual environmental goals and reservation waters.” 88 FR at 29499. 
However, because the Agency has concluded that allowing that CWA-authorized and mandated 
process to occur would take too long,5 EPA proposes to “rely[] on its role as both the 
 
5 EPA asserts that following the normal CWA processes would “further delay needed water 
quality protections,” but the proposed rule lacks any description of this purported need for the 

 Coalition Comments 
 
10 
 
promulgating entity and the primary implementing authority” to circumvent the CWA process 
and create a new process that would “allow a degree of site-specific tailoring within the 
regulatory construct of the WQS during subsequent implementation of the proposed rule.” 88 FR 
at 29499. The level of “tailoring” that the proposal would allow during implementation (without 
any transparency or public process) is unprecedented. Indeed, we are not aware that any state or 
TAS tribe has ever been authorized to conduct the level of site-specific “tailoring” that EPA 
would authorize for itself in the proposed rule.  
 
In an example of how the proposal allows “tailoring” during implementation, EPA explains that 
“a particular Tribe’s fish consumption rates could be used during the implementation stage as 
part of the calculation to set the appropriate human health criteria value for its waters.”  88 FR at 
29499. This example is concerning, for several reasons.  
 
First, the proposal suggests that setting the “appropriate human health criteria value” is 
something that occurs during the implementation stage. This is inaccurate and does not seem to 
make logical sense. Setting the appropriate human health criteria value is done during the criteria 
development stage—the human health criteria value is part of the water quality criteria—and 
thus the criteria value cannot be set during implementation of the criteria. Second, according to 
the proposal, setting a fish consumption rate is merely an implementation step that can be done 
after criteria is established. From a criteria-setting perspective this also does not seem to add up, 
particularly because EPA has disapproved state-promulgated human health criteria based on 
EPA’s belief that the fish consumption rate selected by the state was not protective enough.6 In 
other words, EPA has historically viewed a fish consumption rate as an integral part of a state 
water quality standard, providing an independent basis to reject a state’s water quality standards 
package. The proposed rule represents significant departures from EPA’s prior statements 
concerning fish consumption and its prior actions on state-promulgated standards. EPA has not 
identified these significant policy changes and has not provided any explanation or rationale to 
support the changes, which seem unreasonable on their face and thus require a careful, 
persuasive explanation that takes account of all relevant factors.  
 
The proposal also does not explain, or even acknowledge, that changing a fish consumption 
rate—by itself—has the potential to change the stringency of a water quality standard by orders 
of magnitude. With all else equal, a human health criterion based on EPA’s default fish 
 
water quality protections. EPA has not cited specific waters that are in need of protections, 
scenarios where specific EPA-issued NPDES permits are not protective because a lack of tribal 
water quality standards, or specific situations that demand greater federal regulatory control over 
tribal lands. It is not enough to state that there is a lack of water quality standards, EPA must 
demonstrate that there is a widespread need for additional protections and that the proposed 
baseline standards would provide those protections.  
6 See e.g., EPA’s February 2, 2015 action disapproving certain water quality standards in Maine 
(“EPA is disapproving Maine’s human health criteria because they are not protective of human 
health for the target population. They are based on a fish consumption rate of 32.4 grams per 
day, with the exception of arsenic which is based on 138 grams per day. However, the Wabanaki 
study indicates that consumption values between 286 and 514 grams per day represent the 
sustenance fishing use in tribal waters.”) 

 Coalition Comments 
 
11 
 
consumption rate of 22 grams per day could be 10 times less stringent than a criterion based on a 
site-specific fish consumption rate of 220 grams per day. This is just one example of where a 
Regional Administrator’s decisions during implementation could have profound implications on 
the applicable water quality criteria value and the resulting permitting and waterbody impairment 
designations both within and in the vicinity of reservations. We are not aware that EPA has ever 
authorized a state or TAS tribe to make changes during “implementation” that would result in 
such significant changes in stringency to a water quality criterion. EPA has not explained why 
allowing such significant changes during “implementation” of the proposed rule would be 
appropriate, lawful, or consistent with the CWA or the APA, especially without any public 
process, input, or rulemaking.  
 
Finally, the proposal does not explain how the binding translations could affect upstream or 
neighboring state or tribal TAS water quality standards. For example, if the baseline narrative 
criteria are translated into very stringent numeric criteria based on a site-specific fish 
consumption rate, it is possible that EPA could determine that an existing EPA-approved state or 
TAS tribal water quality standard is no longer protective of the downstream “binding 
translation.” The proposal does not explain how EPA will engage with upstream states or TAS 
tribes in these circumstances, particularly since the translations will be done without public 
notice and APA rulemaking, or whether EPA will mandate those upstream standards be modified 
to account for the new “binding translations” established by EPA Regional Administrators. 
Without significantly more explanation and analysis, the proposed rule does not satisfy EPA’s 
obligations under the APA and is arbitrary and capricious.  
 
3. The proposal improperly conflates aquatic life criteria and human health criteria and does 
so to further impose EPA’s flawed construct of “unsuppressed” fish consumption. 
 
The proposed rule establishes a designated use for aquatic life as follows, “Protection and 
propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife, which includes protection of human health of 
consumers of fish, shellfish, and other aquatic life.” Proposed 131.XX (c)(1). This proposed 
designated use improperly conflates concepts of aquatic life and human health criteria and 
introduces significant uncertainty about the meaning and reach of an aquatic life-based water 
quality standard.  
 
On its website, EPA explains that aquatic life water quality criteria are based on “how much of a 
chemical can be present in surface water before it is likely to harm plant and animal life. EPA 
designs aquatic life criteria to protect both freshwater and saltwater organisms from short-term 
and long-term exposure.”7 This is what is traditionally thought of as aquatic life water quality 
criteria—ensuring the water quality is sufficient to protect the species that live within that water 
body or category of water bodies (e.g., cold water fishery). 
 
Also on its website, EPA explains that human health criteria are based on “how much of a 
specific chemical can be present in surface water before it is likely to harm human health.”8 
 
7 https://www.epa.gov/wqc/aquatic-life-criteria-and-methods-toxics 
8 https://www.epa.gov/wqc/human-health-water-quality-criteria-and-methods-toxics 

 Coalition Comments 
 
12 
 
Again, this is commonly how the regulated community and delegated state and TAS tribes think 
of as human health criteria—ensuring that the fish and drinking water consumed by humans is 
not harmful to human health.  
 
Under the proposed rule, water quality criteria protective of the “aquatic life” designated use 
must also protect “human health of consumers of fish, shellfish, and other aquatic life.” This 
designated use definition is novel, conflates two traditional water quality criteria, will make 
implementation confusing, and makes any final rule vulnerable to litigation. 
 
First, given the structure of the proposal one must assume that the aquatic life designated use is 
intentionally over-broad. As written, it would allow an EPA Regional Administrator to replace 
the promulgated narrative standard with numeric “translations” based on aquatic life 304(a) 
criteria or human health 304(a) criteria or a combination of both. This creates maximum 
flexibility for EPA in its unlawful “tailoring” where it need not explain whether its translation is 
based on numeric aquatic life or human health criteria, or why, and where EPA is insulated from 
public scrutiny and legal challenges. The flip side is that this novel and overly broad aquatic life 
designated use, coupled with the proposed “binding translation” procedure provides essentially 
zero transparency for the public, the regulated community or states or TAS tribes. This could not 
have been what Congress intended when it enacted CWA section 303(c)(4)(B). 
 
Second, bootstrapping human health criteria into the aquatic life designated use opens the door 
for EPA to include in the proposal the concept of “unsuppressed” fish consumption rates, like it 
did in the proposed tribal reserved rights rule just a few short months ago. 87 FR 74361 (Dec. 5, 
2022). But in this proposal, EPA directs itself (as opposed to states) to utilize unsuppressed fish 
consumption rates as part of its “tailoring” of the national baseline standards to be tribe-specific. 
EPA provides no explanation for why it should include a fish consumption rate (or rate of 
consumption for other aquatic resources) based on an estimate of “unsuppressed” consumption 
instead of on actual, real-world consumption data or observations. Indeed, just four years ago in 
its 2019 approval of Idaho’s water quality standards EPA stated that “[n]othing in the CWA or 
the EPA’s regulations and guidance, including the 2000 Methodology, requires a state to set a 
FCR based on an estimate of unsuppressed consumption.”  EPA’s Approval of Idaho’s New and 
Revised Human Health Water Quality Criteria for Toxics and Other Water Quality Standards 
Provisions at 12 (Apr. 4, 2019).  EPA’s proposal provides no detailed or persuasive rationale for 
departing from this recent interpretation, and it does not identify any provisions of the CWA that 
would require EPA to employ a counterfactual estimate of “unsuppressed” consumption. 
Furthermore, it is inconsistent with a sound scientific rationale to assume conditions such as 
subsistence levels of consumption that are neither reflective of the world as it is today nor 
grounded in a fact-based, reasonably foreseeable estimate of the future. The Supreme Court has 
recently disapproved the loose interpretation of tribal treaties that EPA has previously used to 
justify “unsuppressed” fish consumption rates. See Arizona v. Navajo Nation, No. 21-1484, slip 
op. (June 22, 2023). 
 
Lastly, EPA provides no guidance for how aquatic life water quality criteria should be or must be 
protective of fish consumers. Must the aquatic life criteria ensure that there is a sufficient 
quantity of fish in the water to support all consumers, or all subsistence consumers? If so, the 
proposal provides no information concerning how such an analysis would be conducted. Will 

 Coalition Comments 
 
13 
 
EPA consider other aspects of its human health criteria when establishing an aquatic life 
criterion—like the lifetime average rate of water consumption, or other exposures accounted for 
through application of the relative risk contribution? EPA has not provided sufficient information 
on this aspect of the proposed rule to allow the public to submit informed comments. If the 
Agency wishes to pursue this novel designated use, it must provide a supplemental notice that 
explains the purpose of the hybrid aquatic life-human health designated use, how such a use 
could be protected, how protective criteria would be developed within the water quality 
standards program, and how EPA’s APA obligations will be satisfied during the development of 
applicable numeric criteria.9  
 
EPA’s failure to consider or address these basic questions runs afoul of the Agency’s obligations 
under the APA.  
 
4. The proposed cultural and traditional uses must be defined for clarity, transparency, and 
implementation purposes. 
 
In proposed section 131.XX(c)(3), EPA has proposed a general designated use that involves 
protection of the cultural and traditional uses of tribal reservation waters.  While respect for such 
considerations is certainly appropriate, EPA has declined to provide any specificity around what 
“cultural and traditional uses” may include, suggesting it could encompass anything from aquatic 
life protections for grasses used for basket weaving to primary contact protection for full body 
submersion done during rituals. EPA explains that it cannot define “cultural and traditional uses” 
with any specificity because “they can include a variety of uses specific to the ceremonies and 
traditions of each Tribe, and each use may require different levels of protection.” 88 FR at 
29503. The proposed rule essentially provides an open invitation to set water quality criteria at 
almost any value that is perceived to be protective of these general and undefined uses, without 
any transparency or rulemaking, and with no demonstration that such criteria would be 
scientifically sound or defensible.  Here again, the potential implementation challenges are 
ignored both for the permitting authorities and dischargers. 
 
5. The antidegradation policy must be streamlined and clarified. 
 
EPA has proposed a lengthy antidegradation policy and implementation methods that would 
create new uncertainty for anyone proposing to conduct activities within or near tribal 
reservation waters. The proposed scope of applicability, how specific parameters that would be 
considered to determine if water is high quality, and the “area in which the waters are located” 
are all left unclear and too vague to allow for transparent implementation. EPA must streamline 
and clarify the antidegradation policy before finalizing the rule. 
 
The proposal states that the antidegradation policy applies to “all requests to authorize new or 
expanded regulated activities” and that term includes, but is not limited to, “any activity that 
 
9 If EPA moves forward with a supplemental notice, the Agency should incorporate probabilistic 
risk assessment (PRA) as a modern approach to risk assessment that has the ability to address the 
risk of vulnerable sub-populations in a granular, transparent, and highly data driven manner. 
Please review and consider the attached February 28, 2023 NCASI memorandum. 

 Coalition Comments 
 
14 
 
requires a permit, license, or water quality certification pursuant to sections 401, 402 and 404 of 
the CWA.” 88 FR at 29523. It is unclear what other regulatory activities would authorize 
discharges to waters and therefore trigger the antidegradation policy. The proposal should be 
revised to include an exhaustive list of regulatory actions that would trigger the antidegradation 
policy and examples of activities that would not trigger antidegradation. 
 
The proposal also states that EPA will identify high quality waters “on a parameter-by-parameter 
basis” and “[a] parameter is high quality if its water quality level exceeds its water quality 
criterion in paragraph (d) of this section.” It is unclear what specific parameters EPA will 
consider and if EPA is intending to evaluate these parameters against the narrative criteria in the 
proposal or, more likely, if EPA is intending to use the applicable numeric criteria that would 
later be established through the “binding translation” process. The proposal must be revised to 
explain what parameters EPA intends to consider and if EPA intends to compare them against 
the proposed narrative criteria or the numeric translations that will be established later. Notably, 
if EPA intends the latter, it is more evidence that the proposed narrative criteria will not be the 
applicable CWA criteria, but that the numeric criteria resulting from the “binding translations” 
will become the criteria effective for “all purposes under the [CWA]” without any notice or 
comment rulemaking. 
 
The proposal also does not attempt to establish the geographic area that will be considered in an 
antidegradation analysis. Under the proposal, a socio-economic analysis is conducted for the 
“area in which the waters are located” to determine if a lowering of water quality is “necessary to 
accommodate important economic or social development.” 88 FR at 29523. However, under the 
proposal, “the ‘area in which the waters are located’ shall be determined on a case-by-case basis 
and shall include all areas directly impacted by the proposed regulatory activity.” 88 FR at 
29524. This broad and undefined term creates significant uncertainty and could allow EPA to 
evaluate an expansive geographic area, including one that extends beyond the tribal reservation.  
 
The antidegradation policy in the proposed rule must be streamlined and revised to provide 
greater clarity and certainty. 
 
6. EPA’s proposed process for nominating a water as an Outstanding National Resource 
Water (ONRW) is unreasonably incomplete at best and unlawful at worst. 
 
EPA has proposed that, under its antidegradation policy, any person or entity could nominate a 
water for ONRW status by submitting the nomination in writing with an explanation of “why” 
the water should be designated as an ONRW. In a proposed rule that sets out numerous factors 
for EPA to consider during implementation, the ONRW provision includes not a single factor or 
criterion that will be considered by EPA when determining if a water should be an ONRW.  
 
An ONRW watershed would have extremely limited, and perhaps zero, development 
opportunities because there can be no lowering of water quality within the water. However, EPA 
has not set out any factors or criteria that would inform whether a water should be an ONRW. 
EPA has not even required that a nomination include a map or location coordinates for the 
nominated water or segment.  
 

 Coalition Comments 
 
15 
 
EPA’s proposal is inadequate and must be revised to include specific criteria that will be 
considered by the EPA Regional Administrator before concluding that a water should be an 
ONRW. Factors should include but not be limited to: exact boundaries of the proposed water or 
segment; chemical data; biological data; ecological value, including whether and to what extent 
the water can and does support endangered or threatened aquatic life; flow data to ensure there is 
a consistent presence of water within the feature; use data to understand the current economic or 
aesthetic values of the feature; a description of the exceptional aesthetic, cultural or historical 
value of the water; whether the water is located in a national or state park, wildlife refuge or 
wilderness areas, special trout waters, federal Wild and Scenic Rivers; and whether the water has 
been significantly modified by human activities.  
More broadly, an ONRW designation has the potential to significantly affect economic 
development activities on tribal lands and upstream of reservations. If the standard is that no 
change in water quality is allowed in an ONRW, taken to its logical extreme this could mean that 
development activities could be precluded for tens or hundreds of miles upstream of the 
designated ONRW. This could in turn lead to severe restrictions or even preclusion of the 
important projects our members represent if even microscopic changes in water quality could be 
detected. Without proper regulatory guidelines setting out the level of analysis and factual 
support required to obtain an ONRW designation, extraordinary burdens could be placed on 
upstream discharges to show no effects on the ONRW. These challenges are why states have 
been very cautious in using ONRW designations; yet the proposal would seem to open the door 
to ONRW designations without any guidelines or sideboards at all. This is another case where 
the broad implications of the proposed rule have not been acknowledged by EPA or considered 
during this rulemaking process. 
Given the significant use and development restrictions that result from designation as an ONRW, 
and the potentially significant economic consequences that could result from improper or 
arbitrary designations, EPA must put more specific parameters and criteria in place to ensure that 
only waters that are truly deserving of the ONRW title receive it. Additionally, any ONRW 
designation by EPA must be supported by information demonstrating that the resource is in fact 
an outstanding national resource for which the benefits of protecting it from any degradation 
outweigh the economic and societal costs. Without more specific factors, parameters or criteria 
provided for ONRW designations, the ONRW nomination and determination process in the 
proposed rule would be arbitrary and capricious.  
 
7. EPA has failed to reasonably consider and weigh the potential impacts of the proposed 
rule, including costs. 
 
In the economic analysis section of the proposal preamble, EPA states the following: 
“The baseline WQS proposed in this rule would not themselves impose costs on any 
entity.” 88 FR at 29518. Yet, EPA elsewhere acknowledges that the rule in fact could 
lead to additional compliance costs for regulated entities, and the Agency prepared an 
economic analysis “to estimate the costs that could arise as a result of promulgating 
baseline WQS and identify the potential benefits and beneficiaries of the baseline WQS.” 
Economic Analysis for Proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian 
Reservations, Prepared for United States Environmental Protection Agency Office of 

 Coalition Comments 
 
16 
 
Water, Office of Science and Technology (April 5, 2023), at p. 1 (Economic Analysis). 
EPA also acknowledged limitations of its analysis. Economic Analysis, at pp. 49-51 
(April 5, 2023) (emphasis added) (noting that “little information is available on the cost 
of P2 [pollution prevention] programs for individual pollutants,” stringent control options 
such as granular activated carbon or reverse osmosis may be insufficient “in meeting 
potential effluent limitations” as a result of the rule, and dischargers “would likely pursue 
some form of relief from the requirements” such as a variance.)  
 
In a line of cases from Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 
463 U.S. 29 (1983) to Entergy Corp. v. Riverkeeper, 556 U.S. 208 (2009) to Michigan v. 
EPA, 135 S. Ct. 2699 (2015), the Supreme Court has made clear that agencies such as 
EPA must weigh cost and benefits, absent a statutory prohibition to the contrary. In 
Michigan, the Court made clear that statutory language such as “appropriate and 
necessary” is the kind of “capacious” language that requires the consideration of all 
relevant factors, including cost. See Michigan, 135 S. Ct. at 2707. All nine justices agreed 
that “[c]ost is almost always a relevant, and usually, a highly important factor in 
regulation. Unless Congress provides otherwise, an agency acts unreasonably in 
establishing a standard-setting process that ignore[s] economic considerations.” Id. at 
2716-17 (Kagan, J., dissenting). Nothing in the relevant language of the CWA relieves 
EPA from this obligation; in fact, EPA has recently asserted, and the U.S. Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit has agreed, that the language of the CWA allows EPA to 
consider compliance costs when approving state water quality standards or variances. 
Upper Missouri Waterkeeper v. US EPA, 15 F.4th 966, 972-74 (9th Cir. 2021) v (“EPA 
has reasonably construed § 1313(c)(2)(A) [CWA section 303(c)(2)(A)] as permitting it to 
consider compliance costs when approving water quality standards and variance 
requests”).  
 
The proposed rule fails to reasonably estimate and weigh the costs that would result from 
its implementation. Yet, Section 303(c)(4)(b) of the CWA – cited as authority for the 
proposed rule – requires the EPA Administrator to determine whether regulation “is 
necessary.” 88 FR at 29500 (emphasis added); 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(4)(B). This 
capacious term, “necessary,” requires the Administrator to reasonably consider all 
relevant factors, including cost, and the Agency must do so to avoid being arbitrary.  
 
EPA’s economic analysis of the proposed rule only estimates costs ranging from $15.51 
million to $36.45 million over a 20-year period, plus one-time costs ranging from $1.23 
million to $6.1 million. 88 FR at 29519; Economic Analysis, at p. 7, Exhibit ES-1. EPA 
asserts that the rule “is likely to yield significant benefits” but claims “estimating the 
dollar value of these improvements may not be feasible.” 88 FR at 29519. Nonetheless, 
EPA then asserts that “EPA anticipates, however, that the aforementioned benefits will 
ultimately outweigh the potential estimated costs associated with promulgation of this 
rule.…” Id.   
 
The proposed regulatory approach, which could result in unattainable water quality standards, is 
likely to impose far greater costs than estimated by EPA and create extreme regulatory 
uncertainty. If the standards are unattainable, the only recourse for the regulated facilities would 

 Coalition Comments 
 
17 
 
be an exception, such as a variance. However, variances are uncertain to be granted, subject to 
legal challenge, and are time-limited. Thus, even if a variance were granted, there is no guarantee 
that it would endure or be renewed into the future.   
 
In addition, the proposed rule would impose costs on regulated entities and non-point 
sources. While non-point sources are not typically subject to NPDES permitting, states 
and TAS tribes can and do regulate non-point sources through water quality standards, as 
mandated by CWA section 208(b)(2). 33 U.S.C. § 1288(b)(2). EPA must fully account 
for the costs on non-point sources in the rule. In sum, EPA must make a reasonable 
determination, in light of the full costs of the proposal, whether regulation is necessary to 
meet the requirements of the CWA.  
 
We stand ready to work with you to engage all stakeholders and urge you to withdraw the rule in 
the meantime. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
American Exploration & Mining Association 
American Farm Bureau Federation 
American Forest & Paper Association 
The Fertilizer Institute 
National Mining Association 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0216 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Greg Gianforte, Governor I Chris Dorrington, Director I P.O. Box 200901 I Helena, MT 59620-0901 I (406) 444-2544 I www.deq.mt.gov
July 20, 2023
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Attn: James Ray, Office of Science and Technology, Standards and Health Protection Division
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20004
Re: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian 
Reservations
Dear Mr. Ray, 
Montana Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the 
proposed rule, “Proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations.” 
Montana DEQ is committed to continue collaboratively engaging with EPA under our cooperative 
federalism approach to administering Clean Water Act programs. DEQ is also committed to coordinating 
with our tribal and state partners to achieve shared goals of water quality protection. 
Montana DEQ supports the adoption of water quality standards that protect beneficial uses of water 
bodies and are based on sound scientific rationale. Montana DEQ also supports opportunities for public 
input to be provided as standards are adopted and implemented across Clean Water Act programs. 
Several Montana tribes have obtained TAS and have adopted water quality standards that have been 
approved by EPA; others are pursuing these actions. Montana DEQ applauds these efforts and 
appreciates EPA’s acknowledgement of these achievements in the proposed rule. 
This proposed rule will impact several Montana DEQ programs, including Montana Pollutant Discharge 
Elimination System (MPDES) permitting, beneficial use support and impairment assessment, Total 
Maximum Daily Load development, and our 401 and 404 certification programs. With this letter, 
Montana DEQ submits our comments on the proposed rule, “Proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations.”
Applicability
States must be able to distinguish where the proposed federal baseline water quality standards apply 
and where state water quality standards apply. States must also accurately identify the spatial
boundaries of lands to which this rule applies to evaluate water body assessment unit boundaries and 
evaluate potential for downstream impacts of pollutant discharges.  EPA has noted difficulty in acquiring 
accurate spatial information depicting boundaries of certain categories of tribal lands. 
Montana DEQ requests that EPA maintain accurate maps that clearly distinguish the spatial boundaries 
of the formal and informal Indian reservation lands (including applicable trust lands) covered by this 
rule, as well as those lands that are considered exceptions including off-reservation allotments or 
dependent Indian communities and make them readily available to states and tribes. 

Page 2 of 3
NarraAve TranslaAon Procedures 
The proposed rule includes narrative criteria and binding translation procedures which EPA would use to 
determine case-specific numeric values protective of applicable designated uses for use in CWA program 
implementation. States must know the numeric values that are applicable to downstream waters to 
ensure adequate downstream protections when issuing permits. States also take upstream water quality
conditions and downstream protections into consideration when performing waterbody assessments, 
reasonable potential analysis, TMDL development, and other CWA program actions. 
Montana DEQ recommends EPA provide clarity and guidance related to the following technical aspects 
of the proposed rule’s narrative translation procedures:

Expectations for the type, quantity and quality of regional and location-specific information
which may be incorporated when selecting case-specific numeric values using the narrative 
translation procedures, including natural (nonanthropogenic) conditions.  

How EPA will ensure the most appropriate narrative translation procedure option is selected for 
a specific pollutant or circumstance. 

What timing and rationale is considered acceptable to retranslate the narrative for a pollutant 
to which the translator was already applied, particularly if the retranslation may result in a 
numeric value that differs from a previous translation outcome. 

How EPA will or will not ensure the same numeric values produced via narrative translation is 
implemented across all Clean Water Act programs. 

How differences, if they exist, between federal baseline water quality standards and adjacent 
state water quality standards will be reconciled when issuing permits or other CWA program 
actions. 
Montana DEQ recommends EPA provide clarity and guidance related to the following logistical aspects 
of the proposed rule’s narrative translation procedures:

How and when states may request that EPA perform a narrative standard translation for 
downstream waters. 

Who within EPA will perform the narrative translation to case-specific numeric values. 

Who will serve as EPA’s point of contact for coordination with states pertaining to narrative 
standard translation and implementation.  

How EPA will track translated numeric values and make them readily available to states, tribes, 
and the public. 
Public ParAcipaAon and InformaAon Sharing
Public participation is foundational to water quality standards development, adoption, and evaluation 
through time. 

Montana DEQ urges EPA to implement all reasonable public participation opportunities when 
implementing the proposed baseline WQS, including public notice and triennial review. 

Montana DEQ urges EPA to create a means of signing up to receive notification of significant 
actions related to this rule, including narrative translation, for states, tribes, and any interested 
persons.
Montana DEQ recommends that EPA develop a consolidated online platform for sharing information 
pertaining to this proposed rule, including notices of narrative translation, the numeric values that result 
from narrative translation procedures, comment opportunities, and other relevant information. 

Page 3 of 3
Best Available Science and DocumentaAon
Water quality standards must be based on based on sound scientific rationale and must protect 
designated uses of water bodies. Rigorous documentation and certainty in how the criteria were 
developed is foundational to water quality standards approval. 

Montana DEQ urges EPA to document the scientific rationale used when implementing the 
narrative standard and translation procedures, including documenting the rationale for the 
selected translation procedure option and the scientific basis of the numeric value produced.
EPA Regional Capacity and Impacts to State Clean Water Act Programs
Montana DEQ urges EPA to ensure that their regional offices receive adequate additional resources to 
enhance their capacity to perform additional workload related to this proposed rule. 

Montana DEQ urges EPA to consider additional resource demands that result from this 
proposed rule including but not limited to performing narrative translations, coordinating with 
states and tribes, issuing permits, performing and reporting on impairment determinations, and 
managing and sharing information related to the baseline water quality standards for Indian 
country. 
Montana DEQ urges EPA to communicate to states to what degree the practical implementation of this 
proposed rule may affect EPA regional offices’ capacity and resulting effects to states’ state Clean Water 
Act Programs, including: 

Review and approval of state-issued permits. 

Review and approval of Total Maximum Daily Load documents. 

Review and approval of 303d/305b water quality reports. 
Conclusion
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide comments on this proposed rule. We look forward to 
ongoing coordination with EPA, states, and tribes on water quality standards. 
Sincerely, 
Katie Makarowski
Water Quality Standards and Modeling Section Supervisor
Montana Department of Environmental Quality 
PO Box 200901
Helena, Montana 59601

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0255 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Department of Law 
 
 
OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
 
 
1031 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 200 
Anchorage, AK 99501 
Main: 907-269-5100 
Fax: 907-276-3697
 
August 3, 2023 
 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Attn: Administrator Michael S. Regan 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
 
Re: 
Dkt. No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
 
The undersigned States appreciate the opportunity to comment on the 
Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”)’s proposal, Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations, 88 Fed. Reg. 29496 (May 5, 2023) (“Proposed 
Rule”), which would establish nationally applicable “baseline” federal water quality 
standards (“WQS”) under the Clean Water Act (“CWA”) for navigable waters on most 
“reservations.” We urge EPA to withdraw the Proposed Rule and to apply State-
promulgated water quality standards over the waters covered by this rule, as Congress 
intended.   
 
BACKGROUND 
 
In 1987, Congress amended the Clean Water Act to allow Tribes to be treated like 
States for some provisions of the CWA upon meeting certain requirements.1 Tribes with 
treatment-as-States (“TAS”) status have authority to establish WQS, administer permits, 
 
1  
The EPA Administrator may treat a Tribe as a State “only if” the following 
conditions are met: “(1) the Indian [T]ribe has a governing body carrying out substantial 
governmental duties and powers; (2) the functions to be exercised by the Indian [T]ribe 
pertain to the management and protection of water resources which are held by an Indian 
[T]ribe, held by the United States in trust for Indians, held by a member of an Indian tribe 
if such property interest is subject to a trust restriction on alienation, or otherwise within 
the borders of an Indian reservation; and (3) the Indian [T]ribe is reasonably expected to 
be capable, in the Administrator’s judgment, of carrying out the functions to be exercised 
in a manner consistent with the terms and purposes of this chapter and of all applicable 
regulations.” 33 U.S.C. § 1377(e).   

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 2 of 20 
 
and manage nonpoint source pollutants.2 Tribes that have not attained TAS status have no 
such authority. EPA’s role in the world of WQS is twofold: (1) to serve as a “backstop,”3 
stepping in only when a State or TAS Tribe is failing to meet the requirements of the 
Clean Water Act;4 and (2) to “support”5 States and TAS Tribes by providing technical 
services like § 304(a) national recommended water quality criteria for use by States and 
TAS Tribes when setting WQS.6  
 
The Proposed Rule would establish the following federal water quality standards 
for all navigable waters in non-TAS Tribal reservations,7 nationwide: 
 
 “Designated uses consistent with the CWA protection and 
restoration goals for aquatic life and users of surface water” 
including “a designated use that protects cultural and traditional 
uses”; 
 “water quality criteria to protect those uses” in narrative form, to 
be translated later by EPA using one of five binding “options”; 
 
2  
33 U.S.C. §§ 1313, -1315, -1318, -1319. 
3  
Nw. Env’t Advocs. v. EPA, 2021 WL 2206497, at *2 (W.D. Wash. 2021); Gulf 
Restoration Network v. McCarthy, 783 F.3d 227, 230 (5th Cir. 2015) (EPA has 
“secondary” role). 
4  
See CWA § 303(c)(4)(B); 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(4)(B). 
5  
CWA § 101(b); 33 U.S.C. § 1251(b) (“It is further the policy of the Congress to 
support and aid research relating to the prevention, reduction, and elimination of 
pollution and to provide Federal technical services and financial aid to State and 
interstate agencies and municipalities in connection with the prevention, reduction, and 
elimination of pollution.”). 
6  
CWA § 304(a); 33 U.S.C. § 1314(a); see City of Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 
415, 425 (10th Cir. 1996) (“Congress clearly intended the EPA to have a limited, non-
rulemaking role in the establishment of water quality standards by states and tribes[.]”). 
7  
EPA notes exceptions in “a few instances” in Footnote 4 of the Proposed Rule, 
including specified Tribes in Maine, potentially some Tribes in Oklahoma, and one Tribe 
in Washington.  88 Fed. Reg. at 29498. EPA also indicates that Tribes may request to be 
excluded from the Proposed Rule if they act within a very short time frame following 
finalization of the rule (90 days). 88 FR at 29502.  

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 3 of 20 
 
 “an antidegradation policy with associated implementation 
procedures,” including requirements for the development of total 
maximum daily loads (“TMDLs”) and requirements for 
recognizing impaired waters and revising this status; and  
 “general WQS polic[i]es such as a mixing zone policy and 
compliance schedule authorizing provision.”8 
 
The Proposed Rule’s water quality criteria are in narrative form. EPA would not translate 
this narrative criteria into numeric criteria until implementation, when it would, on a site-
specific basis, select from 5 translation “options” to use to promulgate numeric criteria. 
The resulting numeric criteria would inform NDPES permits, EPA-issued § 401 
certifications, and § 404(c) vetoes over upstream projects.9  
 
The Proposed Rule rests on an assertion of authority under CWA § 303(c)(4)(B),10 
which requires EPA to first make a determination that a new or revised standard is 
necessary to meet the requirements of the CWA (a “necessity determination”11).   
 
EPA’s necessity determination is factual.  In the Proposed Rule, EPA discusses a 
gap in CWA protections, explaining that “[w]hile more than 300 Tribes within Indian 
reservations are eligible to apply for TAS, only 84 Tribes have applied and been 
approved to administer a WQS program”12 and that “[t]he lack of CWA-effective WQS 
for most Indian reservations means that those waters do not have the human health and 
environmental objectives in place that form the basis for CWA protections.”13  EPA 
estimates, accordingly, that roughly “76,000 miles of rivers and streams” and “1.9 million 
acres of lakes, reservoirs, and other open surface waters” are presently unprotected by the 
CWA.14  EPA notes the unprecedented speed at which Tribes are currently attaining TAS 
status (27, or approximately 33% of TAS Tribes, attained TAS status in the last 6 years), 
and the fact that “Tribal interest in obtaining TAS and adopting their own WQS has 
increased in recent years.”15  Yet, then EPA states that “acquiring TAS authorities and 
adopting WQS is a time and resource-intensive process,” and that “[a]t the current pace, 
it could take more than a decade for CWA-effective WQS to be put in place for all Indian 
 
8  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29499.   
9  
Id. at 29506–29508, 29522–29523. 
10  
Id. at 29500. 
11  
EPA has rebranded this an “Administrator’s Determination” in the Proposed Rule. 
12  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29499. 
13  
Id. 
14  
Id. 
15  
Id.  

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 4 of 20 
 
reservations”16 which is why, EPA concludes, the Proposed Rule is necessary.  In other 
words, EPA believes that: (1) there is a gap in CWA protections over waters on 
reservations of non-TAS Tribes; (2) this gap exists because Tribes are not attaining TAS 
Status fast enough; and (3) it is EPA’s prerogative to promulgate comprehensive, 
nationwide water quality criteria to fill this gap.   
 
DISCUSSION 
 
EPA is charged with protecting human health and the environment under the 
authority conferred and circumscribed by Congress. In the WQS context, Congress has 
required EPA to play a supportive role to States as they protect the health of their 
environment while juggling multiple other policy considerations, like protecting the 
health of their economy and providing for the overall well-being of their people. In its 
1987 amendments, Congress carved out a similar role for EPA vis-a-vis Tribes who have 
met Congress’s TAS requirements. The Proposed Rule upsets this considered division of 
responsibility. For reasons detailed below, EPA lacks authority to promulgate this rule 
and it is arbitrary and capricious.  
 
1. 
EPA lacks authority to promulgate this rule. 
 
The Proposed Rule relies on the authority conferred by CWA § 303(c)(4). This 
provision requires that the EPA Administrator “promptly prepare and publish proposed 
regulations setting forth a revised or new water quality standard for the navigable waters 
involved” in two situations: 
 
(A) 
if a revised or new water quality standard submitted by such 
State under paragraph (3) of this subsection for such waters is 
determined by the Administrator not to be consistent with the 
applicable requirements of this chapter; or  
(B) 
in any case where the Administrator determines that a revised 
or new standard is necessary to meet the requirements of this 
chapter. 
 
 
16  
Id. 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 5 of 20 
 
The Proposed Rule invokes only subsection (B).17 To lawfully invoke this power, EPA 
must make a “necessity determination.”18 Assuming a valid necessity determination, EPA 
is “subject to the same policies, procedures, analyses, and public participation 
requirements established for States in these regulations” when promulgating WQS.19 
 
 
As detailed below, the Proposed Rule: (a) disregards Congress’s intent that State 
WQS apply in Tribal navigable waters until Tribes attain TAS status and promulgate 
Tribe-specific WQS; (b) exceeds Congress’s limited grant of power to EPA under 
§ 303(c)(4)(B); and (c) rests on a demonstrably false necessity determination. 
 
a. 
EPA disregards Congress’s intent that State WQS apply in Tribal 
navigable waters until Tribes attain TAS status and promulgate Tribe-
specific WQS.  
 
States have spent more than 50 years establishing science-based water quality 
standards that recognize each State’s unique topography, hydrogeology, geology, climate, 
and the resulting rivers, streams, and lakes that make up the State’s surface waters. Not 
only is relying on State WQS to protect reservation waters sensible, adherent to 
cooperative federalism precepts, and consistent with EPA past policy—it is required by 
the CWA. Congress has plenary authority over Indian affairs,20 which includes Tribal 
navigable waters regulatable under the CWA. Determining which WQS Congress 
intended to apply to non-TAS reservation waters is a straightforward matter of statutory 
construction.   
 
 
17  
EPA points to a previous EPA’s Administrator’s necessity determination. 88 Fed. 
Reg. at 28955. Since this determination never made it past the draft stage before being 
withdrawn, EPA is for all practical purposes simply re-adopting this previous statement 
as its own. EPA cannot evade accountability by pointing to something that was never 
finalized. 
18  
Gulf Restoration Network, 783 F.3d at 230. 
19  
Id. at 231. 
20  
Haaland v. Brackeen, 143 S. Ct. 1609, 1629 (June 15, 2023) (“Congress’s power 
to legislate with respect to Indians is well established and broad.”). 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 6 of 20 
 
The CWA’s comprehensive nationwide environmental regulatory structure does 
not omit Tribal waters from the scope of State-promulgated WQS protections.21 Under 
the CWA, States have the primary right, responsibility, and authority to plan for the 
development and use of water resources and to create, review, and revise WQS for “all 
intrastate waters.”22 The CWA requirement that States promulgate WQS for all intrastate 
waters, by its plain language, is necessarily inclusive of all Tribal reservation waters 
within State boundaries.23   
 
Supreme Court precedent supports this reading. In Federal Power Commission v. 
Tuscarora Indian Nation, the Supreme Court recognized that “a general statute in terms 
applying to all persons includes Indians and their property interests.” 24 The analogous 
context of the Safe Drinking Water Act, which establishes “national policy with respect 
to clean water,” was broadly held to apply to Tribal lands consistent with Tuscarora rule, 
prior to Congress’s amendment explicitly stating so.25 EPA’s own WQS regulations and 
 
21  
PUD No. 1 of Jefferson Cnty. v. Wash. Dep’t of Ecology, 511 U.S. 700, 700 
(1994); 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251, 1313; see also 57 Fed. Reg. 60848, 60849 (Dec. 22, 1992) 
(EPA acknowledgment that CWA is designed to ensure that “all waters” are sufficiently 
clean); id. at 60851 (EPA’s initial efforts under the 1972 CWA aimed to expand coverage 
to “all interstate and intrastate surface waters”). 
22  
33 U.S.C. §§ 1251(b), 1313(a)–(c); Following enactment of PL 92-500 in 1972, 
the CWA required states to promulgate WQS for all intrastate waters of the United States 
by specific benchmarked deadlines in the early 1970s. 33 U.S.C. § 1313(a)–(b). See also 
PUD No. 1, 511 U.S. at 704 (stating that the CWA is a “comprehensive water quality 
statute” that establishes “distinct roles for the Federal and State Governments” and 
“requires each State, subject to federal approval, to institute comprehensive water quality 
standards establishing water quality goals for all intrastate waters”); Coeur Alaska, Inc. v. 
Southeast Alaska Conservation Council, 557 U.S. 261, 299 n.2 (2009). 
23  
See Thomas v. Jackson, 581 F.3d 658, 661 (8th Cir. 2009) (CWA requires each 
state to establish WQS for waterbodies “within the state’s boundaries”); National Wildlife 
Federation v. Browner, 127 F.3d 1126, 1127 (D.C. Cir. 1997) (CWA requires state WQS 
for “every” body of water within a state); Friends of Merrymeeting Bay v. Olsen, 839 
F.Supp.2d 366, 370 (D. Me. 2012) (CWA requires states to establish WQS for “all” of 
their waterbodies); see also 33 U.S.C. 1370 (nothing in the CWA “shall . . . be construed 
as impairing or in any manner affecting any right or jurisdiction of the States with respect 
to the waters (including boundary waters) of such States.”). 
24  
362 U.S. 99, 116 (1960). 
25  
Phillips Petroleum Co. v. EPA, 803 F.2d 545, 555–57 (10th Cir. 1986). 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 7 of 20 
 
historical guidance on WQS, too, emphasize the role of States in comprehensively 
promulgating WQS for all intrastate waters.26   
 
Examining the timing of CWA amendments confirms this understanding. The 
CWA required States to comprehensively promulgate WQS for intrastate waters by 
specific benchmarked deadlines in the early 1970s. The CWA’s Tribal TAS provisions 
were added later, in 1987, and only thereafter permitted eligible Tribes, if approved for 
TAS by EPA, to be treated as if they were States for WQS purposes on a prospective 
basis.27 Congress’s intent was plainly for State WQS to protect all navigable waters 
unless and until Tribes attain TAS status and promulgate Tribe-specific WQS. Congress 
did not mistakenly legislate a “gap” in coverage into the CWA, consisting of non-TAS 
waters. 
 
 
EPA’s § 303(c)(4)(B) power is narrow and limited, and cannot support such a 
broad and sweeping rule. Invocation of this power requires a valid necessity 
determination, which EPA has not made. Congress’s intent is that State WQS apply until 
TAS Tribes promulgate Tribe-specific WQS, which EPA is not free to disregard. 
 
b. 
The Proposed Rule exceeds EPA’s power under § 303(c)(4)(B). 
 
In 1989, EPA undertook a rulemaking to establish the criteria and procedures by 
which a Tribe can qualify for TAS status.  Speaking about federal promulgation of water 
quality standards, EPA stated in this rulemaking that: 
 
 
26  
See 40 C.F.R. §§ 131.1, 131.2, 13 l.3(j), 131.4, 131.8, 131.10; see Questions and 
Answers on Water Quality Standards Under PL 92-500, U.S. EPA, Office of Water 
(1972), available at https://tinyurl.com/39dbv5w2, question no. 4 (WQS apply to all 
interstate and intrastate waters), no. 6 (states must establish WQS for all intrastate 
waters); no. 8 (states set WQS and EPA may promulgate WQS only when states fail to 
timely adopt WQS consistent with CWA), no. 9 (WQS are approved for all states), and 
Chronological Timetable of Events and Requirements (outlining deadlines in 1972–1973 
for the promulgation of all intrastate WQS)); see Questions & Answers on: Water Quality 
Standards, U.S. EPA, Office of Water (1983), available at https://tinyurl.com/476j6av8, 
question no. 2 (WQS are established by states), no. 9 (WQS apply to waters of the United 
States), no. 22 (all states have WQS)); Introduction To Water Quality Standards, U.S. 
EPA, Office of Water (1988), available at https://tinyurl.com/4yyknxn5, Section I, 
question no. 7 (WQS should be adopted for each waterbody within a State’s boundaries), 
no. 8 (states adopt WQS), no. 10 (WQS apply to all waters of the United States). 
27  
33 U.S.C. § 1377(e); 40 C.F.R. §§ 131.4, 131.7, 131.8. 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 8 of 20 
 
EPA emphasizes that [f]ederal promulgation is not consistent with the intent of 
CWA sections 303(c) and 518(e) to provide States, and Tribes qualifying for 
treatment as States, with the first opportunity to set standards.28 
 
The relevant statutes have not been materially revised since EPA made this statement. In 
2014, this time to a federal judge, EPA stated that its §303(c)(4)(B) power “is . . . used 
only when the State has made every other effort” to comply with CWA requirements and 
the State “will not, or cannot, act”:  
 
Unlike the authorities in CWA section 303(a) and (b) and (c)(1)-(3), 
which form the basic framework of the WQS program under the 
CWA, the section 303(c)(4)(B) necessity determination is an 
extraordinary authority that is judiciously and rarely used when the 
State has made every other effort to comply with the CWA under the 
preferred procedures of CWA section 303(c)(3), and EPA believes 
that the State either will not, or cannot, act.29 
 
EPA explained to the court that such an approach “is consistent with the cooperative 
federalism embodied in the Act, and as reflected in the legislative history.”30 That is why, 
EPA told the court, “[t]he section 303(c)(4)(B) authority . . . is used only in unusual 
circumstances.”31 
 
Far from demonstrating that non-TAS Tribes “will not, or cannot, act,” EPA 
acknowledges that Tribes are actively applying for TAS status and that twenty-seven 
Tribes have been approved in the last six years.32 The fact that 33% of all TAS Tribes 
have been approved in the last six years demonstrates that Tribes “can,” and “will” attain 
TAS status and promulgate Tribe-specific WQS. There is no indication that all non-TAS 
Tribes are unwilling or unable to act. As such, any rule covering all aspects of WQS, 
 
28  
EPA, Amendments to the Water Quality Standards Regulations That Pertain to 
Standards on Indian Reservations, 54 Fed. Reg. 39098-01, 39103 (September 22, 1989). 
29  
United States’ Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment: Combined Memorandum in 
Opposition to Plaintiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment and in Support of Cross-Motion 
for Summary Judgment, Puget Soundkeeper Alliance v. EPA, No. 2:13-cv-01839-JCC, at 
5 (W.D. Wash. Mar. 24, 2014) (emphasis added). 
30  
Id. at 5 (quoting H.R. Rep. No. 92-911, at 105, reprinted in 1A Federal Water 
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 at 792 (Comm. Print 1973)). 
31  
Id. at 9. 
32  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29499 (stating that “Tribal interest in obtaining TAS and adopting 
their own WQS has increased in recent years” and this interest has resulted in 27 Tribes 
attaining TAS status in the last six years). 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 9 of 20 
 
applicable to all non-TAS reservations, nationwide, cannot rationally be described as 
“judicious” or a “tool of last resort.” 
 
Section 303(c)(4)(B)’s limited applicability is plain from the text. The grant of 
power applies to “any case” and extends only to the promulgation of “a revised or new 
water quality standard.” “Case,” “a,” and “standard” are all singular. Seemingly 
recognizing this, EPA previously stated that “[a] necessity determination would have to 
identify a particular standard that requires revision to meet the requirements of the 
Act.”33 The power to promulgate a particular standard in one case at a time does not 
encompass the power to promulgate every type of WQS in innumerable cases, 
nationwide, over an EPA-estimated 76,000 miles of rivers and streams and 1.9 million 
acres of lakes, reservoirs, and other open surface waters.34     
 
c. 
EPA’s “necessity determination” rests on a false premise. 
 
EPA cannot lawfully invoke its § 303(c)(4)(B) power until it makes a valid 
“necessity determination.” In the Proposed Rule, EPA estimates that 76,000 miles of 
rivers and streams and 1.9 million acres of lakes, reservoirs, and other open surface 
waters (EPA’s estimation of non-TAS reservation waters) constitute a gap of waters 
presently unprotected by the CWA.35 This is false. EPA (again) contradicts itself: in the 
Proposed Rule, EPA explains that “EPA is typically the NPDES permitting authority in 
Indian country” and “[i]n the absence” of WQS established by TAS Tribes, “EPA permit 
writers have utilized various tools to write protective NPDES permits, such as relying on 
downstream state WQS to inform relevant permit limits.”36 In other words, EPA is the 
entity charged with implementing NPDES for non-TAS reservation waters, and EPA 
acknowledges that its NPDES permits do not leave these waters unprotected.37 Rather, 
these permits incorporate State WQS—or, “at a minimum,” EPA’s 304(a) national 
 
33  
United States’ Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment: Combined Memorandum in 
Opposition to Plaintiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment and in Support of Cross-Motion 
for Summary Judgment, Puget Soundkeeper Alliance v. EPA, No. 2:13-cv-01839-JCC, at 
8 (W.D. Wash. Mar. 24, 2014) (emphasis added). 
34  
See 88 Fed. Reg. at 29499. 
35  
Id. (“50 years after enactment of the CWA, the majority of Indian reservations do 
not have this foundational protection laid out by Congress in the CWA for their waters.”). 
36  
Id.   
37  
If EPA’s NDPES permits are leaving Tribal waters unprotected, EPA should 
review its own permitting policies, or address those State WQS considered to be 
“unprotective” of tribal waters on a case-by-case basis. Developing a national rule is an 
incongruous solution. 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 10 of 20 
 
numeric recommendations.38 While, as described in Section 1(a) of this Letter, the former 
is lawful and the latter is not, both work to protect non-TAS reservation waters. 
 
But-for the Proposed Rule, in other words, reservation waters will remain 
protected under the CWA—by EPA’s application of State WQS or EPA’s 304(a) national 
recommended criteria in NPDES permits and § 401 certifications.39   
 
2. 
The Proposed Rule is arbitrary and capricious.  
 
The Administrative Procedure Act requires EPA “to engage in reasoned 
decisionmaking, and directs that agency actions be set aside if they are arbitrary or 
capricious.”40 Courts will evaluate whether the Proposed Rule “was based on a 
consideration of the relevant factors and whether there has been a clear error of 
judgment.”41 Among other things, EPA must show that it “examined the relevant data 
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for [its] decision, including a rational 
connection between the facts found and the choice made.”42  “Unsubstantiated or bare 
assumptions” are not enough.43  
 
The Proposed Rule would not survive arbitrary-and-capricious review.   
 
 
38  
EPA Region 9, EPA’s Water Quality Certifications on Tribal Lands of the Pacific 
Southwest at 2 (Nov. 2016), available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016-
11/documents/wqc_fact_sheet_november_2016_0.pdf.  EPA elaborates that “[t]his 
national framework protects different water uses with different criteria for specific 
substances.”  
39  
EPA has expressly stated that State WQS may inform § 401 certifications.  EPA 
Region 9, EPA’s Water Quality Certifications on Tribal Lands of the Pacific Southwest at 
2 (Nov. 2016), available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016-
11/documents/wqc_fact_sheet_november_2016_0.pdf. 
40  
Dep’t of Homeland Sec. v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal., 140 S. Ct. 1891, 1905 
(2020) (cleaned up). 
41  
Id. (cleaned up). 
42  
Dep’t of Com. v. New York, 139 S. Ct. 2551, 2569 (2019) (cleaned up). 
43  
Nat. Res. Def. Council v. EPA, 31 F.4th 1203, 1207 (9th Cir. 2022) (cleaned up). 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 11 of 20 
 
a. 
The Proposed Rule unlawfully vests policy-decisionmaking power in 
EPA.  
 
EPA’s Proposed Rule covers all three major WQS components: (i) designated 
uses, (ii) water quality criteria, and (iii) antidegradation requirements.44 EPA has made 
several clear errors of judgment in each. 
 
i. 
Designated Uses 
 
Designated uses “establish, and communicate to the public, the environmental 
management objectives and water quality goals for a state or authorized Tribe’s 
waters.”45 EPA proposes to establish three designated uses for all non-TAS reservation 
waters: (1) cultural and traditional uses; (2) aquatic life; and (3) primary contact 
recreation.46 Under the Proposed Rule, these three uses would apply to all covered waters 
until EPA revises a specific water’s designation.47 The Proposed Rule does not require 
consideration of whether these uses are attainable.  
 
(1) 
Cultural and Traditional Use 
 
The Proposed Rule creates a new classification entitled cultural and traditional 
use. Neither this classification, nor permission to create this classification, appears 
anywhere in the CWA. 48 EPA’s implementing regulations contain no such classification. 
In the Proposed Rule, EPA offers only a circular definition of this new classification, 
providing, in full: 
 
 
44  
The Proposed Rule goes even further and advances additional general WQS 
policies including a mixing zone policy, which this Letter does not get into.  
45  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29502–03. 
46  
Id. at 29522. 
47  
Id. at 29526. 
48  
EPA ties this new use to a provision of the CWA with the thinnest of threads, 
stating only that “[c]ultural and traditional uses serve to protect the health and welfare of 
Tribal members exercising such uses and are thus within the purposes enumerated in the 
Act.”  88 Fed. Reg. at 29503. The States respect the freedom of all individuals to engage 
in religious and spiritual practices, including those involving water. The States do not, 
however, believe that Congress intended EPA to police the religious, spiritual, or cultural 
uses of water. EPA’s job is more secular, and more limited to helping States and TAS 
Tribes reduce pollution in their navigable waters to improve physical health.  

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 12 of 20 
 
Cultural and traditional uses. Protection of cultural and traditional 
uses of reservation waters.49   
 
EPA further states that such uses “can include a variety of uses specific to the ceremonies 
and traditions of each Tribe, and each use may require different levels of protection.”50 
Apparently envisioning this designation to function as some sort of catch-all, EPA lastly 
states that “Tribal treaty or other reserved rights to fish, hunt, and/or gather on Indian 
reservations could generally be protected by such cultural and traditional designated uses, 
to the extent they are not protected by an aquatic life use or primary contact recreation 
use.”51 Other than hinting at the potentially vast coverage of this designation, the 
Proposed Rule provides little clue as to how EPA will apply this standard during 
implementation, including what data EPA will rely on (heritage or historic data, for 
example). And the Proposed Rule departs from EPA’s own regulations, which predicate 
new use designations on a reviewable use-attainability analysis.52   
 
Whatever uses this new category might encompass, Congress has chosen to 
protect them under another Act—the National Historic Preservation Act,53 which 
establishes a comprehensive cultural and historic resource protection and preservation 
program at the national level. Nowhere in that Act or in the CWA is there a hint of 
congressional intent that EPA should play a role in the identification and protection of 
cultural and traditional resources through a mechanism such as this.  
 
With only a circular definition, and absolutely no standards or guidelines, EPA 
writes itself a blank check to require extremely (perhaps impossibly) stringent WQS for 
all waters covered by the Proposed Rule. Once a designation is made, a Tribe may only 
“request” that EPA revise the designation—actual power to revise the designation, once 
established, would reside exclusively with EPA.54 EPA provides no rational justification 
for this new designation use, points to no authority for its creation, and offers no good 
reason why EPA should be the one making such important policy decisions. Congress has 
 
49  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29503.    
50  
Id. 
51  
Id. 
52  
40 C.F.R. § 131.10(g), (j). 
53  
54 U.S.C. §§ 300101 et seq. 
54  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29526 (“The Regional Administrator may upon request of a Tribe 
for its reservation waters, or based on the Regional Administrator’s identification, revise 
one or more designated uses in paragraph (c) of this section and associated criteria, add 
additional designated uses and associated criteria where such revisions will more 
appropriately reflect the Tribe-specific use and value of waters covered by paragraph (a) 
of this section, or establish water quality standards variances . . . .”). 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 13 of 20 
 
already determined that these policy decisions lie with the States and the TAS Tribes 
except in very rare circumstances. 
 
(2) 
Aquatic Life Use 
 
EPA’s selection of the aquatic life classification, while a recognizable 
classification, is similarly inappropriate. By EPA’s description, this classification would 
protect all covered waters for human consumers of fish, shellfish, and other aquatic life. 
In other words, EPA would give itself the power to establish human health criteria for all 
non-TAS Tribes with reservations covered by the Proposed Rule. By giving itself the 
option to impose a high fish consumption rate (an important component of the human 
health criteria formula), EPA lays another foundation for imposing extremely stringent 
WQS. While the States agree that waters that are used by consumers of fish, shellfish, 
and other aquatic life should be protected, EPA has provided no indication that every 
water covered by the Proposed Rule contains fish and other consumable aquatic life. 
Moreover, Congress intended that this type of protection first be set by States, and then 
by Tribes with TAS status. Not by EPA.   
 
(3) 
Primary Contact Use 
 
The primary contact use designation “protects people from illness due to activities 
involving the potential for ingestion of, or immersion in, water” and usually is reserved 
for bodies of water that people use to “swim, water-ski[], skin-div[e], surf[], or other 
activities likely to result in immersion.”55 This designation can be contrasted to a 
secondary contact recreation classification, which is protective when immersion is 
unlikely (e.g., when a water is used for boating, wading, and rowing.)56 In its Water 
Quality Standards Handbook, EPA offers States and TAS Tribes four options to choose 
among when deciding whether and which waters to protect for use as recreation, and 
which level (primary, secondary, or subcategories of either) to protect under.57 These 
options provide States and TAS Tribes the flexibility to protect waters consistent with 
their unique circumstances, values, and other policy goals. While being swimmable is a 
long-term policy goal we can all get behind, it may not be necessary in every 
circumstance. Flexibility for policymakers is key. 
 
 
55  
EPA Water Quality Standards Handbook, EPA-823-B-17-001. EPA Office of 
Water, at 2.3.1 (2017), available at https://www.epa.gov/wqs-tech/water-quality-
standards-handbook (hereinafter “EPA WQS Handbook”). 
56  
Id.   
57  
Id. 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 14 of 20 
 
Designated use classifications reflect the type of decisionmaking that Congress 
intended to be exercised by States and Tribes with TAS status—not EPA.58 EPA provides 
little to no explanation for applying all three designations to all covered waters, and 
further giving itself the ability to create numeric criteria applicable to each designation, is 
arbitrary and capricious and beyond EPA’s authority.   
 
ii. 
Water Quality Criteria 
 
EPA’s Proposed Rule makes water quality criteria decisions for non-TAS Tribes. 
EPA’s decisions to (a) promulgate narrative,59 as opposed to numeric, criteria in this 
rulemaking; and (b) give itself 5 “options” for translating this narrative criteria into 
numeric criteria when implementing this rule, function together to allow EPA unchecked 
discretion to promulgate extremely stringent standards.  
 
EPA’s proposed narrative criteria include requirements that discharges be free 
from pollutants at levels preventing attainment of designated uses; free from substances 
forming “objectionable” deposits, color, odor, etc., or matter that floats to form a 
“nuisance”; free from conditions likely to jeopardize threatened or endangered species; 
and discharged at levels that do not violate applicable downstream WQS.60 EPA lays out 
5 “options” that EPA may select from when translating narrative into numeric criteria. 
The process of translation would be completed by EPA outside of this rulemaking.   
 
Option 1 allows EPA to use the national recommended water quality criteria 
published under section 304(a), which are already in numeric form. Option 2 starts with 
the national recommended criteria, with an important addition: EPA may “modif[y]” 
these criteria “to reflect site-specific conditions and aquatic communities.” Buried in the 
list of conditions EPA may take into account under Option 2 are: “[a] fish consumption 
rate protective of Tribal fish consumers”; and “[o]ther scientifically defensible 
 
58  
To the extent EPA seeks to rely on a “general Trust responsibility,” it cannot: the 
Supreme Court has explicitly stated that “the Federal Government must expressly accept 
trust responsibilities in a treaty, statute, or regulation that contains rights-creating or duty-
imposing language.” Arizona v. Navajo Nation, 143 S. Ct. 1804, 1815 (June 22, 2023) 
(internal quotations omitted). EPA makes no effort to identify specific language imposing 
a trust responsibility related to WQS for each non-TAS Tribes whose lands are covered 
by the Proposed Rule.  
59  
“Narrative criteria are qualitative descriptions of the conditions necessary to 
protect a water body’s designated use, while numeric criteria—expressed as levels, 
concentrations, toxicity units or other values—are quantitative descriptions of those 
conditions.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 29504.   
60  
Id. at 29506.  

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 15 of 20 
 
assessments, for example . . . those related to Endangered Species Act consultation.”61 
Option 3 allows EPA to adopt WQS submitted by TAS Tribes that are already pending 
approval, or to adopt State WQS. Option 4 is limited to the Great Lakes System, and 
Option 5 is a catch-all, stating in full: “EPA may rely on existing CWA implementation 
provisions to translate applicable narrative criteria, as necessary.” 
 
Two legal flaws with this approach are immediately apparent. First, none of these 
options require the application of State-promulgated water quality criteria. They are 
therefore not lawful under the CWA.62 Second, EPA disregards its own regulation 
allowing use of narrative standards in only two instances: (1) to supplement numeric 
criteria; or (2) in situations where numeric criteria cannot be determined.63 EPA offers no 
explanation for this deviation. 
 
The remaining flaws are also immediately apparent. Option 1 appears to be 
already used by EPA in the NPDES permitting process, and doesn’t explain the need to 
expend agency time and resources into promulgating this rule. Option 1 is perhaps a red 
herring.  
 
 
Option 2 raises a red flag, and is likely EPA’s preferred option. Indeed, EPA 
shows its hand in the environmental justice section of the Proposed Rule, where it 
explains that this rule “is likely to reduce existing disproportionate and adverse effects on 
Indigenous people” specifically because it gives EPA the “flexibilit[y] allowing for the 
consideration of Tribe-specific fish consumption rates when translating narrative criteria 
into numeric values” which EPA may avail itself of “to address disproportionate and 
adverse effects to Indigenous people.”64 Option 2, in conjunction with EPA’s newly 
created ability to designate waters for consumption of aquatic life, is how EPA gets there. 
Nothing in the Proposed Rule would prevent EPA from applying Option 2 in most, or 
every, instance. In practice, this means that EPA may select a high fish consumption rate 
to generate stringent numeric criteria, which are then applied to all water covered by the 
Proposed Rule. Further, subsistence use is a condition that States do, or can, account for 
 
61  
Id. at 29506. 
62  
See Section 1(a) of this Letter. 
63  
40 C.F.R. part 131.11(b)(2) (emphasis added).  
64   
88 Fed. Reg. at 29521.   

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 16 of 20 
 
in their HHC (as EPA suggested the State of Alaska do65), and is something that Tribes 
may consider once they have attained TAS status. Additionally, Option 2 appears to vest 
in EPA some type of discretionary power to implement the Endangered Species Act. This 
power, of course, was never granted to EPA. The State of Alaska can attest to the use and 
abuse of the Endangered Species Act to stop projects, and is not eager to experience more 
at the hands of EPA.   
 
Options 3, 4, and 5 are no better. Option 3 simply allows EPA to short-circuit the 
TAS WQS approval process, and should be disallowed on that basis. Option 4, which is 
region-specific, is inappropriate in a nationwide rule. The catch-all provision of Option 5 
has hardly any accompanying explanation, and should not exist.  
 
iii. 
Anti-Degradation Requirements 
 
State-established WQS must include an antidegradation policy, which is “a policy 
requiring that state standards be sufficient to maintain existing beneficial uses of 
navigable waters, preventing their further degradation.”66 Existing uses must be 
maintained unless the State or a TAS Tribe makes a finding that allowing for lower water 
quality is “necessary to accommodate important economic or social development in the 
area in which the waters are located[.]”67 In its Water Quality Standards Handbook, EPA 
notes that “[a]ntidegradation . . . is a policy that allows public decisions to be made on 
important environmental actions.” Waters can be protected at levels of Tier 1 (existing 
uses), Tier 2 (high-quality waters), and Tier 3 (Outstanding Natural Resource Waters 
(“ONRWs”)). Tier 3 designations, in particular, can be exceedingly controversial. EPA’s 
Water Quality Standards Handbook recognizes some States’ concern that “the Tier 3 
ONRW provision [i]s so stringent that its application would likely prevent States from 
taking actions in the future that were consistent with important social and economic 
development on, or upstream of, ONRWs” and that “[t]his concern is a major reason that 
 
65  
See Michael Szerlog, Acting Dir. Ltr. from EPA to DEC Re: EPA Response to 
Alaska Human Health Criteria Development Letter at 3 (July 3, 2023) (stating that 
“adopting statewide HHC that are protective of subsistence fishing would be a reasonable 
approach[]”); id. at 8 (“EPA recommends that DEC select the inputs to derive revised 
HHC for Alaska, particularly the FCR and cancer risk level inputs, with protection of 
subsistence consumers as the focus. More specifically, this would mean selecting an FCR 
that represents a value at the high end (e.g., 90th percentile) of the state’s subsistence 
population, rather than a mean or median, paired with a cancer risk level of 10-5 or 10-
6.”). 
66  
PUD No. 1 of Jefferson County, 511 U.S. at 705. 
67  
40 C.F.R. part 131.12(a)(2).   

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 17 of 20 
 
relatively few water bodies are designated as ONRWs.”68 The process of designating Tier 
3 waters is laden with value- and policy judgments.69 
 
Regarding Tier 2 designations, EPA’s Proposed Rule appears to allow EPA, 
without Tribal input, to make an initial designation of a covered water as Tier 2.70 A 
Tribe may not lower the protection of a Tier 2 water unless (1) the Tribe provides written 
consent, (2) the EPA Regional Administrator agrees, and (3) the EPA Regional 
Administrator memorializes his agreement in a “finding” indicating that “such a lowering 
is necessary to accommodate important economic or social development in the area in 
which the waters are located.”71 Such a finding can “only” be made if the Regional 
Administrator determines that it is supported by socio-economic and alternatives 
analyses.72 But why does EPA—a federal agency with one narrow mission—get to 
decide what types of “economic or social development” are “important” for the 
community this affects? EPA’s mission, and expertise, is limited to environmental 
protection. EPA has no expertise on economic or social development, and has no place 
making decisions like this, which Congress reserved for States and TAS Tribes. 
 
Regarding Tier 3 designations, the Proposed Rule allows “any person or entity,” 
including non-Tribal members and EPA, to nominate bodies of water on reservations for 
Tier 3 status using a new basis of “cultural significance.”73 Under the Proposed Rule, 
agreement from both the Tribe and EPA are required to designate a water as Tier 3. Once 
made, a Tier 3 designation can only be undone if the Tribe agrees in writing and the EPA 
 
68  
EPA WQS Handbook at § 4.2. 
69  
In the past several Alaska legislative sessions, for example, bills have been 
introduced in the Alaska State Legislature that would vest exclusive authority to make 
Tier 3 designations in the Legislature. 
70  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29523 (“In determining which waters will receive high quality 
water protection consistent with paragraph (e)(2) of this section [laying out general policy 
of Tier II protection], the Regional Administrator will identify high quality water on a 
parameter-by-parameter basis.”).  
71  
Id.   
72  
Id. at 29524 (“The Regional Administrator shall make a finding that a lowering of 
high water quality is necessary to accommodate important social and economic 
development in the area in which the water is located only if the information in paragraph 
(f)(3)(i) of this section supports such a conclusion and the Tribe has provided written 
agreement.”); see also id. (“If compliance with the highest statutory and regulatory 
requirements for all new and existing point sources and all Tribal-regulated cost-effective 
and reasonable best management practices for non-point sources cannot be assured, the 
Regional Administrator will not allow a lowering of high water quality.”) 
73  
Id. at 29524–29525. 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 18 of 20 
 
Administrator makes a specific finding similar to that required for Tier 2. This suffers 
from the same fundamental flaw as the Tier 2 process: EPA asserts policymaking power 
that it does not have. As a practical matter, this means that EPA can singlehandedly 
prevent a water from being de-designated by declining to make the requisite finding. If a 
Tribe is ever inclined to develop its land on or upstream of a Tier 3 body of water, the 
Tribe’s economic future will be at the mercy of EPA.   
 
Perhaps most irrationally, EPA fails to explain why under a “baseline” rule, EPA 
is protecting anything beyond Tier 1 existing uses. Providing designation and revision 
processes for Tiers 2 and 3 is entirely inconsistent with a rulemaking aimed at creating 
only a baseline layer of protection. 
      
In a scheme where Congress left primary responsibility for land- and resource-use 
decisions to States and TAS Tribes—those juggling multiple policy considerations 
including but not limited to water protection—EPA has no place deciding what types of 
economic or social development are “important” enough to justify a lowering of WQS.     
  
The Proposed Rule additionally gives EPA control over impaired designations on 
covered waters and TMDL establishment under CWA § 303(d). A TMDL calculates the 
amount of a pollutant that a water body can assimilate in one day from all sources of 
pollution within the watershed, point and non-point, and still meet water quality 
standards. The TMDL then allocates to total limit of pollutants allowable from point and 
non-point source discharges, respectively. After a TMDL has been developed, effluent 
limitations in NPDES permits must be consistent with the assumptions and requirements 
underlying the allocated limits. To comply with the more stringent effluent limitations 
that often result from this process, point source dischargers frequently must implement 
more stringent controls, which can impose significant additional costs and disincentive to 
develop. EPA asserts, without citation, that it has the power to establish impaired water 
lists and TMDLs for non-TAS Tribes. Neither § 303(d) nor 40 CFR 130.7 confer 
authority to EPA for assessment and identification of impaired waters. This is a decision 
with significant economic effects that, again, is not EPA’s to make.  
 
b. 
The Proposed Rule is fiscally irresponsible. 
 
Alarmingly, EPA has based its entire economic analysis on the use of Option 1, 
not Option 2. Because the cost to upstream permittees skyrockets under Option 2 as 
compared to Option 1, basing costs only on Option 1 is inaccurate and misleading.   
 
As a practical matter, translating narrative criteria into numeric criteria applicable 
to specific Tribal navigable waters will require a far greater capacity in terms of staff, 
time, and data collection than EPA has. Unlike States, Tribes may not have water quality 
experts on staff to assist EPA. EPA admits as much in the Proposed Rule, recognizing 
that “there is a general lack of Federal funding to support operation and maintenance 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 19 of 20 
 
(O&M) of . . . wastewater facilities” that stand to be affected by this rule.74 EPA further 
estimates that “some Tribal communities”—potentially those in Alaska, who experience 
some of the worst wastewater and other critical infrastructure issues—“may need to 
contribute toward O&M needs, which are estimated to range from approximately $50,000 
to $500,000 aggregate per year.”75 EPA suggests that perhaps Tribes can “impos[e] an 
additional burden on ratepayers” to cover this increase.76 But the suggestion that Tribes 
should simply have “ratepayers”—i.e., Tribal members—absorb this added cost is 
absurd. How are Tribes supposed to create job opportunities for their members with an 
EPA set on thwarting development, and thus job creation, at every turn?     
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The undersigned States promulgate WQS with the goal of protecting the general 
well-being of our people, which includes the health of our environment and the health of 
our economy. TAS Tribes may make WQS decisions that are similarly informed by 
multiple values, policy preferences, and goals. States and TAS Tribes are directly 
accountable to their constituents; EPA is not. EPA is charged with one goal: protect 
human health and the environment. Congress’s considered division of roles in the CWA 
reflect these fundamental differences. EPA is not free to rewrite these roles.  
 
Congress did not give EPA the power asserted by the Proposed Rule. 77 Section 
303(c)(4)(B) is a limited backstop power exercisable only when a State or TAS Tribe is 
failing to meet CWA requirements. This has not happened. Section 303(c)(4)(B) provides 
EPA limited power to promulgate “a particular standard.” This has not been adhered to. 
The “gap” premise that EPA relies on is so demonstrably false that it hints at something 
more: one would be forgiven for suspecting that this rule might truly be aimed at giving 
 
74  
Id. at 29522 
75  
Id.  
76  
Id.  
77  
The Proposed Rule, if finalized, will also violate the major question doctrine.  See 
W. Virginia v. E.P.A., 142 S. Ct. 2587, 2607–09 (2022) (major questions doctrine 
provides that for issues of major national significance, a regulatory agency must have 
clear statutory authorization from Congress to take certain actions and cannot rely on its 
general agency authority). 

Administrator Michael Regan 
 
August 3, 2023 
Re: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 20 of 20 
 
EPA a blank check to issue overly stringent NPDES permits,78 deny § 401 
certifications,79 and buttress § 404(c) vetoes of non-Tribal projects.80   
 
The undersigned States respectfully request that EPA withdraw this rule. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Treg Taylor  
Alaska Attorney General 
 
 
 
Raul R. Labrador 
Idaho Attorney General 
 
 
 
Kris Kobach 
Kansas Attorney General 
 
 
Lynn Fitch 
Mississippi Attorney General 
 
 
 
Mike Hilgers 
Nebraska Attorney General  
 
 
 
Drew Wrigley 
North Dakota Attorney General 
 
 
Alan Wilson 
South Carolina Attorney General  
 
 
Marty Jackley 
South Dakota Attorney General 
 
 
 
78  
EPA’s intent to use this as a mechanism for greater EPA control over development 
is express: “In short, implementing CWA-effective WQS in Indian reservation waters 
would provide a strong basis for NPDES permit limits and other controls that is not 
presently available to protect such waters.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 29521. 
79  
Id. at 29516 (“[I]f the proposed baseline WQS are finalized, the Administrator 
would be able to rely on the baseline WQS among other water quality requirements when 
deciding whether to grant or deny section 401 certifications, or to develop conditions.”) 
80  
Indeed, EPA expressly threatens to use its 404(c) veto power whenever it believes 
that activities governed by a 404 permit “cause or contribute” to a violation of EPA’s 
new standards and the Corps disagrees after EPA provides comments to the Corps. Id. at 
29515.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0239 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
August 3, 2023 
 James Ray 
 U.S. EPA, Office of Science and Technology 
 Standards and Health Protection Division 
 1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW (MC 4305T) 
 Washington, DC 20460 
 RE: Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2016–045 
 Dear Mr. Ray: 
 The Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment submits the following comments on EPA's May 5, 
 2023, proposal to establish baseline federal water quality standards (WQS) for waters of the United States 
 (WOTUS) within Indian reservations, as published in the Federal Register at 88 FR 29496. We appreciate the 
 opportunity to explain Colorado's perspective on the unique jurisdictional circumstances concerning waters 
 within the exterior boundaries of the Southern Ute Indian Reservation  1  . Additionally, Colorado has comments 
 related to the implementation of the translation procedures. 
 JURISDICTIONAL ISSUE 
 EPA is proposing to promulgate baseline WQS for all WOTUS in "Indian country," which is defined in relevant 
 part as "all land within the limits of any Indian reservation under the jurisdiction of the United States 
 Government, notwithstanding the issuance of any patent, and, including rights-of-way running through the 
 reservation". 18 U.S.C. § 1151(a). As explained in its proposal, EPA does not intend for the baseline WQS to 
 apply to WOTUS within Indian country where: (1) EPA has explicitly found that a state has jurisdiction to adopt 
 WQS or authorized a Tribe to adopt WQS pursuant to the TAS  2  regulation; and (2) where EPA has approved the 
 applicable state or Tribal WQS. EPA has identified only four instances where it recognizes state jurisdiction to 
 administer WQS on reservations or parts of a reservation. These instances do not include non-Indian owned fee 
 lands within the Southern Ute Indian Reservation, and thus Colorado assumes that EPA intends to administer its 
 proposed baseline standards on those lands.  See also  EPA’s website at 
 https://www.epa.gov/wqs-tech/water-quality-standards-regulations-colorado (stating “Colorado water quality 
 standards apply to all waters within the State of Colorado, with the exception of those waters that are within 
 Indian Country, as defined in 18 U.S.C.  §  1151.")  These statements indicate EPA’s intent to apply its baseline 
 WQS for WOTUS flowing through any lands within the reservation boundaries where the Tribe’s approved 
 standards do not apply. 
 2  In the context of the Clean Water Act, “TAS” refers  to “Treatment in a similar manner as a state."  33 U.S.C. § 1377(e). 
 1  The other Indian reservation within Colorado’s borders belongs to the Ute Mountain Ute Tribe. The Ute Mountain Ute Tribe 
 has treatment in a similar manner as a state status to administer its own water quality standards program on all lands 
 within its exterior reservation boundaries, and has had a WQS program in place since 2011. 
Headers row 
 4300 Cherry Creek Drive S, Denver, CO 80246-1530     P  303-692-3500     www.colorado.gov/cdphe 
 Jared Polis, Governor   |   Jill Hunsaker Ryan, MPH, Executive  Director 

 The Southern Ute Indian Reservation consists of a "checkerboard" pattern of tribally-owned lands, federal trust 
 lands, and non-Indian owned fee lands. Colorado has long held the position that pursuant to Public Law 98-290, 
 enacted by Congress in 1984, 98 Stat. 201, the State has civil jurisdiction, including jurisdiction to administer 
 federally-delegated Clean Water Act programs, on non-Indian owned fee lands within the exterior Reservation 
 boundaries. The Tribe, on the other hand, has historically held the position that the State lacks regulatory and 
 EPA-delegated authority over water quality on non-Indian owned fee lands within the Reservation boundaries. 
 Because stream segments cross through this checkerboard of lands, Colorado and the Tribe have collaborated 
 for decades on a consistent approach for managing water quality across the entire Reservation. Colorado 
 appreciates and respects the Southern Ute Tribe's commitment to protect water quality. 
 Without ceding its jurisdictional position, the Southern Ute Indian Tribe's 2015 application for TAS status to 
 administer a WQS program was limited to trust lands within the Reservation boundaries. As such, EPA's grant of 
 TAS authority to the Tribe in 2018 did not include any non-Indian owned fee lands within the Reservation 
 boundaries. In 2022, EPA approved the WQS promulgated by the Tribe for those trust lands. 
 Without ceding the state's jurisdictional position, Colorado intends to recognize EPA's baseline standards for 
 WOTUS on non-Indian owned fee lands within the Southern Ute Reservation boundaries in the context of 
 EPA-issued discharge permits. In implementing its baseline standards on WOTUS flowing through those lands, 
 we encourage EPA to honor the longstanding desire for consistency of protective WQS across the entire 
 reservation. We believe EPA's proposed approach provides sufficient flexibility to accomplish this, and we look 
 forward to working with EPA and the Tribe to ensure continued consistency and protectiveness of the Tribe's 
 and State's water resources. At the same time, Colorado intends to continue to use its own standards to 
 establish effluent limits for State-issued discharge permits on such fee lands. 
 ADDITIONAL COMMENTS 
 Translation Procedures:  The proposed rule identifies  numeric translation procedures and derivation of 
 numeric values. These are provided in 40 CFR § 131.XX(d)(2) of the proposed rule. The five options established 
 under the procedures are summarized in Table 1 of the preamble. Based on discussions with both EPA Region 8 
 staff and headquarters staff at meetings on June 12 and 14, it is our understanding that the five available 
 options are not prioritized and that any option can be utilized when determining the most appropriate way to 
 translate the narrative standard. We request that this is made clear in the rule. 
 In Colorado, Option 2 may be the most appropriate as both the State and and both the Ute Mountain Utes and 
 the Southern Ute Indians tribes have applicable standards that should be considered on a site-specific basis. 
 The most protective standards should be considered to protect downstream uses. For example, Colorado has 
 adopted more protective temperature standards than the temperature standards adopted by the Southern Ute 
 Indian Tribe; the aquatic community should be considered when determining the most appropriate temperature 
 standards to be implemented for any given stream. In addition, streams may pass in and out of tribal lands, 
 and downstream protection should be considered. In some cases where Colorado has adopted a standard for a 
 particular parameter, there may be no 304(a) criteria for that parameter. All three options—EPA 304(a) criteria, 
 Colorado basin-specific standards, and Southern Ute standards—should be carefully considered when 
 implementing these translation procedures on non-Indian owned fee lands within the Reservation's external 
 boundaries. 
 Downstream Protection:  "The fifth proposed element  of the baseline narrative criteria under 5. would require 
 that all waters maintain a level of water quality at their pour points to downstream waters that provide for the 
 attainment and maintenance of the water quality of downstream waters of those waters, including the waters 
 of another state or a federally recognized Tribe." We support the protection of downstream uses in this rule. 
 Reviewing Upstream State-Issued Permits:  At 88 FR 29515, the proposed rule states that "EPA will coordinate 
 Page  2 

 with Tribes to ensure that Tribal concerns and issues are considered when EPA is reviewing NPDES permits 
 issued by authorized states that may affect Indian reservation waters covered by the baseline WQS." It is 
 essential that EPA also coordinate with the permitting authority when making this review, and therefore this 
 statement should address coordination with both Tribes and the permitting authority. 
 Sincerely, 
 /s/ Trisha Oeth, Esq. 
 Trisha Oeth, Director 
 Environmental Health and Protection 
 COLORADO DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENT 
 Page  3

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0217 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
July 25, 2023 
 
 
Sent Via Regulations.gov 
 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Mail Code: 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
RE:    Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 Promulgation of Tribal Baseline Water Quality Standards 
 
Dear EPA Water Division:  
 
Please accept this letter as formal comment from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) 
regarding the proposed Tribal Baseline Water Quality Standards (WQS) rulemaking. Listed below are the 
elements of the proposal the MPCA supports, and the items that need to be addressed regarding 
implementation.  
 
Support for the Rulemaking 
Issuing baseline water quality standards will enable protection of Tribal waters as Tribal Nations develop 
their Clean Water Act (CWA) programs and seek authority to administer their own federally approved 
water quality standards. As water moves and flows into and out of reservation boundaries, 
implementation of baseline standards will ensure all waters within Minnesota borders have appropriate 
protections and allow for the MPCA and Tribal Nations to meet their shared goal to protect, restore, and 
preserve water quality.  
 
The MPCA has formed essential partnerships with Tribal Nations to co-manage the waters within the 
state. A key component to maintaining and further developing these partnerships rests with the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) upholding its federal trust responsibilities to Tribal Nations in 
promulgating baseline standards and following through with its 2021 Tribal Action Plan commitments1.  
 
MPCA supports establishing aquatic life use and primary contact recreation use consistent with CWA 
section 101(a)(2) as well as establishing a cultural and traditional designated use. MPCA also 
recommends including public water supply use, agricultural use, and industrial use in the development 
of the baseline standards. These criteria will assist in appropriately designating the use of waters for 
business entities or needs and will provide direction for Tribal Nations with varied land management 
practices. Additionally, identifying cultural and traditional water uses as a designated use class will 
promote consideration of subsistence fishing in Treaty areas during the use assessment process. 
 
 
 
1 Strengthening the Nation-to-Nation Relationship with Tribes to Secure a Sustainable Water Future (epa.gov) EPA 
Office of Water Action Plan. October 2021. EPA -823-F-21-003 
 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Water Division 
Page 2 
July 25, 2023 
 
 
Concerns about the Proposed Rule  
The MPCA has the following concerns about the proposed Tribal Baseline WQS rulemaking. 
 
Boundary Concerns 
As part of the rulemaking, EPA must establish a clear list of which 250+ Tribal Nations this proposed 
rulemaking may impact, as well as the jurisdictional boundaries subject to the rulemaking. Deferring 
these decisions will lead to delays in standards development, permitting actions, and water quality 
assessments. In the section regarding off-reservation allotments, EPA should explain whether this 
rulemaking and its subsequent water quality standards would apply to waters on Tribal trust and fee 
lands not formally designated as reservations. Would the standards, which apply to non-member owned 
fee lands within a reservation, also apply to Tribally owned fee lands outside a reservation? 
 
The Baseline WQS rulemaking must explain how the standards should be considered when waters are 
not wholly within reservation boundaries. It is very difficult to assess waterbodies when the 
management of such waterbodies creates a checkerboard pattern. Waters that are not wholly within 
Tribal boundaries will be more accurately assessed if there are consistent processes developed and 
implemented by the states. Minnesota can provide examples of assessment processes, including hosting 
consultations with Tribal Nations and involving these Nations in the assessment process for waters 
adjacent to or partially-within Tribal boundaries.  
 
The following proposed rule language requires clarification:  
 
“All waters shall maintain a level of water quality at their pour points to downstream waters 
that provide for the attainment and maintenance of the water quality standards of those 
waters, including the waters of another state or a federally recognized Tribe.” 
 
For example, if a wastewater treatment facility (WWTF) is located downstream from a reservation 
boundary and upstream from the next pour point, it appears effluent limits would need to be employed, 
regardless of whether the WWTF would cause or contribute to an exceedance of an upstream baseline 
water quality standard. The MPCA asks EPA to consider moving the delineation to the reservation 
boundary rather than the pour point to avoid confusion with implementing the proposed rule. 
 
Implementation Concerns 
EPA should provide procedural clarity on how this rule will be implemented. EPA does not describe the 
process for developing baseline standards for Tribal waters or how states can monitor progress in this 
area. We require clarification regarding the application of triennial standards reviews to these baseline 
standards and what roles states, Tribal nations and the public will play in that review process. Once 
baseline standards have been adopted, we request that EPA develop a public-facing central repository 
of standards for specific Tribal waters for easy reference.  
 
EPA needs to provide a clear process for developing and implementing numeric expressions of the 
narrative standard. Specifically, EPA needs to clarify how upstream standards are to be developed and 
implemented when a numeric expression has not yet been established. If Minnesota is going to 
effectively implement this rule, EPA needs to specify the applicable standards at each specific location. 
This rule may affect state and Tribal 401 certifications where projects need to be evaluated for their 
contribution to downstream impairments and water quality.  
 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Water Division 
Page 3 
July 25, 2023 
 
 
Finally, we urge EPA to more carefully assess the resources needed to implement the proposed rule, 
both from Tribal Nations and EPA’s Regional Offices. Calculation of economic costs by including a set 
radius of five miles upstream should be reconsidered. Only analyzing the costs within five miles may 
underestimate the potential costs. The radius for upstream costs should consider the type of pollutant 
and the risk posed to beneficial uses and ecosystem services.  
 
Conclusion 
MPCA supports providing baseline water quality standards for waters within Tribal reservation 
boundaries and agrees with including a wide variety of beneficial uses. However, more detail is needed 
in several areas to ensure smooth implementation.  
 
MPCA looks forward to EPA’s clarifications on the topics below.  
- 
The list of Tribal Nations where the rulemaking applies 
- 
The rule’s application on Tribally-owned fee lands 
- 
Guidance for states on assessments and application of standards for waters not wholly within 
Tribal reservation boundaries  
- 
Edits to the boundaries and pour point section 
- 
Process for assigning beneficial uses and standards to waterbodies  
- 
Process for triennial standard reviews  
- 
Procedure for developing numeric expressions of narrative standards  
- 
Economic analysis based on type of pollutant vs a set radius 
 
Sincerely, 
Katrina Kessler 
This document has been electronically signed. 
Katrina Kessler 
Commissioner 
 
KK/LC:je 
 
cc: 
Dana Vanderbosch, MPCA 
Helen Waquiu, MPCA  
Todd Biewen, MPCA  
Paul Pestano, MPCA 
Bill Cole, MPCA 
Steve Weiss, MPCA 
Anna Hotz, MPCA 
Maggie Wenger, MPCA

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0224 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
1899 L Street, NW, Suite 1200 
T 202.822.8282 
HOBBSSTRAUS.COM 
Washington, DC 20036 
F 202.296.8834 
 
HOBBS STRAUS DEAN & WALKER, LLP            WASHINGTON, DC   |   PORTLAND, OR   |   OKLAHOMA CITY, OK   |   SACRAMENTO, CA   |   ANCHORAGE, AK 
 
 
August 2, 2023 
 
 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Attn:  Administrator Michael S. Regan; Assistant Administrator Radhika Fox; Regional 
Administrator Martha Guzman 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
 
Re: 
Docket ID. No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 Federal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards for Indian Reservations 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, Assistant Administrator Fox, and Regional Administrator 
Guzman: 
 
 
This letter submits the comments of the Lytton Rancheria of California (Tribe) in 
response to the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) solicitation of comments from 
tribes in its May 5, 2023 publication in the Federal Register of its Proposed Rule to 
promulgate Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards (WQS) for Indian Reservations 
(Proposed Rule) under the Clean Water Act (CWA).   
 
 
The Tribe generally is in support of the Proposed Rule and its stated aims to 
provide WQS to help protect the water quality of the vast majority of on-reservation 
waterbodies presently lacking CWA-effective WQS.  The Tribe joins other tribes in 
recommending that EPA continue to consult with tribal governments and Alaska Natives 
to better protect tribal interests in off-reservation water bodies as well, given the various 
tribal rights that remain in ancestral homelands.  The Tribe, additionally, believes the 
Proposed Rule could better protect on-reservation waterbodies as well as tribal 
sovereignty interests, as set forth below: 
 
1. 
The 90-Day Period to Request Exclusion: 
 
 
In the preamble to the Proposed Rule, EPA states tribes with waters of the United 
States (WOTUS) qualifying for coverage under the baseline WQS will have no later than 
90 days after the final rule is published in the Federal Register to submit requests to be 
excluded from the baseline WQS to the pertinent Regional Administrator.  Federal 
Baseline Water Quality Standards, 88 Fed. Reg. 29496, 29502 (May 5, 2023).  To afford 
tribes greater flexibility in determining whether baseline WQS meet their needs and, thus, 
to better serve tribal sovereignty interests, EPA should extend this deadline to at least 180 
days after the final rule is published. 
 

United States Environmental Protection Agency 
August 2, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 
HOBBS STRAUS DEAN & WALKER, LLP            WASHINGTON, DC   |   PORTLAND, OR   |   OKLAHOMA CITY, OK   |   SACRAMENTO, CA   |   ANCHORAGE, AK 
2. 
Discretionary Extension of Request to Exclude WQS Baseline Coverage for Newly-
Acquired Trust Lands: 
 
 
As an exception to its general policy only permitting tribes to request exclusion 
from the baseline WQS only 90 days after the baseline WQS are published in the Federal 
Register, EPA explains "limited circumstances may warrant the ability of the Regional 
Administrator to exclude specific Indian reservation waters from" baseline WQS 
coverage.  88 Fed. Reg. at 29518.  EPA explains one such circumstance that "may 
warrant the ability of the Regional Administrator to exclude" waterbodies from WQS 
coverage includes tribes' acquisition of off-reservation trust lands after the final rule is 
published in the Federal Register.  Id. (emphasis added).  We believe this is problematic 
because it does not require but, rather, gives the Regional Administrator the discretion to 
consider whether to exclude tribes from baseline WQS coverage whenever they acquire 
trust lands—at least, for acquisitions 90 days after the baseline rule becomes finalized.  
By giving the Regional Administrator discretion here, EPA could—depending on the 
Regional Administrator's use of this discretion—bar tribes from expressing legitimate 
concerns about their communities' needs, including needs requiring exclusion from these 
WQS.  Instead, we believe EPA could better protect tribal sovereignty interests by always 
requiring the Regional Administrator to provide tribes an opportunity to request 
government-to-government consultation and/or to request an exclusion of baseline WQS 
coverage for waterbodies on such lands (e.g., to be open for a 90-day period after 
acquiring new trust lands) whenever they acquire new trust lands.      
 
3. 
Third-Party Input on Lowering Protections for High Quality Waters: 
 
 
Under EPA's anti-degradation policy, EPA may lower protections for "high 
quality waters" if it determines a lower water quality is "necessary to accommodate 
important economic or social development" in the area in which the waters are located.  
88 Fed. Reg. at 29509.  In the preamble, EPA explains, in determining whether a 
lowering of high water quality is necessary for a waterbody covered by the baseline 
WQS, the Regional Administrator and pertinent tribe would consider the results of socio-
economic analyses.  Id.  EPA also specifically stated it is soliciting comments on whether 
to allow third parties to submit such analyses in addition to those submitted by the EPA 
or an affected tribe.  Id.  Importantly, EPA suggested a third-party could include the 
"discharger affecting water quality."  Id.   
 
 
As a preliminary matter, the Tribe acknowledges Section 131.XX(e)(2) of the 
Proposed Rule provides the Regional Administrator may not approve the lowering of 
high water quality unless a tribe agrees in writing to a lower water quality to 
accommodate important economic or social development in the area in which the waters 
are located.  But because industry representatives may try to assert—and historically have 

United States Environmental Protection Agency 
August 2, 2023 
Page 3 
 
 
HOBBS STRAUS DEAN & WALKER, LLP            WASHINGTON, DC   |   PORTLAND, OR   |   OKLAHOMA CITY, OK   |   SACRAMENTO, CA   |   ANCHORAGE, AK 
had success in asserting1—their interests over conflicting tribal interests in protecting on-
reservation waterbodies' water quality, we believe providing third-party dischargers with 
a platform to advocate for less stringent WQS could harm tribal sovereignty interests, 
particularly if tribes have no say on allowing consideration of third-party analyses. 
 
Accordingly, the Tribe believes allowing third-parties to submit such analyses 
could be compatible with tribal sovereignty interests only to the extent EPA:  (1) retains 
the tribal written-consent requirement provided in section 131.XX(e)(2) in the final rule 
and/or (2) only allows third-parties to submit socio-economic analyses with the consent 
of the tribe possessing lands wherein the affected waterbody is located—the latter of 
which is not covered by the Proposed Rule.  To the extent that more than one tribe may 
be impacted (e.g., EPA is reviewing the high water quality designation for a waterbody 
going through multiple tribes' reservations), EPA should also make clear in the Proposed 
Rule that any single tribe should have the right to withhold consent, so that third parties 
cannot exploit any difference of opinion between tribal governments.  
 
4. 
Scope of Rule – Off-Reservation Allotments: 
 
In the preamble, EPA explains the baseline WQS do not apply to off-reservation 
allotments, as defined 18 U.S.C. § 1151(c) and which specifically pertains to trust and 
restricted fee lands held by individual tribal members,2 because the Bureau of Land 
Management (BLM) is currently in the process of identifying off-reservation allotments 
in several areas of the country and EPA is concerned that until such identifications are 
made, EPA will not be able to ensure adequate public commenting opportunities to 
allotment owners.  88 Fed. Reg. at 29501.  The Tribe believes EPA could better serve 
tribal sovereignty interests and address its concerns regarding the lack of information on 
off-reservation allotments without automatically excluding such coverage by allowing 
Regional Administrators to consider applicability of the baseline WQS to off-reservation 
allotments on a case-by-case basis.  Because Tribal governments likely have better 
knowledge of off-reservation allotments than the BLM, EPA should at least consult with 
tribes rather than automatically excluding their trust or restricted fee lands from coverage 
under the baseline WQS, particularly if those lands hold substantial cultural, religious, 
historic, social and environmental values for a tribal government.  
 
 
 
                     
1 In Oklahoma, for example, multiple tribes voiced outrage after EPA approved the State of Oklahoma's 
authority to implement CWA programs in the Indian country within its state bounds (which, in conjunction 
with a 2005 law permitting Treatment as State (TAS) for tribes only with the State of Oklahoma's consent, 
would effectively preclude many tribes from implementing CWA programs) after state representatives took 
steps to address oil and gas industry concerns that tribes with TAS status would harm industry interests. 
Kimberly Chen, Toward Tribal Sovereignty: Environmental Regulation in Oklahoma After McGirt, 121 
Columbia L. Rev. Forum 95, 102–4, 108–10 (June 1, 2021) (law review article accessible here).   
2 See Oklahoma v. Sac and Fox Nation, 508 U.S. 114, 123 (1993) ("Indian allotments, whether restricted or 
held in trust by the United States," are Indian country) (citing 18 U.S.C. § 1151).   

United States Environmental Protection Agency 
August 2, 2023 
Page 4 
 
 
HOBBS STRAUS DEAN & WALKER, LLP            WASHINGTON, DC   |   PORTLAND, OR   |   OKLAHOMA CITY, OK   |   SACRAMENTO, CA   |   ANCHORAGE, AK 
5. 
Scope of Rule – Dependent Indian Communities: 
 
Similar to the Proposed Rule's exclusion of coverage for off-reservation 
allotments, EPA states it is considering an automatic exclusion of baseline WQS 
coverage for off-reservation dependent Indian communities (DICs) because of "the lack 
of information regarding the location of dependent Indian communities."  88 Fed. Reg. at 
29501.  The Tribe believes EPA could better address its concern regarding the lack of 
information on the location of DICs by applying the rule to waterbodies within DICs on a 
case-by-case basis, not applying a blanket exclusion.  As with our comment above on 
trust allotments, the Tribe recommends that EPA at least engage in tribal consultation 
with potentially affected tribal governments regarding the applicability of the baseline 
WQS to their DICs.     
 
Conclusion 
 
 
The Tribe appreciates the opportunity to comment on the Proposed Rule.  The 
Tribe generally supports EPA taking strides toward protecting the water quality of tribal 
waterbodies through establishing baseline WQS for Indian country.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
HOBBS, STRAUS, DEAN & WALKER, LLP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By: 
Joseph H. Webster 
 
cc: 
Larry Stidham, Esq. 
 
 
Joseph H 
Webster
Digitally signed by Joseph H Webster 
DN: cn=Joseph H Webster, o, ou, 
email=jwebster@hobbsstraus.com, c=US 
Date: 2023.08.02 08:45:48 -04'00'

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0237 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
1200 Memorial Highway   |   Bismarck, ND 58504   |   701.328.2750   |   DWR.nd.gov 
 
 
 
August 3, 2023 
 
Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Suite 1101 A 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Subject: Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations; Docket ID No. 
EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
The North Dakota Department of Water Resources (NDDWR) appreciates the opportunity to 
comment on the proposed Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Rule (Rule). The DWR sustainably manages and develops North Dakota’s water resources for 
the health, safety, and prosperity of its people, businesses, agriculture, energy, industry, and 
natural resources. In part, this includes funding and constructing water infrastructure projects 
across the state for flood control, water supply, and other state-authorized uses. 
 
The Rule, as proposed, continues to implement the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) 
stance that water infrastructure is considered pollution by listing “hydrologic integrity” as an 
unacceptable water quality criterion including “structural attributes that influence…the water 
body, including the characteristic pattern of flow magnitude, timing, duration, frequency, and 
rate of change of a water body”.  
 
NDDWR is a regulatory agency that issues permits for construction of dams, dikes, and other 
water retention structures; NDDWR additionally permits water use for water supply, irrigation, 
industrial, and recreation among other uses. The North Dakota State Water Commission 
(NDSWC), in partnership with NDDWR, cost-shares up to 75% for water infrastructure and in 
the next two years will appropriate over $780 million towards water supply, flood control, and 
general water projects. In addition, the NDSWC also owns the Devils Lake Outlets that have, in 
part, influenced watersheds across the Devils Lake Basin in North Dakota. In short, water 
infrastructure is necessary for the health and safety of all people and is a necessary part of 
supporting North Dakota’s largest industries—agriculture and energy through flood protection 
and drainage as well as irrigation and industrial uses of water. The EPA’s ongoing stance that 
water quality standards cannot be met if hydrology is altered implies that infrastructure such as 
flood protection can be achieved in ways that don’t affect the environment at all. 
 
As a part of NDDWR’s and the North Dakota Department of Environmental Quality’s (NDDEQ) 
permitting processes, impacts to waters are properly mitigated and managed at a state level to 
assure that the state’s water resources remain healthy and safe. All projects meet the 
requirements of the Endangered Species Act, National Environmental Protection Act, and other 

state and federal regulations. NDDWR respectfully requests the removal of these requirements 
from the Rule to assure that Indian Reservations that choose to invest in infrastructure are able to 
do so without fear of not meeting the narrative criteria the EPA has proposed. 
 
Thank you for considering NDDWR’s comments. If there are any questions, please feel free to 
reach out to me at asebach@nd.gov or 701-328-2795. 
 
 
Abby Ebach 
Director of Public Policy 
North Dakota Department of Water Resources

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0229 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Sent: Wednesday, August 2, 2023 3:18 PM 
To: Ray, James (he/him/his) <ray.james@epa.gov> 
Cc: Ann House <ann.house@snoqualmietribe.us> 
Subject: Snoqualmie Tribe's comments on proposed baseline tribal water quality standards 
 
Hello. I am contacƟng you as the listed point of contact on tcots.epa.gov for EPA’s proposed baseline 
tribal water quality standards.  
 
I have aƩempted to submit the aƩached formal comment leƩer signed by the Snoqualmie Tribal Council 
into the oﬃcial docket: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405. Although the leƩer is dated August 1, 2023, we have 
been unable to submit the leƩer into the docket portal by the August 1 deadline.  
 
Could you please advise how we can ensure the Snoqualmie Tribe’s comments are incorporated into the 
record and taken into consideraƟon when EPA makes a ﬁnal decision?  
 
   Mary 
Mary Verner, mary.verner@snoqualmietribe.us, 425-606-8670

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0254 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
1 
 
 
 
P.O. Box 689  
Spokane, Washington 99210 
www.region10rtoc.net 
August 3, 2023 
 
James Ray 
U.S. EPA, Office of Science and Technology 
Standards and Health Protection Division 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW (MC 4305T) 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
SUBMITTED VIA REGULATIONS.GOV 
 
RE: 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405: Tribal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards 
 
Dear Mr. Ray: 
These comments are submitted on behalf of the Region 10 Tribal Operations Committee 
(“RTOC” or “Committee”) on the proposed promulgation of Tribal Baseline Water Quality 
Standards (“Standards”). This letter is not sent on behalf of EPA Region 10 or any employees of 
EPA, but solely tribal government representatives of the RTOC. The following comments and 
the meetings that occurred during the rulemaking process do not replace or fulfill the EPA’s 
obligation to consult with the Tribes of EPA Region 10. 
The RTOC strongly supports this effort and believes it is an important step forward to assist 
Tribes who face jurisdictional and/or capacity challenges to protect and restore clean water 
within their jurisdictional lands and provide effective regulations are critical to efficient water 
management, healthy ecosystems, and healthy communities. Many Tribes in Region 10 face 
challenges to full implementation of the Clean Water Act (“CWA”) through the Treatment-in-the-
Same-Manner-as-State (“TAS”) process due to a legacy of checkerboarded ownership and 
challenges by local and state governments to Tribal jurisdiction. This effort presents a reasonable 
solution to that problem. Moreover, there is a serious question as to whether EPA’s current 
approach of utilizing an adjacent state’s water quality standards is legal without action to 
promulgate those standards for Tribal lands. This effort resolves that problem. 
While the RTOC supports this effort, we do have the following comments for consideration: 

2 
 
 
1. A reasonable estimate of a Tribe’s traditional fish consumption rate should be 
obtained when translating narrative criteria. 
 
As written, the translation procedure incorporates site-specific conditions only “[w]here 
information and/or data are available.” This does not impose any obligation to find information 
that would be relevant for protecting Tribal fish consumption.  
Many Tribes do not have a scientifically derived fish consumption rate to offer the EPA Regional 
Administrator. Therefore, the same financial barriers that precluded Tribes from conducting their 
own studies and thereby precluded them from applying for TAS could undermine the efficacy of 
these baseline standards.  
The use of neighboring water quality standards provides dubious assurances for Tribes. While 
every Tribe will have a neighboring state’s standards to look to, the fish consumption rate for 
Tribal populations is significantly greater than the general U.S. population. Neighboring state 
standards are unlikely to capture Tribal practices and needs. Although a neighboring Tribe’s 
EPA-approved standards may be more representative, the rule does not ensure that such a source 
will be found or utilized. 
Therefore, if there are not resources for a full, scientific study of Tribal fish consumption, 
baseline water quality standards should at least be based on best estimates of that rate, with input 
from the Tribe itself.  
2. A Tribe’s fish consumption rate should be more explicitly defined, and the rate 
should reflect traditional practices. 
 
The Standards appear to incorporate a Tribe’s fish consumption rate only when translating the 
broad designated use of “Aquatic Life” into a numerical limit on pollutants. “Option Two” of the 
translation procedure allows for the incorporation of a fish consumption rate protective of Tribal 
fish consumers. Without explicit reference to a specific fish consumption rate, several different 
rates could be used. A “fish consumption rate protective of Tribal fish consumers” could mean 
the relatively low prevailing rate that is caused by current contamination. However, the 
traditional fish consumption rate and the desired fish consumption rate will both be much higher. 
Translation of narrative criteria should be done using fish consumption rates that reflect 
Indigenous fishing and subsistence traditions and that adequately protect the health of Indigenous 
communities. 
This concern was noted and addressed in favor of an unsuppressed rate consistent with 
subsistence practices when present, but only in the proposed rule’s supplementary information, 
not the rule itself.1 The fish consumption rate being used in the rule should be clarified within the 
operative language of the rule. 
 
1 88 Fed. Reg. 29507 (“When translating the narrative criteria to protect consumers of fish, EPA would consult with 
the Tribe and determine the need for a modified fish consumption rate . . . .”). 

3 
 
3. Preference should be given to translation methods that respect site and Tribal 
specific conditions. 
 
The Standards allow the Regional Administrator to “utilize one of the options” articulated for 
translating narrative criteria, but the selection of the specific method is left to the discretion of 
the Regional Administrator. Although a Tribe’s own water quality standards may be used in 
translating, this is not a necessary, or even explicitly recommended, method. To ensure better-
tailored standards and to promote predictability in the rule’s application, there should be a 
hierarchy of translation methods, giving primary importance to the Tribe’s knowledge and goals. 
For example, the rule does not necessarily incorporate a Tribe’s desired outcomes for water 
quality regulation. If a Tribe desires a lower cancer risk than what is conventionally used by 
EPA, even if the Tribe has formally adopted the standard through Tribal Council, that standard 
will only be incorporated when the Regional Administrator finds it “appropriate.”  
By granting the Regional Administrator excessive discretion in selecting translation procedures, 
it creates the possibility of undermining the rule’s ability to create region- and site-specific 
standards. 
The Standards present laudable progress in establishing much-needed water quality standards for 
Tribes. The protection of fish consumption at traditional rates is an important and positive step. 
One of the great strengths of this rule is its ability to create site-specific standards that protect 
both new and traditional uses. It is hoped that the translation methods are such that Tribal input is 
given due credence in establishing standards for Tribal waters. 
The RTOC appreciates your consideration of these comments. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Raymond E. Paddock III 
Central Council of the Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska 
Region 10 Tribal RTOC Co-Chair

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0222 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0223 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
Page 1 of 7 
 
 
August 1, 2023 
 
Mr. James Ray 
 
Office of Science and Technology,  
Standards and Health Protection Division 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave, NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
 
Submitted via email to: ray.james@epa.gov and www.regulations.gov 
 
RE: 
National Tribal Water Council’s Comments on EPA’s Proposed Rule on Federal Baseline 
Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations, Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2016–
0405  
Dear Mr. Ray: 
On behalf of the National Tribal Water Council (NTWC), I am pleased to submit the following 
comments on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) proposed rule regarding Federal 
Baseline Water Quality Standards (WQS) for Indian Reservations, as identified above. 
Introduction 
Tribes nationwide have waited over two decades for EPA to promulgate WQS for waterbodies 
on Indian reservations that do not have Clean Water Act (CWA) standards. In 2001, Administrator 
Carol Browner determined that federal WQS are necessary for such waters in order to protect the health 
and well-being of tribal members and the environment. The proposed rule, signed by Administrator 
Michael Regan on April 27, 2023, 88 Fed. Reg. 29496 (“Proposed Rule”), takes the agency one-step 
closer to fulfilling its duty.   
NTWC recognizes the importance of ensuring CWA protections for all tribal waters and fully 
supports federal baseline WQS for Indian reservations without such protections as the most effective 
way to do so and to ensure nationwide water quality protection at the same time. Without federal 
baseline WQS, the protection and improvement of water quality in Indian country is limited. NTWC 
believes that the Proposed Rule is consistent with EPA’s 1984 Indian Policy, which sets forth EPA’s 
direct implementation practice. The proposed federal baseline WQS rule is separate from but 

 
Page 2 of 7 
 
complementary to the Tribal Reserved Rights rule, which protects tribal treaty and other reserved 
rights.   
Please accept the following comments on the Proposed Rule. 
I. 
General Information 
 
EPA explains: “Because EPA-approved state WQS generally do not apply in Indian country, 
in the absence of Federal WQS or EPA-approved Tribes’ WQS, no CWA-effective WQS apply in the 
many Indian country waters where Tribes have not yet obtained TAS [treatment in a similar manner 
as a state] and established EPA-approved WQS.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 29498. More than 300 federally 
recognized tribes have formal or informal reservations but only 50 of these tribes have EPA-approved 
WQS. See id. This leaves some 76,000 miles of rivers and streams and 1.9M acres of lakes, reservoirs, 
and other surface waters within Indian country without CWA-effective WQS, id. at 29499, or, in the 
case of tribes that have water quality standards that have not yet been approved, without protection 
from upstream discharges. 
NTWC agrees with EPA’s assessment that obtaining TAS authority and adopting WQS is a 
time- and resource-intensive process. Therefore, NTWC supports federal baseline WQS as a temporary 
gap-filler to ensure reservation waters are federally protected until such time as tribes obtain TAS status 
and adopt CWA-approved WQS for their respective waters. NTWC believes that the proposed federal 
baseline WQS would benefit tribal governments in a variety of ways beyond straight protection of 
water quality. These include promoting tribal participation in EPA’s administration of the federal 
baseline WQS, protecting aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources, and providing a basis for 
determining water quality impairments.  
II.  
Applicability of the Proposed Federal Baseline WQS  
 
The federal baseline WQS would apply to all waters of the United States in Indian country 
except Indian reservation waters for which EPA has promulgated other federal WQS, has determined 
that a state has jurisdiction, or has authorized a tribe with TAS to adopt WQS, and EPA has approved 
the state’s or tribe’s WQS. 88 Fed. Reg. at 29500. As proposed, however, federal baseline WQS would 
not apply to Indian country waters in off-reservation allotments or dependent Indian communities due 
to the claimed difficulty of identifying and locating these areas. Id. at 29500-01. NTWC’s position is 
that the federal baseline WQS should apply in these areas also because they meet the statutory 
definition of Indian country, 18 U.S.C. § 1151, and therefore state standards are unlikely to apply and 
so these waters would be unprotected.  When Indian country status is unclear, it can be addressed on a 
case-by-case basis. It is counterproductive to limit the applicability of the Proposed Rule from the 
beginning; indeed, this is the very reason why the Proposed Rule is structured on an opt-out rather than 
an opt-in basis.  
Administrator Browner’s 2001 determination excluded waters where the tribe or EPA “‘has or 
intends to develop a plan’” for establishing CWA-approvable WQS within a reasonable time. 88 Fed. 
Reg. at 29501. Going one step further, the Proposed Rule offers tribes an option to seek exclusion from 
coverage without committing to a plan. Id. NTWC supports this change: we believe that fewer tribes 
will oppose promulgation of the federal baseline WQS if they have the opportunity to opt-out by 

 
Page 3 of 7 
 
request to their Regional Administrator and, second, that EPA will be able to focus its efforts on 
reservation waters where tribes are positioned to work with the agency to implement the baseline WQS.  
 
The Proposed Rule describes an approach and a timeframe for a tribe seeking to opt out of the 
federal baseline WQS: “[A] tribe should communicate with the Regional Administrator, explaining the 
basis of the Tribes’ request to be excluded from coverage at this time and providing any supporting 
information, including, where applicable, plans for developing WQS and the associated timeline for 
doing so.” Id. at 29501-02. NTWC recommends that a tribe’s opt-out request to the Regional 
Administrator also should be granted when it is based on fundamental statements for which detailed 
supporting information is not required, including a statement that the tribe views application of the 
federal baseline WQS as counter to its sovereign authority or as not aligned with its current priorities. 
EPA also should provide guidance in the final rule as to the types of statements that will qualify so that 
there is consistency among Regional Administrators in making exclusion determinations. If one 
Regional Administrator accepts a tribe’s explanation for its opt-out request, all Regional 
Administrators should accept this or similar explanations. The NTWC suggests that Regional 
Administrators discuss exclusion determinations during their quarterly coordination meetings in order 
to ensure consistent determinations across the regions. 
EPA proposes a limited timeframe for a tribe to request an exclusion from coverage under the 
federal baseline WQS: between publication of the Proposed Rule in the Federal Register (May 5, 2023) 
and 90 days after publication of the final rule. Id. at 29502. This timeframe is too short for a tribe to 
decide on, develop its request, and consult with the Regional Administrator, especially as tribes are 
unlikely to consider their position until the final rule is published and the provisions of the rule are 
certain. NTWC requests that EPA extend this timeframe to 180 days after publication of the final rule 
to give tribal decision makers time to engage with their professional and legal staff to understand their 
options for exclusion and to assemble the information needed by the Regional Administrator. The 
effective date of the final rule could still occur 90 days after publication, but a tribe could opt out for 
up to 90 days after the effective date and have the federal baseline WQS lifted at that point. This would 
be the only instance when a tribe could opt out after the rule becomes effective. As for tribes that have 
opted out and subsequently acquire additional lands after the opt-out deadline has passed, those lands 
should automatically be excluded from application of the federal WQS unless the tribe requests or 
binding documents provide otherwise. 
III. 
Components of the Proposed Federal Baseline WQS 
A. Proposed Baseline Designated Uses 
NTWC supports EPA’s proposed promulgation of a designated use for primary contact 
recreation to protect recreational users of surface waters. See 88 Fed. Reg. at 29503. NTWC also 
supports EPA’s proposal to promulgate a cultural and traditional designated use, based on its 
interpretation of CWA § 101(a)(2). The proposed cultural and traditional designated use explicitly 
protects the cultural and traditional uses of Indian reservation waters. NTWC supports the addition of 
this designated use because there are certain time-honored traditions and tribal cultural practices – such 
as the use of sacred plants for food, art, or utility – that may not be covered by the aquatic life or the 
primary contact recreation designated uses. As EPA itself recognizes: “Tribal treaty or other reserved 

 
Page 4 of 7 
 
rights to fish, hunt, and/or gather on Indian reservations could generally be protected by such cultural 
and traditional designated uses, to the extent they are not protected by an aquatic life use or primary 
contact recreation use.” Id. EPA does not provide more detail about these uses because “they can 
include a variety of uses specific to the ceremonies and traditions of each Tribe, and each use may 
require different levels of protection.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 29503. NTWC agrees with this approach. 
 
EPA also requests input on whether to promulgate uses protected under CWA § 303(c)(2) but 
not under § 101(a)(2), including a public water supply use for all fresh waters covered by the Proposed 
Rule, or whether an individual tribe should be allowed to request this designation for a specific water 
body or water bodies on its reservation. See id. at 29502-03. Although NTWC recognizes that not all 
reservation waters are able to support public water supply uses, promulgating a public water supply 
designated use for all reservation fresh waters is nevertheless a high priority of tribes and is critical to 
protect their drinking water sources. EPA asks similar questions regarding agricultural and industrial 
designated uses. NTWC supports the inclusion of all these designated uses, especially because the 
proposal would allow a tribe to request that any of these designations be removed from specific waters 
for which it is not appropriate, due to tribe-specific or site-specific factors. NTWC believes this 
provision affords sufficient flexibility to allow inclusion of a broad range of designated uses. Last, 
NTWC supports EPA’s proposal to develop a process to revise or add baseline designated uses or 
establish WQS variances for specific waterbodies. See id. at 29504. 
B. Proposed Baseline Water Quality Criteria 
To protect the baseline designated uses, EPA proposes to promulgate narrative criteria with 
binding procedures to translate the narrative criteria into numeric values. This approach will provide 
for limited tailoring to account as best as possible for site-specific conditions and water attributes of 
importance to individual tribes, such as fish consumption rates. See id. NTWC supports the proposed 
narrative water quality criteria, see 88 Fed. Reg. at 29505. Because tribes are disproportionately 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, EPA must develop adaptation strategies in partnership 
with tribes and with consideration of Indigenous Knowledge (also referred to as traditional ecological 
knowledge, or TEK). NTWC strongly believes that TEK can assist in supporting a regulatory basis for 
addressing the resiliency of tribal waters in the face of climate change and should be incorporated into 
EPA’s translation of narrative into numeric criteria.  
 
The Proposed Rule provides five options for a Regional Administrator to translate narrative 
criteria, including those incorporating TEK, into the numeric values that will serve as the basis of CWA 
section 402 and 404 permits, section 303(d) lists and total maximum daily loads, and section 401 
certifications. Id at 29506–08. These translation procedures, if promulgated, will allow the Regional 
Administrator to utilize TEK when tribal information and data more accurately reflect site-specific 
conditions than the national criteria and are consistent with statutory and regulatory requirements, such 
as a fish consumption rate protective of subsistence fishing rights. Id. at 29507. These procedures also 
are a crucial place for implementation of the 2022 Guidance for Federal Departments and Agencies 
on Indigenous Knowledge issued by the White House Office on Science and Technology Policy and 
the Council on Environmental Quality. NTWC approves of EPA’s use in this context of information 
regarding tribal treaty or other reserved rights to aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources.  

 
Page 5 of 7 
 
The EPA regional office would rely on the binding translation procedures to incorporate the 
federal baseline WQS into the Section 402 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) 
permit conditions for discharges both outside and inside reservation boundaries to determine if they 
may cause or contribute to an exceedance of WQS. Where there are significant differences between 
upstream state WQS and federal baseline WQS in the context of a shared waterbody, EPA proposes to 
use the procedural steps in 40 CFR § 131.7 even though this regulation does not specifically apply to 
disputes between state and federal WQS. See 88 Fed. Reg. at 29507. According to the Proposed Rule: 
“EPA could utilize procedural steps similar to those laid out in that section where appropriate to work 
with the relevant parties in a neutral fashion in an effort to resolve the issues involved.” Id. at 29508. 
NTWC has no issues with extending the § 131.7 dispute resolution process to this situation but 
recommends that EPA include specific language that provides for affected tribes’ involvement in the 
dispute resolution process.  
C. Proposed Baseline Antidegradation Policy and Implementation 
 
NTWC supports EPA’s proposed antidegradation policy for Indian reservation waters 
consistent with the antidegradation regulation at 40 CFR § 131.12(a). This proposal would establish 
three levels of protection: protection for existing uses, protection for high quality waters, and protection 
for outstanding national resource waters (ONRWs), known as Tier 3 protection. Id. at 29508-10. With 
regard to the Tier 3 level of protection, NTWC agrees with EPA’s proposal to include the term “cultural 
significance” as part of the new regulations, since it is not included within 40 CFR § 131.12(a)(3). In 
this way, tribes will be able to identify and protect highly valued waterbodies on their reservations 
based on the cultural significance they ascribe to these waters. NTWC also finds it important that the 
affected tribe agree to a designation of ONRW, as EPA proposes. 
D.  Mixing Zones   
Under the proposal, the Regional Administrator can consider establishing mixing zones in 
permitting actions on a case-by-case basis. The NTWC recommends that EPA follow its mixing zones 
guidance, which emphasizes a holistic approach to mixing zone regulation that considers location, size, 
shape, outfall design, and zone quality as part of a permit action. See 88 Fed. Reg. at 29510. The NTWC 
agrees that mixing zones for toxic pollutants should be prohibited because of their potential to persist 
and bioaccumulate within the aquatic environment. The NTWC also recommends limiting the size of 
mixing zones and prohibiting them from extending across the entire water body, which would enable 
aquatic organisms, such as migrating salmon, to avoid contact with the pollutant dilution zone. Finally, 
the NTWC recommends that EPA deny a request by a permittee to authorize a mixing zone in a tribal 
water unless the tribe agrees to such action. EPA must first provide the affected tribal government with 
necessary information and resources to understand the issuance of a mixing zone as part of the permit 
action.  
IV. 
Proposed Procedures to Revise or Add a Designated Use or Establish a WQS Variance  
NTWC supports EPA’s proposed administrative procedure for revising the federal baseline 
WQS for specific Indian reservation waters, where appropriate, without launching a new rulemaking. 
See 88 Fed. Reg. at 29512-14. NTWC agrees that information and data may become available after the 

 
Page 6 of 7 
 
Proposed Rule becomes final that could make EPA or a tribe want to revise or add a designated use for 
specific tribal waters or adopt a variance from the baseline WQS. NTWC understands that, in these 
circumstances, the Regional Administrator would follow the public participation steps consistent with 
EPA regulations, including a public hearing, accessible documentation, and opportunity for public 
comment.  
V. 
Implementation of Baseline WQS in CWA Programs 
 
A.  CWA Section 402 NPDES Program 
EPA is generally the authority for issuing NPDES permits in Indian country unless and until 
EPA authorizes a tribe to administer the NPDES program. (Currently, no tribes are authorized to do 
so.) Thus, NTWC supports “public participation when EPA issues NPDES permits for discharges to 
Indian reservation waters” and stresses the importance for EPA to “consult with the appropriate Tribe 
when developing and issuing NPDES permits for discharges to Indian reservation waters to ensure that 
Tribal concerns and issues are considered.” 88 Fed. Reg. at 29514. Moreover, when EPA is not the 
permit writer, NTWC agrees that EPA should “coordinate with Tribes to ensure that Tribal concerns 
and issues are considered when EPA is reviewing NPDES permits issued by authorized states that may 
affect Indian reservation waters covered by the baseline WQS.” Id. at 29515. Here too, tribal 
participation is crucial to successful implementation of the federal baseline WQS.  
 
B.  CWA Section 404 Permits for Discharges of Dredge or Fill Material 
 
CWA section 404 permits for dredge or fill activities must include permit conditions to ensure 
discharges from those activities meet certain criteria, including applicable WQS. In the current 
rulemaking, EPA proposes to clarify that these permits need to ensure compliance with the federal 
baseline WQS for Indian reservation waters as well as with any state WQS. Id. at 29515. This proposal 
would apply to section 404 permits that are issued by the Corps of Engineers or that are issued by 
states. See id. NTWC supports EPA’s intent to work closely with the appropriate tribe, along with 
adjacent states and tribes, in situations where a discharge could cause or contribute to a violation of the 
federal baseline WQS.  
C. Section 401 Certifications 
Under CWA section 401(a)(2), the Administrator provides notice to states and authorized tribes 
if the Administrator determines that a discharge originating in another jurisdiction may affect their 
water quality. The federal baseline WQS, when finalized, will feed into this determination. Id. at 29516. 
NTWC seeks clarification regarding EPA’s responsibility to provide notice to authorized tribes of such 
discharges, upon which notification they may object to the issuance of the license or permit. We 
recommend that the agency refer to its Policy on Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribes 
(pp. 5-6), that explains notification can occur in several ways depending on the activity and the number 
of tribes potentially affected as well as tribal preferences regarding the specific mode of contact. Above 
all, notification should include sufficient information for tribal officials to make an informed decision 
and occur early enough in the process to allow for meaningful input by the tribe(s).  
 

 
Page 7 of 7 
 
Conclusion  
On behalf of NTWC, I thank you for the opportunity to comment on the Proposed Rule 
establishing federal baseline WQS for Indian reservation waters that lack CWA protections.  
Ultimately, the Proposed Rule, if finalized, will go a long way toward meeting the goals of the 
CWA in protecting all waters of the United States while at the same time protecting unique tribal 
practices and resources and implementing the federal trust responsibility to tribes. Most importantly, 
the federal baseline WQS must be complied with. EPA must ensure compliance as part of permit 
issuance for a potential pollutant discharge regardless of origination, especially when the discharge 
could have serious effects on the health and welfare of a downstream reservation.   
We believe that our comments and recommendations will assist EPA in making better-informed 
decisions when finalizing this rule. 
Should you or your staff have questions or comments regarding our letter, please contact me at 
Kenpnorton@gmail.com or Elaine Wilson, NTWC Project Manager, at Elaine.Wilson@nau.edu. 
Sincerely, 
 
Ken Norton, Chair 
National Tribal Water Council 
 
Cc:  Karen Gude, US EPA Office of Water 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Northern Arizona University 
PO Box 15004 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5004 
Elaine H. Wilson, NTWC Project 
Manager 
928-523-9555 office 
928-523-1266 fax 
nau.edu/ITEP 
Elaine.Wilson@nau.edu 
480-452-6774 cell

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0242 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---
August 3, 2023 
 
United States Environmental Protection Agency  
Attn: Administrator Michael S. Regan  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20004 
 
Re:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 – Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards 
for Indian Reservations 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
The Nevada Division of Environmental Protection (NDEP) appreciates the opportunity to comment on 
the proposed rule Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations. This proposed 
rule would promulgate federal baseline water quality standards (WQS) for waters on over 250 Indian 
reservations that do not have WQS in effect under the Clean Water Act (CWA). On behalf of NDEP, I 
offer these comments to the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) on this 
proposed rule.  
 
NDEP strongly believes in the importance of WQS to restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and 
biological integrity of the State’s and Nation’s waters. However, NDEP recommends that the 
proposed rule should not be adopted at this time. The proposed rule appears to be a framework that 
leaves many critical questions unanswered and lacks the detail necessary to thoroughly evaluate 
potential impacts and consequences of its adoption to State water programs, stakeholders, and the 
public. In fact, many of the most impactful decisions won’t be made until after the rule is already in 
place, resulting in reduced predictability and increased uncertainty related to rule implementation.  
 
The specific points below further support why the proposed rule should not be adopted at this time.  
 
Waters Affected by the Proposed Rule 
No list of waters affected by this proposed rule has been provided. Without knowing which waters will 
be subject to the rule in advance, it is impossible for states to assess and fully understand the potential 
impacts to their water quality programs and stakeholders. Prior to consideration of rule promulgation, a 
definitive list of all waterbodies and waterbody reaches to which the baseline WQS would apply 
should be developed and made accessible to the public. At a minimum, an interactive web map 
depicting Tribal boundaries and affected waters should be developed, however availability of a 
Geographic Information System (GIS) coverage/layer would be extremely valuable. 
 
Designated Uses 
The proposed rule does not consider attainability of proposed baseline designated uses. For example, 
many state and/or Tribal waterbodies that would be affected by the proposed rule do not have 

 
Administrator Regan  
Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 2 of 4 
 
901 S. Stewart Street, Suite 4001 • Carson City, Nevada 89701 • p: 775.687.4670 • f: 775.687.5856 • ndep.nv.gov 
Printed on recycled paper 
 
 
sufficient flow to support baseline designated uses such as primary contact recreation or consumption 
of specific aquatic organisms. 
 
The proposed rule specifically states that USEPA is soliciting comment on whether a public water 
supply use should be designated for all Indian reservation fresh waters covered by the scope of this 
rule. As pointed out in the proposed rule, designating a public water supply use for all Indian 
reservation waters without accounting for local considerations could result in a designation of a 
waterbody where such a use is not appropriate. NDEP therefore believes USEPA should not designate 
a blanket public water supply use for all Indian reservation fresh waters covered by the scope of this 
rule and that this issue is best addressed by allowing affected Tribes to request a public water supply 
use on a case-by-case basis after the rule is final. This will ensure the designation is appropriate for the 
waterbody.  
  
The USEPA proposes to promulgate an explicit cultural and traditional designated use to ensure full 
protection of such uses. However, these cultural and traditional uses and the water quality criteria to 
protect these beneficial uses have not been defined within the proposed rule. Without knowing what 
these uses and criteria are in advance, it is impossible for states to ascertain the potential impacts of 
designating such uses and associated criteria. This also appears to be an impossible task, as the cultural 
and traditional uses of water are expected to vary from Tribe to Tribe, or at least regionally, and 
certainly are not the same across the country.  Therefore, cultural and traditional uses and the 
associated water quality criteria to protect these beneficial uses should be identified prior to rule 
promulgation. Moreover, to reduce uncertainty and improve predictability surrounding rule 
implementation, it would be beneficial to explicitly detail the process by which the water quality 
criteria to protect proclaimed cultural and traditional uses would be developed.   
 
Narrative Criteria  
The proposed rule puts forth narrative criteria with no acknowledgement that, oftentimes, WQS are 
unachievable due to natural background conditions. A provision should be included that excludes 
nonattainment of baseline designated uses due to natural background conditions.   
  
Related to Narrative Criterion #2, a portion of this criteria is an overreach into States’ sole and 
exclusive authority to address water rights; it appears to contradict CWA sections 101(g) and 518(a) 
which state that WQS shall not be construed to supersede or abrogate rights to quantities of water.  
Criterion states, “2. All waters shall be free from adverse impacts to the chemical, physical or 
hydrologic, or biological integrity caused by pollutants or pollution that prevent the attainment of 
applicable designated uses” (emphasis added). The term “hydrologic integrity” may lead to conflicts 
with Nevada regulations and statutes if it can be interpreted as lack of environmental flow due to 
agricultural or other water diversions. NAC 445A.122 Standards applicable to beneficial uses states 
that “The following standards are intended to protect both existing and designated beneficial uses and 
must not be used to prohibit the use of the water as authorized under title 48 of NRS.” Nevada Revised 
Statutes TITLE 48—WATER includes Chapter 533 – ADJUDICATION OF VESTED WATER RIGHTS; 
APPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC WATERS.  
  
State WQS Different from CWA Section 304(a) Criteria  
The proposed Tribal baseline WQS will be based on the national recommended water quality criteria 
(CWA section 304(a)). Some of Nevada WQS are deliberately, and legally, different from the 304(a) 

 
Administrator Regan  
Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 3 of 4 
 
901 S. Stewart Street, Suite 4001 • Carson City, Nevada 89701 • p: 775.687.4670 • f: 775.687.5856 • ndep.nv.gov 
Printed on recycled paper 
 
 
criteria. For example, the table below shows Nevada’s statewide selenium criteria, which is based on 
the absence of sturgeon in State waters:  
  
 
Selenium 
Criterion 
Chronic Exposures 
Short-Term 
Fish Tissue (mg/kg dw*) 
Water Column (ug/L*) 
Water Column 
(ug/L) 
Egg-
Ovary 
Muscle 
Whole 
Body 
Water 
(Lakes) 
Water 
(Streams) 
Water 
EPA 2016 
15.1 
11.3 
8.5 
1.5 
3.1 
Intermittent 
Exposure Equation 
Nevada 
“sturgeon-free” 
waters 
19.0 
13.1 
9.5 
1.9 
3.9 
Intermittent 
Exposure Equation 
*mg/kg dw = milligrams per kilogram dry weight, ug/L = micrograms per liter. 
  
 
Implementation of the proposed rule has the potential to cause issues when a stream or river flows 
through a federally recognized Indian reservation. Since Nevada’s selenium criteria is higher, it will 
inherently conflict with and may not be considered protective of downstream uses if a Tribal baseline 
WQS in Nevada is based on blanket 304(a) criteria for waters with sturgeon. In general, it is unclear in 
the proposed rule how such conflicts between State WQS and blanket Tribal WQS under the proposed 
rule would be resolved, which undoubtedly has the potential to create confusion, unclear 
implementation, and drain already thinly stretched State and Federal resources.      
  
Feedback on Implementation and Revisions  
To ensure protection of the baseline designated uses, the rule proposes to promulgate narrative criteria 
with binding procedures for the USEPA to translate the narrative criteria into numeric values as 
needed for implementation. The procedures would:  
• 
Reflect the latest science (e.g., latest published CWA section 304(a) water quality criteria 
recommendations).  
• 
Provide for limited location-specific tailoring to better protect Tribal waters (e.g., fish 
consumption rates).  
• 
Provide the option to rely upon adjacent state or Tribal CWA-effective WQS.  
 
The presentation slides from the public hearings on June 27th and July 12th, 2023, state that “EPA 
anticipates that this rule would facilitate a process of mutual consideration and discussion between 
EPA, Tribes, and states, and provide an opportunity for EPA to work closely with Tribes and states 
when implementing applicable baseline WQS.” NDEP believes that this process of mutual 
consideration and discussion must be formalized and explicit in the rule, not just anticipated.  
 
NDEP recommends including a process in the proposed rule for consulting with states on where/when 
it is appropriate to rely upon adjacent states or Tribal CWA-effective WQS. The proposed rule must 
include a detailed process to address any future inconsistencies between existing state water quality 
standards and those promulgated under this proposed rule.  
 

 
Administrator Regan  
Federal Baseline Water Quality Standards for Indian Reservations 
Page 4 of 4 
 
901 S. Stewart Street, Suite 4001 • Carson City, Nevada 89701 • p: 775.687.4670 • f: 775.687.5856 • ndep.nv.gov 
Printed on recycled paper 
 
 
Furthermore, the proposed rule should be revised to facilitate the ease by which the public, Tribes, and 
states can review the baseline WQS as they are implemented and revised, and the ability to provide 
feedback to the USEPA. The review process and feedback mechanisms should be explicit in the rule. 
 
Outstanding National Resource Waters  
NDEP is also concerned about the designation process of certain waters on Indian reservations as 
Outstanding National Resource Waters (ONRWs). During the public hearings, the USEPA indicated 
that a potential benefit of the rule is enabling Tribes to utilize antidegradation implementation methods 
to protect culturally significant waters by nominating them as ONRWs. Because designating a Tribal 
water being designated as an ONRW could have major implications to upstream users/dischargers/ 
permittees, NDEP recommends the rule be revised to include a delineated process for consulting with 
states on the designation of ONRWs.  
 
The proposed rule does not detail the nomination process for an ONRW. The text states that “any 
person or entity may nominate a specific water for such protection by providing written documentation 
of the qualifications of the reservation water to the Regional Administrator and the Tribe.” The process 
for establishing ONRWs must be explicit, standardized, and transparent, with minimum requirements 
for nominating a water as an ONRW as well as the criteria for determining which waters deserve 
protection as an ONRW specified in the proposed rule. Prior to this specification, the minimum 
nomination requirements and establishment criteria should be vetted through a public hearing/ 
workshop process. Finally, USEPA should not take a lead role in identifying waters on Tribal lands for 
nomination as ONRWs.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment. Establishment of WQS to protect waterbodies within 
Indian reservations without treatment in similar manner as states authority is an honorable effort.  
However, it is clear the proposed rule requires much improvement prior to adoption being considered. 
NDEP looks forward to engaging in future conversations to revise the proposed rule in a manner that 
will increase predictability with respect to its implementation while minimizing potential impacts and 
consequences to State water programs and stakeholders.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Jason Kuchnicki 
 
Chief, Bureau of Water Quality Planning 
Nevada Division of Environmental Protection

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0253 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405-0252 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2016-0405 ---

