
--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2025-0002-88065 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2025-0002 ---
March 27, 2025
Council on Environmental Quality
730 Jackson Place NW
Washington, DC 20503
Re: Docket No. CEQ-2025-0002
We are writing to provide comments on the interim final rule developed by Council on 
Environmental Quality (CEQ) that would remove the council’s NEPA implementation, titled 
Removal of National Environmental Policy Act Implementing Regulations, referred to as “interim 
final rule” (docket no. CEQ-2025-0002). We are environmental health researchers who study 
health effects of various physical and chemical exposures from many different environments in 
the United States and across the globe. Our institutional affiliation is included for identification 
purposes only, and we declare no actual or perceived financial conflicts of interest.
Our letter contains alternative considerations apart from removing CEQ’s NEPA implementation, 
namely related to conflict of interest. We think our suggestions would improve and potentially 
streamline the NEPA process. Without CEQ NEPA implementation, each federal agency would 
still be required to carry out NEPA procedures, but these procedures vary by agency, creating a 
patchwork of inconsistent and outdated implementation.1 We also highlight the importance of 
notice and comment procedures for the nation’s public in CEQ’s NEPA procedures.
As the interim final rule states, NEPA requires environmental impact statements (EIS) for major 
federal actions that may have significant effects on the quality of the human environment. 
NEPA, which is overseen by the CEQ, is intended to serve as a procedural tool for EISs to 
provide environmental impacts for a range of actions that can be considered by a federal 
agency. Since NEPA’s creation in 1969, it has been the subject of changing requirements in 
different executive orders, as summarized in the interim final rule, as well as thousands of 
lawsuits.
The statute’s language on “major federal actions” that can cause “significant” effects have been 
contested, as have agencies’ full consideration of EISs in decision-making, timing of EIS 
preparation, type of potential harm considered, and exclusions.1 The vast majority of these 
cases can be traced to conflict of interest issues. The role of conflicts of interest in EIS 
development has been well-documented.2,3
One of the most well-known examples of conflict of interests impacting NEPA was seen in the 
Deepwater Horizon spill nearly 50 miles off the coast of Louisiana in 2010. In 2009, the Minerals 
Management Service within the Department of the Interior decided that oil exploration in the 
Gulf of Mexico was exempt from a full EIS under NEPA.4 Even before this exemption, MMS was 
                                               
1 Salzman, J. and Thompson, Jr., B. Chapter 12: The National Environmental Policy Act. In: Salzman, J. 
and Thompson, Jr., B. Environmental Law and Policy. 5th ed. Foundation Press; 2019:339-354.
2 Colleen McGrath, Three’s A Crowd: Conflicts of Interest in Third- Party Preparation of Environmental 
Impact Statements and Evolving Agency Responsibility Under NEPA, 29 Hastings Envt'l L.J. 165 (2023)
3 Hansen, R. P., Wolff, T. A., and McCold, L. N. The conflict of interest problem in EIS preparation. 22nd 
Annual Conference of the National Association of Environmental Professionals, Orlando, FL (United 
States), 19-23 May 1997. Accessible: https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc676383/
4 Minerals Management Service. Environmental Documents Prepared for Proposed Oil, Gas, and Mineral 
Operations by the Gulf of Mexico Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Region. April 15, 2009. Available:
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2009/04/15/E9-8525/environmental-documents-prepared-for-
proposed-oil-gas-and-mineral-operations-by-the-gulf-of-mexico

under investigation for violating conflicts of interest and was found to engage in “a culture of 
ethical failure” by the DOI Office of Inspector General.5 Coverage of the investigation 
summarized: “Government officials in charge of collecting billions of dollars worth of royalties 
from oil and gas companies accepted gifts, steered contracts to favored clients and engaged in 
drug use and illicit sex with employees of the energy firms.”6 It is not surprising that MMS 
declined the need for an EIS for British Petroleum’s Deepwater Horizon project.
The undeniable regulatory capture of US federal agencies creates a challenging and ineffective 
environment for these agencies to perform their duties. This also paves the ground for 
expensive and time-consuming lawsuits. Therefore, we recommend three potential actions for 
CEQ to implement conflict of interest and ethics rules for NEPA implementation.
1. Development an Environmental and Public Health Advisory Board to assist federal 
agencies in their decisions to require an EIS and their EIS interpretation. Members of the 
proposed advisory board would be experts in environmental and public health and 
neutral parties with no investments in relevant entities to the action.
2. Perform regular conflict of interest compliance activities to ensure that only federal 
employees with no conflicts of interest to the relevant action can be involved in EIS 
decision making, although we recognize this would also require broader ethics rules 
administration for federal employees.
3. To balance the corporate influence in NEPA procedures, create a Community 
Stakeholder Advisory Board with the majority of stakeholders from non-profit 
organizations or the residential area that would assist federal agencies in EIS decision 
making, similar to the above proposed Environment and Public Health Advisory Board.
Although NEPA has its challenges, we recommend strategies to increase its efficiency rather 
than removing environmental considerations - a decision that led to the Deepwater Horizon 
disaster.
Finally, we are very concerned about the interim final rule’s impact on removing public note and 
comment procedures by removing CEQ’s NEPA implementation altogether. Public participation 
in federal agency decision making is tantamount to our democracy. Removing CEQ NEPA 
implementation revokes any civilian input to decisions that may affect their everyday lives. The 
National Resources Defense Council, an environmental non-profit organization, wrote a 
summary of 76 NEPA cases across the U.S. in which public participation led to a better outcome 
than federal agency EIS consideration could have achieved alone.7 Many of these projects were 
road and bridge construction projects, wildlife access, and energy projects - projects that are 
fundamental to everyone who lives in the U.S. Additionally, public comments provide the scope 
of potential problems with projects that those involved may not have thought of and possible 
solutions and alternatives so that these projects can be conducted safely and efficiently. This will 
                                                                                                                                                      
5 Earl E. Devaney. U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of Inspector General. OIG Investigations of 
MMS Employees. Sept 9, 2008. Available: https://www.doioig.gov/sites/default/files/2021-
migration/RIKinvestigation.pdf
6 Juliet Eilperin, “U.S. exempted BP's Gulf of Mexico drilling from environmental impact study,” The 
Washington Post, May 5, 2010. Available: https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/content/article/2010/05/04/AR2010050404118.html
7 Elly Pepper, National Resources Defense Council. Never Eliminate Public Advice: NEPA Success 
Stories. February 2015. Available:
https://www.nrdc.org/resources/never-eliminate-public-advice-nepa-success-stories

save billions of dollars from accidents and re-construction of projects that would initially fail 
without valuable input from communities.
We hope our comments are useful and not the last public comment we sent regarding CEQ 
NEPA implementation.
Sincerely,
Kathryn Rodgers, MPH
Boston University School of Public Health
Stephanie Grady, PhD MPH
Boston University School of Public Health
Erin Polka, MPH
Boston University School of Public Health
Jean Costello, PhD
Boston University School of Public Health

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2025-0002-65104 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2025-0002 ---
Comment by Liz Cates, Leesport, PA 
In a time when man-made climate change and environmental degradation are upending 
people’s lives, one would think that effective environmental laws would be protected. I 
guess that’s too much to ask. 
Replacing CEQ’s regulations with guidance and leaving it to federal agencies to implement 
NEPA using their own interpretations will create confusion, inconsistency, and chaos. 
The regulations implementing NEPA should be preserved, improved upon, and centralized. 
The Trump administration must reverse its decision to repeal the regulations and make its 
priority protecting the environment and all of those who depend upon it. 
Providing guidance that says agencies should only consider “reasonably foreseeable” 
effects, rather than cumulative impacts, diminishes the quality of the environmental review 
and exposes the population unnecessarily to adverse impacts. 
The people of this land deserve a healthy environment. Every aspect of American life will 
suffer in a world of diminished environmental oversight and protection.

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2025-0002-65795 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2025-0002 ---
Comment by Peggy Berry, Dayton, Ohio 
As a healthcare professional, I have seen what the lack of regulation does to employees 
and the community. You can’t create a chemical without knowing the consequences of that 
chemical on the environment. 
Providing guidance that tells agencies to exclude consideration of environmental justice in 
approving projects condemns our more vulnerable and historically overburdened 
populations to more pollution, more illness and death, and more threats to public safety. 
The regulations implementing NEPA should be preserved, improved upon, and centralized. 
The Trump administration must reverse its decision to repeal the regulations and make its 
priority protecting the environment and all of those who depend upon it. 
Allowing agencies and project sponsors to determine that environmental reviews are not 
necessary for some projects deprives members of the public of their only opportunity to 
participate in the consideration of projects that will profoundly impact them. 
If you want a more productive nation, worker and community health is essential. Stop 
removing these safeguards.

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2025-0002-87856 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2025-0002 ---
1 
 
 
 
Via Regulations.gov 
 
March 27, 2025 
 
Katherine R. Scarlett 
Acting Chair 
Council on Environmental Quality 
730 Jackson Place, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20503 
 
Re: The American Exploration & Production Council’s Comments on the Interim Final 
Rule Removing the Council for Environmental Quality’s Regulations Implementing 
the National Environmental Policy Act (CEQ-2025-0002/90 Fed. Reg. 10,610 (Feb. 25, 
2025)) 
 
Dear Acting Chair Scarlett: 
 
The American Exploration & Production Council (“AXPC”) appreciates the opportunity to 
comment on the Council on Environmental Quality’s (“CEQ’s”) February 25, 2025 Interim Final 
Rule (“IFR”) removing CEQ’s regulations implementing the National Environmental Policy Act 
(“NEPA”).1 
I. 
AXPC’S INTERESTS 
AXPC is a national trade association representing America's leading and most active 
independent natural gas and crude oil exploration and production companies. AXPC companies 
are among the cleanest and safest onshore producers of oil and natural gas in the world, while 
supporting millions of Americans in good-paying jobs and investing a wealth of resources in our 
communities. Dedicated to safety, science, and technological advancement, our members strive 
to deliver affordable, reliable energy while positively impacting the economy and the 
communities in which we live and operate. As part of this mission, AXPC members understand 
the importance of ensuring positive environmental and public welfare outcomes and responsible 
stewardship of the nation’s natural resources.  
 
AXPC works collaboratively with regulators and policymakers to help them understand our 
operations so that they will be able to create sound, fact-based public policies that result in the 
safe and responsible exploration and production of America’s vast oil and natural gas resources. 
Our goal is to provide technical and regulatory knowledge, making AXPC a rich repository of 
resources on the industry and the science behind our operations. 
 
AXPC’s members are uniquely positioned to provide comments on how the unwarranted 
 
1 90 Fed. Reg. 10,610. 

 
 
2 
 
expansion of NEPA review processes and governing regulations affect the development of 
projects that are vital to the American economy and national security. For example, as businesses 
with projects that are frequently the subject of NEPA reviews, AXPC’s members have extensive 
experience working with various agencies during the NEPA review process and can provide a 
perspective that is particularly relevant to project-level NEPA analyses. 
 
In light of our members’ frequent hands-on experience with NEPA reviews, AXPC has long 
supported efforts to improve the efficiency and consistency of the NEPA review process while 
also reorienting those reviews so that they more clearly focus on achieving NEPA’s central goal 
of improving agency decision-making. Decades of increasingly confusing and ambiguous 
analytical requirements, inconsistent agency approaches and procedures, and extensive litigation 
have unfortunately led to excessively lengthy NEPA review documents full of information that 
has no reasonable bearing on agencies’ decision-making processes, and increasingly protracted 
review periods resulting from agencies compiling and reviewing information largely extraneous 
to the decisions they had to make. In the 40 years since CEQ promulgated its first regulations 
implementing NEPA, the average environmental impact statement (“EIS”) expanded to 661 
pages, with over 1,000 additional pages of appendix materials.2 And the average time to 
complete these increasingly voluminous EISs increased to roughly 4.5 years.3 
This is not what Congress intended when it enacted NEPA.  Nor is it consistent with the NEPA 
reform Congress more recently included in the Fiscal Responsibility Act of 2023 (“FRA”)4 in the 
hope of reducing agencies’ unnecessarily excessive procedures and analyses, and reorienting 
agencies’ implementation of NEPA to the efficient and effective decision-making tool that 
Congress intended.   
AXPC therefore welcomes this administration’s recognition of the need to substantially reform 
the manner in which federal agencies implement NEPA.  Indeed, we believe that President 
Trump’s January 20, 2025 Executive Order entitled Unleashing American Energy (“EO 
14154”),5 CEQ’s February 19, 2025 Memorandum for Federal Departments and Agencies on the 
Implementation of the National Environmental Policy Act (“February 19 Guidance”), and this 
IFR are critical to reigning in needlessly complex and protracted NEPA reviews and facilitating 
the efficient and statutorily-supported permitting and decision-making that are critical to 
America’s domestic energy industry. 
II. 
COMMENTS ON IMPLEMENTATION OF THE IFR 
The IFR appropriately recognizes that, irrespective of whether it has statutory authority to issue 
regulations, CEQ continues to have an important statutorily authorized advisory role within the 
executive branch, including as a resource for federal agencies in their implementation of NEPA.6 
This enduring authority and obligation to coordinate the federal government’s NEPA compliance 
and to advise agencies is critical to ensuring that the removal of CEQ’s NEPA regulations does 
 
2 Council on Environmental Quality, Length of Environmental Impact Statements (2013-2018) (June 12, 2020). 
3 Council on Environmental Quality, Environmental Impact Statement Timelines (2010-2018) (June 12, 2020). 
4 Fiscal Responsibility Act of 2023, Pub. L. No. 118-5, 137 Stat. 10, 38 (2023).  
5 90 Fed. Reg. 8,353 (Jan. 29, 2025). 
6 90 Fed. Reg. at 10,611-12. 

 
 
3 
 
not disrupt agencies NEPA reviews nor unduly delay important permitting decisions and other 
federal actions. 
AXPC therefore supports the Administration’s decision to require agencies to expeditiously 
revise or establish NEPA implementing procedures within twelve months of CEQ’s issuance of 
the February 19 Guidance.7  We also support the manner in which CEQ has instructed agencies 
to conduct their NEPA practices and procedures until CEQ’s rescinded NEPA regulations are 
replaced by agency-specific implementing procedures.   
In particular, AXPC supports allowing agencies to continue following their existing practices 
and procedures to the extent that they are “consistent with the text of NEPA, E.O. 14154, and 
[the February 19 Guidance].”8  We also support allowing agencies to voluntarily continue to rely 
on rescinded CEQ regulations “in completing ongoing NEPA reviews or defending against 
challenges to reviews completed while those regulations were in effect.”9 
As a final note with respect to implementation of the IFR, AXPC also supports CEQ’s 
instruction that agencies consider utilizing its final 2020 rule entitled “Update to the Regulations 
Implementing the Procedural Provisions of the National Environmental Policy Act” (“2020 
NEPA Regulations”),10 to guide future NEPA reviews.11 AXPC supported the 2020 NEPA 
Regulations because we believed they provided long-overdue regulatory reforms that, if dutifully 
implemented by agencies, could reorient the NEPA review process back to the Act’s core 
purpose of improving agency decision- making, and away from the litigation-fueled dysfunction 
and delay that have become the statute’s hallmarks.  As such, and as further explained below, we 
believe it is appropriate for agencies to utilize the procedures and guidelines in the 2020 NEPA 
Regulations to the extent those procedures and guidelines are permitted by law and consistent 
with EO 14154 and the February 19 Guidance.  AXPC believes that doing so can help agencies 
effectively implement the IFR without undue disruption or delay. 
III. 
AGENCIES’ OPPORTUNITY AND OBLIGATION TO IMPLEMENT NEPA 
CONSISTENT WITH CONGRESSIONAL INTENT 
NEPA is a procedural statute12 that Congress expected would facilitate “fully informed and well-
considered” agency decisions;13 it certainly did not intend the Act’s procedural mandates to so 
encumber agencies with extraneous analytical requirements that it would become effectively 
 
7 February 19 Guidance at p. 7.   
8 February 19 Guidance at p. 4.  
9 February 19 Guidance at p. 4. 
10 86 Fed. Reg. 43,304 (July 16, 2020). 
11 February 19 Guidance at p. 4. 
12 See 42 U.S.C. § 4332(2)(C) (agency obligation under NEPA is only to prepare detailed statement on “adverse 
environmental effects which cannot be avoided”); See also Kleppe v. Sierra Club, 427 U.S. 390, 406 (1976) (“The 
procedural duty imposed upon agencies by this section is quite precise…”); Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. 
Natural Resources Defense Council, 435 U.S. 519, 558 (1978) (NEPA’s “mandate to the agencies is essentially 
procedural); Ohio Forestry Ass’n v. Sierra Club, 523 U.S. 726, 737 (1998) (“NEPA… simply guarantees a particular 
procedure, not a particular result.”); and Tenn. Valley Auth. v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153, 188 n.34 (1978) (“NEPA 
essentially imposes a procedural requirement on agencies, requiring them to engage in an extensive inquiry as to the 
effect of federal actions on the environment.”). 
13 Vt. Yankee, 435 U.S. 519, 558 (1978). 

 
 
4 
 
impossible for agency reviews to culminate in reasonably timely decisions.  Indeed, Congress’s 
expectation that NEPA would “create and maintain conditions under which man and nature can 
exist in productive harmony, and fulfill the social, economic, and other requirements of present 
and future generations of Americans”14 cannot be reconciled with decades of implementing the 
Act such that its required reviews are now widely regarded as among the foremost obstacles to 
developing our nation’s most critical infrastructure.     
Despite decades of CEQ guidance and related case law acknowledging that NEPA reviews 
should be guided by the “rule of reason,” the NEPA review process has generally remained 
unnecessarily complex, unreasonably time-consuming, and uncertain. This complexity and delay 
in turn acts as an impediment to investment in critical infrastructure, including projects 
immediately needed to facilitate the safe and effective utilization of America’s critical domestic 
energy resources. 
This IFR and the NEPA implementing procedures federal agencies must revise or establish in the 
next twelve months pursuant to EO 14154 and CEQ’s February 19 Guidance provide those 
agencies a unique opportunity to address the uncertainty, inconsistency, and delay that have been 
the hallmarks of the federal government’s implementation of NEPA for decades.  In fact, given 
the inconsistency of many recent agency implementation practices with the statute, many 
agencies are effectively compelled to begin implementing NEPA consistent with congressional 
intent.   
Furthermore, while CEQ will continue to advise and support federal agencies in their 
implementation of NEPA, the elimination of CEQ’s broad-based regulatory requirements 
provides each agency an opportunity to more precisely tailor its NEPA practices and procedures 
to better reflect not only the types of actions the agency typically authorizes or permits, but also 
the limits of agency’s statutory jurisdiction and subject matter expertise.  For example, and as 
relevant to AXPC members, leasing and permitting of upstream oil and natural gas exploration 
and production on federal land is largely governed by the Federal Land Policy and Management 
Act (“FLPMA”) and the Mineral Leasing Act (“MLA”). These and other statutes prescribe the 
requirements, procedures, and considerations the Bureau of Land Management (“BLM” or “the 
Bureau”) must adhere to in managing public lands and making decisions about resource 
development.  After decades of implementing these statutes and managing public lands, BLM’s 
expertise is quite deep, but also limited by its jurisdictional reach.   
Thus, to the fullest extent permissible under the statute, BLM should be allowed to adopt NEPA 
implementation practices and procedures that do not require the Bureau to needlessly devote 
resources analyzing potential indirect impacts that are outside of BLM’s jurisdiction and 
therefore the agency’s authority to control.  
Likewise, in light of courts’ recognition that “the rule of reason does not give agencies license to 
fulfill their own prophecies, whatever the parochial impulses that drive them,”15 BLM’s 
implementation practices and procedures should clearly state that the Bureau need not consider 
alternatives that BLM lacks statutory authority to impose or enforce, or which are inconsistent 
 
14 42 U.S.C. § 4331(a) (emphasis added). 
15 Citizens Against Burlington, Inc. v. Busey, 938 F.2d 190, 196 (D.C. Cir. 1991). 

 
 
5 
 
with the goals of the project sponsor.  In the 2023 FRA, Congress confirmed this reasonable 
delineation of the range of alternatives that agencies must consider in the course of their NEPA 
reviews by amending NEPA to explicitly direct that “a reasonable range of alternatives to the 
proposed agency action must be “technically and economically feasible, and meet the purpose 
and need of the proposal…”16  As such, BLM and all other agencies should clarify in their 
individual practices and procedures that they need only consider alternatives that are reasonable 
and both technically and commercially feasible in light of the project’s purpose and the project 
sponsor’s goals.17 
While agencies should be afforded flexibility to tailor their NEPA implementation practices and 
procedures to reflect their statutory authority, expertise, and most commonly permitted federal 
actions, CEQ, through its enduring advisory role, should continue to ensure that agencies adopt 
practices and procedures that are consistent with NEPA as amended by the FRA. In the 
following subsections, AXPC identified three key aspects of NEPA that we believe CEQ should 
expressly instruct agencies to account for in their NEPA implementing practices and procedures. 
1. 
Fully Utilize and Expand Categorical Exclusions, Programmatic Review 
Options, and Tiering 
CEQ should instruct agencies to streamline their environmental reviews by revising their NEPA 
implementation practices and procedures to fully utilize available categorical exclusions and to 
establish new categorical exclusions. As a modest first step, agencies should revise their 
procedures to incorporate the NEPA amendments Congress included in the FRA.  These 
amendments included multiple provisions intended to make it easier for agencies to utilize 
categorical exclusions for NEPA compliance.   
For instance, the 2023 NEPA amendments allow an agency to “adopt a categorical exclusion 
listed in another agency’s NEPA procedures for a category of proposed agency actions for which 
the categorical exclusion was established…”18  To avail itself of this flexibility, an agency must 
“identify the categorical exclusion,” “consult with the agency that established the categorical 
exclusion to ensure that the proposed adoption… is appropriate,” “identify to the public the 
categorical exclusion,” and “document adoption of the categorical exclusion.”19 
 
16 42 U.S.C. § 4332(C)(iii). 
17 See Protect Our Parks Inc. v. Buttigieg, 10 F.4th 758, 764 (7th Cir. 2021) (per curiam) (“Put another way, the 
agencies must take the objectives they are given and consider alternative means of achieving those objectives, not 
alternative objectives.”) (citing Busey); Del. Riverkeeper Network v. U.S. Army Corps. of Eng’rs, 869 F.3d 148, 157 
(3d Cir. 2017) (stating that an alternatives analysis involves looking to “the range of projects that could achieve the 
same goal as the proposed project”); Webster v. USDA, 685 F.3d 411, 422-24 (4th Cir. 2012) (providing that “[i]n 
deciding on the purposes and needs for a project, it is entirely appropriate for an agency to consider the applicant’s 
needs and goals” and considering whether agency’s purposes and needs were consistent with statutory 
authorization); Coal. for Advancement of Reg’l Transp. v. Fed. Highway Admin., 576 Fed. App’x. 477 (6th Cir. 
2014) (“agenc[ies] should take into account ‘the needs and goals of the parties involved’” and “an agency should 
always consider the views of Congress” in developing a purpose and need statement) (quoting Busey, 938 F.2d at 
196); and HonoluluTraffic.com v. Federal Transit Admin., 742 F.3d 1222, 1230 (9th Cir. 2014). 
18 42 U.S.C. § 4336c. 
19 42 U.S.C. § 4336c. 

 
 
6 
 
In addition to counseling agencies to increasingly utilize other agencies’ categorical exclusions, 
CEQ should also advise agencies to assess whether they routinely authorize additional categories 
of actions that do not generally result in significant environmental impacts but are not yet 
covered by a categorical exclusion.  To support agencies in these streamlining efforts, CEQ 
should expand its efforts undertaken during the first Trump Administration to create a 
centralized and readily searchable database of categorical exclusions that federal agencies and 
project proponents alike can use to easily identify exclusions that would apply to specific federal 
actions or which could be adopted from other agencies. 
Most importantly, however, CEQ should instruct each federal agency to ensure that its processes 
and procedures fully utilize currently available categorical exclusions and contain adequate 
provisions requiring them to transparently explain precisely why the agency declined to utilize a 
seemingly suitable categorical exclusion for a proposed federal action.  This guidance is 
surprising necessary because, as AXPC members are aware, agencies frequently decline to 
utilize even those categorical exclusions enacted by Congress.   
For instance, in Section 390 of the 2005 Energy Policy Act (“2005 EPA”), Congress 
categorically excluded five types of oil and natural gas activities from the requirement to develop 
environmental assessments (“EAs”) and environmental impact statements (“EISs”) based on 
Congress’ determination that these activities do not individually or cumulatively have a 
significant effect on the human environment.20  These five categories of activities included: 
(1) Individual surface disturbances of less than five acres so long as the total 
surface disturbance on the lease is not greater than 150 acres and site-specific 
analysis in a document prepared pursuant to NEPA has been previously 
completed.  
 
(2) Drilling an oil or gas well at a location or well pad site at which drilling has 
occurred previously within five years prior to the date of spudding the well.  
 
(3) Drilling an oil or gas well within a developed field for which an approved land 
use plan or any environmental document prepared pursuant to NEPA analyzed 
such drilling as a reasonably foreseeable activity, so long as such plan or 
document was approved within five years prior to the date of spudding the well. 
 
 (4) Placement of a pipeline in an approved right-of-way corridor, so long as the 
corridor was approved within five years prior to the date of placement of the 
pipeline.  
 
(5) Maintenance of a minor activity, other than any construction of major 
renovation or a building or facility.21 
 
Notwithstanding that Congress statutorily required these categorical exclusions to be utilized, 
BLM and other agencies have expansively interpreted a provision of the 2005 EPA that allowed 
 
20 2005 EPA at Sec. 390(b). 
21 2005 EPA at Sec. 390(b). 

 
 
7 
 
these exclusions to be rebutted only in “extraordinary circumstances,” and as a result, have rarely 
ever applied these five statutory categorical exclusions.  This is plainly not what Congress 
intended when it enacted Section 390 of the 2005 EPA, and it is entirely consistent with CEQ’s 
enduring advisory role to ensure that agencies utilize categorical exclusions such as this in a 
manner consistent with congressional intent. 
Finally, CEQ should advise agencies to continue to streamline their NEPA processes by 
continuing to programmatically review all general and/or programmatic permits such as the U.S. 
Army Corps of Engineers’ nationwide permit program. CEQ should also encourage agencies to 
revise their NEPA implementation practices and procedures to clearly and expressly state that 
existing and completed NEPA documents can be directly relied upon in reviewing and 
authorizing future actions as well as by using those existing documents to use used as part of 
tiering analyses that can often allow agencies to abbreviate their reviews without sacrificing 
analytical rigor.  Effective tiering is critical to timely reviews because it can allow agencies and 
project proponents to avoid the need to duplicate substantial portions of completed NEPA 
reviews. 
 
2. 
Adhere to the Deadline and Page Limits Congress included in the FRA 
As with multiple other provisions of the NEPA amendments Congress enacted through the FRA, 
many agencies have failed to meaningfully adopt practices and procedures to implement and 
abide by congressionally prescribed deadlines and page limits.  To ensure that these recent 
congressional efforts to streamline NEPA reviews are lawfully implemented and adhered to, 
CEQ should advise agencies to expressly include these statutory deadlines and page limits in 
their implementing procedures and practices, and to narrow as much as possible the 
circumstances under which agencies have previously justified circumvention of these deadlines 
and page limits. 
For instance, Congress, through the FRA, established a one year deadline for any agency’s 
preparation of an EA and a two year deadline for an agency’s preparation of an EIS.22  
Nevertheless, agencies frequently exceed these deadlines, often by relying on an FRA provision 
that allows an agency to consult with an applicant and, based on that consultation, provide “only 
so much additional time as is necessary to complete” the EIS or EA.23  While agencies that have 
extended their reviews using this provision of the FRA presumably did so in consultation with 
the project proponent, in many cases the project proponents may be effectively compelled to 
consent to the extensions based on agencies explicit or implicit threats that failures to do so may 
lead to disapprovals.   
CEQ should also encourage agencies to adopt practices and procedures that better allow the 
agencies to meet the FRA’s statutory deadlines.  For example, although the FRA directed 
agencies to establish procedures that allow a project sponsor to prepare “an environmental 
assessment or an environmental impact statement under the supervision of the agency,”24 few 
agencies have taken full advantage of this provision.  Thus, CEQ should counsel agencies to 
 
22 42 U.S.C. § 4336a(g)(1). 
23 42 U.S.C. § 4336a(g)(2). 
24 42 U.S.C. § 4336(a)(f). 

 
 
8 
 
ensure not only that that statutory deadlines are met, but that the agencies are utilizing all of the 
tools Congress provided to facilitate compliance with those deadlines.  
Similarly, Congress’s NEPA amendments in the FRA set page limits of 75 pages for EAs and 
150 pages for EISs but allows up to 300 pages for EISs involving “extraordinary complexity.”25  
While Congress’s use of the term “extraordinary” strongly implies that Congress intended this 
exemption to be utilized sparingly, agencies frequently far exceed the statutory page limits by 
determining that the analyses are of “extraordinary complexity.”  Thus, we believe CEQ should 
encourage agencies to develop practices and procedures that specify what constitutes 
“extraordinary circumstances,” and provide guidelines to ensure that those circumstances are 
genuinely extraordinary and rare. 
3. 
Acknowledge NEPA’s Procedural Role and Refrain from Mandating 
Particular Results 
Notwithstanding that NEPA, its legislative history, and five decades of binding Supreme Court 
case law indisputably demonstrate that the Act “does not mandate particular results, but simply 
describes the necessary process,”26 CEQ has previously directed agencies to use their NEPA 
reviews to mandate particular outcomes.  Rather than establishing processes for analyzing the 
potential environmental impacts of proposed actions, agencies were previously directed to use 
their NEPA authority to achieve administrative environmental policy objectives. But “Congress 
in enacting NEPA,… did not require agencies to elevate environmental concerns over other 
appropriate considerations.”27 
For example, agencies have previously claimed authority under NEPA to require applicants to 
mitigate impacts of their proposed projects.  This was not permissible. NEPA “does not mandate 
the form or adoption of any mitigation.”28  In fact, the Act “does not mandate particular 
substantive environmental results; rather, it focuses Government and public attention on the 
environmental effects of proposed agency action.”29  Thus, the only authority an agency has to 
require mitigation therefore must be found in the agency’s action statute.30  As the Supreme 
 
25 42 U.S.C. § 4336(a)(f). 
26 Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens Council, 490 U.S. 332, 350; See also Stryker’s Bay Neighborhood Council, 
Inc. v. Karlen, 444 U.S. 223, 227-28 (1980); Dep’t of Transp. v. Pub. Citizen, 541 U.S. 752, 756-57 (2004); Vt. 
Yankee, 435 U.S. at 558. 
27 Baltimore Gas & Elec. Co. v. Nat. Res. Def. Council, Inc., 462 U.S. 87, 97 (1983). 
28 40 C.F.R. § 1508(s). 
29 Theodore Roosevelt Conservation P’ship v. Salazar, 661 F.3d 66, 68 (D.C. Cir. 2011) (quoting Marsh v. Or. 
Natural Res. Council, 490 U.S. 360, 371 (1989)); See also Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens Council, 490 U.S. 
332, 350 (1989). 
30 See Robertson, 490 U.S. at 351‐52 (“There is a fundamental distinction, however, between a requirement that 
mitigation be discussed in sufficient detail to ensure that environmental consequences have been fairly evaluated, on 
the one hand, and a substantive requirement that a complete mitigation plan be actually formulated and adopted, on 
the other.”). 

 
 
9 
 
Court has recognized, “[o]ther statutes may impose substantive environmental obligations on 
federal agencies, but NEPA merely prohibits uninformed-rather than unwise-agency action.”31   
Given agencies’ previous imposition of mitigation mandates in the face of their plain 
impermissibility, we believe it is important that CEQ counsel each federal agency to revise its 
NEPA implementation practices and procedures to clearly state that the agency shall not require 
project proponents to implement mitigation measures.  CEQ should further advise agencies that 
project proponents may still voluntarily propose mitigation measures to reduce the anticipated 
impacts of their projects, but agencies cannot require mitigation measures as part of their NEPA 
analyses unless another applicable statute requires mitigation.   
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
AXPC appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments on CEQ’s IFR. As noted 
throughout these comments, we support this Administration’s efforts to ensure that agencies 
implement NEPA in accordance with the text of the Act and consistent with the procedural rule 
Congress intended.   
AXPC believes that the IFR represents an important opportunity to reorient agencies’ NEPA 
practices in a manner consistent with the Act’s procedural purpose and to promote efficient, fair, 
transparent, and legally defensible permitting processes.  As this Administration understands and 
appreciates, fully and effectively utilizing America’s domestic energy resources requires federal 
agencies to abandon those NEPA practices and procedures that have fostered delay and 
uncertainty at the expense of reasoned decision-making. 
Thank you again for your consideration of these comments.  If you have any questions or would 
like to discuss these comments, please feel free to contact Wendy Kirchoff at 281-386-7324 or 
wendy.kirchoff@axpc.org. 
 
Wendy Kirchoff 
Senior Vice President of Policy  
American Exploration & Production Council 
  
 
31 Methow Valley Citizens Council, 490 U.S. at 350 (comparing NEPA, which does not impose substantive 
obligations on an agency, with Section 7 of ESA, which requires agencies to insure that its actions do not jeopardize 
threatened or endangered species).

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2025-0002-87240 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2025-0002 ---
Comment by Aidan Aesoph, Cuddy, PA 
Hello! I am not happy with all this nonsense of randomly dismantling a storied institution of 
protection for our landscape. The overt refusal to consider the health, safety, and 
prosperous future of our land over the unfounded concept of short term proﬁt is malicious 
foolhardiness. 
Replacing CEQ’s regulations with guidance and leaving it to federal agencies to implement 
NEPA using their own interpretations will create confusion, inconsistency, and chaos. 
The regulations implementing NEPA should be preserved, improved upon, and centralized. 
The Trump administration must reverse its decision to repeal the regulations and make its 
priority protecting the environment and all of those who depend upon it. 
Providing guidance that says agencies should only consider “reasonably foreseeable” 
effects, rather than cumulative impacts, diminishes the quality of the environmental review 
and exposes the population unnecessarily to adverse impacts. 
There is no intelligent reason to cut down NEPA; this is only short term greed and the 
ignorance of politicians with no regard for the ecology of our country. Knock it off, thank 
you.
