
--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0018 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
40 CFR § 146.93 - Post-injection 
site care and site closure.

CFR
prev | next
§ 146.93 Post-injection site care and site closure.
(a) The owner or operator of a Class VI well must prepare, maintain, and 
comply with a plan for post-injection site care and site closure that meets 
the requirements of paragraph (a)(2) of this section and is acceptable to 
the Director. The requirement to maintain and implement an approved plan 
is directly enforceable regardless of whether the requirement is a condition 
of the permit.
(1) The owner or operator must submit the post-injection site 
care and site closure plan as a part of the permit application to be 
approved by the Director.
(2) The post-injection site care and site closure plan must include the 
following information:
(i) The pressure differential between pre-injection and predicted post-
injection pressures in the injection zone(s);
(ii) The predicted position of the carbon dioxide plume and 
associated pressure front at site closure as demonstrated in the area of 
review evaluation required under § 146.84(c)(1);
(iii) A description of post-injection monitoring location, methods, and 
proposed frequency;
(iv) A proposed schedule for submitting post-injection site 
care monitoring results to the Director pursuant to § 146.91(e); and,
(v) The duration of the post-injection site care timeframe and, if 
approved by the Director, the demonstration of the alternative post-
injection site care timeframe that ensures non-endangerment of USDWs.
(3) Upon cessation of injection, owners or operators of Class VI wells must 
either submit an amended post-injection site care and site closure plan or 
demonstrate to the Director through monitoring data and modeling results 
that no amendment to the plan is needed. Any amendments to the post-
injection site care and site closure plan must be approved by the Director, 

be incorporated into the permit, and are subject to the permit modification 
requirements at § 144.39 or § 144.41 of this chapter, as appropriate.
(4) At any time during the life of the geologic sequestration project, 
the owner or operator may modify and resubmit the post-injection site 
care and site closure plan for the Director's approval within 30 days of 
such change.
(b) The owner or operator shall monitor the site following the cessation of 
injection to show the position of the carbon dioxide plume and pressure 
front and demonstrate that USDWs are not being endangered.
(1) Following the cessation of injection, the owner or operator shall 
continue to conduct monitoring as specified in the Director-approved post-
injection site care and site closure plan for at least 50 years or for the 
duration of the alternative timeframe approved by the Director pursuant to 
requirements in paragraph (c) of this section, unless he/she makes a 
demonstration under (b)(2) of this section. The monitoring must continue 
until the geologic sequestration project no longer poses an endangerment 
to USDWs and the demonstration under (b)(2) of this section is submitted 
and approved by the Director.
(2) If the owner or operator can demonstrate to the satisfaction of 
the Director before 50 years or prior to the end of the approved alternative 
timeframe based on monitoring and other site-specific data, that 
the geologic sequestration project no longer poses an endangerment to 
USDWs, the Director may approve an amendment to the post-injection site 
care and site closure plan to reduce the frequency of monitoring or may 
authorize site closure before the end of the 50-year period or prior to the 
end of the approved alternative timeframe, where he or she has 
substantial evidence that the geologic sequestration project no longer 
poses a risk of endangerment to USDWs.
(3) Prior to authorization for site closure, the owner or operator must 
submit to the Director for review and approval a demonstration, based on 
monitoring and other site-specific data, that no additional monitoring is 
needed to ensure that the geologic sequestration project does not pose an 
endangerment to USDWs.
(4) If the demonstration in paragraph (b)(3) of this section cannot be 
made (i.e., additional monitoring is needed to ensure that the geologic 
sequestration project does not pose an endangerment to USDWs) at the 
end of the 50-year period or at the end of the approved alternative 
timeframe, or if the Director does not approve the demonstration, 
the owner or operator must submit to the Director a plan to continue post-
injection site care until a demonstration can be made and approved by 
the Director.

(c) Demonstration of alternative post-injection site care 
timeframe. At the Director's discretion, the Director may approve, in 
consultation with EPA, an alternative post-injection site care timeframe other 
than the 50 year default, if an owner or operator can demonstrate during 
the permitting process that an alternative post-injection site care timeframe 
is appropriate and ensures non-endangerment of USDWs. The demonstration 
must be based on significant, site-specific data and information including all 
data and information collected pursuant to §§ 146.82 and 146.83, and must 
contain substantial evidence that the geologic sequestration project will no 
longer pose a risk of endangerment to USDWs at the end of the 
alternative post-injection site care timeframe.
(1) A demonstration of an alternative post-injection site care timeframe 
must include consideration and documentation of:
(i) The results of computational modeling performed pursuant to 
delineation of the area of review under § 146.84;
(ii) The predicted timeframe for pressure decline within the injection 
zone, and any other zones, such that formation fluids may not be forced 
into any USDWs; and/or the timeframe for pressure decline to pre-
injection pressures;
(iii) The predicted rate of carbon dioxide plume migration within 
the injection zone, and the predicted timeframe for the cessation of 
migration;
(iv) A description of the site-specific processes that will result in carbon 
dioxide trapping including immobilization by capillary trapping, 
dissolution, and mineralization at the site;
(v) The predicted rate of carbon dioxide trapping in the immobile 
capillary phase, dissolved phase, and/or mineral phase;
(vi) The results of laboratory analyses, research studies, and/or field 
or site-specific studies to verify the information required in paragraphs 
(iv) and (v) of this section;
(vii) A characterization of the confining zone(s) including a 
demonstration that it is free of transmissive faults, fractures, and micro-
fractures and of appropriate thickness, permeability, and integrity to 
impede fluid (e.g., carbon dioxide, formation fluids) movement;
(viii) The presence of potential conduits for fluid movement including 
planned injection wells and project monitoring wells associated with the 
proposed geologic sequestration project or any other projects in 
proximity to the predicted/modeled, final extent of the carbon dioxide 
plume and area of elevated pressure;

(ix) A description of the well construction and an assessment of the 
quality of plugs of all abandoned wells within the area of review;
(x) The distance between the injection zone and the 
nearest USDWs above and/or below the injection zone; and
(xi) Any additional site-specific factors required by the Director.
(2) Information submitted to support the demonstration in paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section must meet the following criteria:
(i) All analyses and tests performed to support the demonstration must 
be accurate, reproducible, and performed in accordance with the 
established quality assurance standards;
(ii) Estimation techniques must be appropriate and EPA-certified test 
protocols must be used where available;
(iii) Predictive models must be appropriate and tailored to 
the site conditions, composition of the carbon dioxide stream and 
injection and site conditions over the life of the geologic sequestration 
project;
(iv) Predictive models must be calibrated using existing information 
(e.g., at Class I, Class II, or Class V experimental technology well sites) 
where sufficient data are available;
(v) Reasonably conservative values and modeling assumptions must be 
used and disclosed to the Director whenever values are estimated on the 
basis of known, historical information instead of site-specific 
measurements;
(vi) An analysis must be performed to identify and assess aspects of the 
alternative post-injection site care timeframe demonstration that 
contribute significantly to uncertainty. The owner or operator must 
conduct sensitivity analyses to determine the effect that significant 
uncertainty may contribute to the modeling demonstration.
(vii) An approved quality assurance and quality control plan must 
address all aspects of the demonstration; and,
(viii) Any additional criteria required by the Director.
(d) Notice of intent for site closure. The owner or operator must notify 
the Director in writing at least 120 days before site closure. At this time, if 
any changes have been made to the original post-injection site care and site 
closure plan, the owner or operator must also provide the revised plan. 
The Director may allow for a shorter notice period.

(e) After the Director has authorized site closure, the owner or 
operator must plug all monitoring wells in a manner which will not 
allow movement of injection or formation fluids that endangers a USDW.
(f) The owner or operator must submit a site closure report to 
the Director within 90 days of site closure, which must thereafter be retained 
at a location designated by the Director for 10 years. The report must 
include:
(1) Documentation of appropriate injection and monitoring well 
plugging as specified in § 146.92 and paragraph (e) of this section. 
The owner or operator must provide a copy of a survey plat which has 
been submitted to the local zoning authority designated by the Director. 
The plat must indicate the location of the injection well relative to 
permanently surveyed benchmarks. The owner or operator must also 
submit a copy of the plat to the Regional Administrator of the 
appropriate EPA Regional Office;
(2) Documentation of appropriate notification and information to 
such State, local and Tribal authorities that have authority over drilling 
activities to enable such State, local, and Tribal authorities to impose 
appropriate conditions on subsequent drilling activities that may penetrate 
the injection and confining zone(s); and
(3) Records reflecting the nature, composition, and volume of the carbon 
dioxide stream.
(g) Each owner or operator of a Class VI injection well must record a 
notation on the deed to the facility property or any other document that is 
normally examined during title search that will in perpetuity provide any 
potential purchaser of the property the following information:
(1) The fact that land has been used to sequester carbon dioxide;
(2) The name of the State agency, local authority, and/or Tribe with which 
the survey plat was filed, as well as the address of the Environmental 
Protection Agency Regional Office to which it was submitted; and
(3) The volume of fluid injected, the injection zone or zones into which it 
was injected, and the period over which injection occurred.
(h) The owner or operator must retain for 10 years following site closure, 
records collected during the post-injection site care period. The owner or 
operator must deliver the records to the Director at the conclusion of the 
retention period, and the records must thereafter be retained at a location 
designated by the Director for that purpose.

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0017 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
Established: 2015 | Employees: 17
DUNS: 117510051  | CAGE: 8LEV0
Primary NAICS Code:  236220 
Other: 237310, 237990, 238110, 
238190, 238990 
In the USA:
1044 N Tower Road
Alamo, TX 78516
Contact: Gary Clyne, CEO
gary@cadaenergy.com
T: +1 956 340 9103 (DL)
T: +1 956 601 0016
In the Caribbean:
P. O. Box 594, Calivigny
St. George’s, Grenada W.I.
Contact: Earl Charles, Vice President
T: +1 473 415 9620
P. O. Box 1023
Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago
Contact:  Tamara Bujhawan
Senior Associate
T: +1 956 601 0016
In West Africa:
No. 1 Abubaogele Street
Ahoada, Rivers State
Contact: Rev. Dr. Apia Bright Apia, 
FCEM, Associate
T: +23438736611 (DL)
In Europe:
Hagabergsv. 5 
SE-17996 Svartsjö, Sweden
Contact: Dr. Deborah Cornland, 
Associate
T: +46 (0)766 33 72 77
In the Philippines:
302 Agno Street, Ayala Alabang Village, 
Muntinlupa City, Metro Manila, the 
Philippines
Contact: Dr. Peter Pembleton, Associate
T: +63 917 8262 688
In South America and Panama:
TOP Tower Tr. A  # 1503 – Costa del 
Este, Ciudad de Panamá
Contact:  Eng. Carlos Daniel Falla, 
Associate
T:  +507 6565 0902
ARBON ASSET DEVELOPER ASSOCIATES LLC (CADA) is a certified Texas
Department of Transportation DBE, Texas HUB, and is SBA HUBZone certified.
CADA provides general contracting, design-build, construction program management,
and building services to a broad range of government, commercial, and industrial
clients. Recently we have carried out analysis and design of various projects in
several countries: the Philippines, Mongolia, Vietnam, Brazil, Ethiopia, India, Nigeria,
Kenya, Trinidad and Tobago, and Mexico. CADA has provided support to major
international funding agencies including the World Bank, UNFCCC, the Asian
Development Bank, UNDP, UNIDO, WWF, Japan Policy and Human Resources
Development Fund, InfoDev, Inter-American Development Bank, and Standard Bank.
CADA recovers, compresses, transports, stores vented and flared associated and non-
associated gases; fractionating, treating and monetizing the resultant natural gas
liquids and dry gas to:
§
Reduce wellhead emissions with closer monitoring and more timely repairs at
selected sites using detection methods and technologies such as Method 21 or
Optical Gas Imaging cameras.
§
Replace, repair, or retrofit high-bleed pneumatic controllers with low-or zero-
emitting devices.
§
Minimize emissions associated with the removal of liquids that can build up and
restrict flows at older gas wells.
CADA uses “green well completions” to capture gas and condensate that are by-
products of oil production and fracking, making the valuable hydrocarbons available
to the producer for sale.
CADA provides United Nations prescriptive mitigation and adaptation consulting, as
well as creates demand for Paris Climate Agreement Article 6 compliant exchanges
for governments and private sector industry. CADA is a member of and/or an official
observer with the following global multilateral funding organizations:
CADA navigates the complex world of financing low-carbon and energy savings
development, including accessing international sources of finance, participating in
international instruments such as Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions. It is a
proponent of and experienced at utilizing existing and new market mechanisms (e.g.,
carbon finance) to implement energy savings and low-carbon development
investments. As an experienced company, its teaming partners have over 100 years
in the energy sector construction business. In the United States, CADA utilizes a U.S.
SBA-approved Technical Assistance Agreement to provide technical support to
SDVOSB, HUBZone, DBE, WOSB and 8(a) businesses.
www.cadaenergy.com
C
UNFCCC Loan Consultant
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS
WORLD BANK GROUP 
OFFICIAL OBSERVER 

CURRENT PROJECTS
69th Supply Support Activity (SSA) Warehouse
69th Air Defense Artillery Division, Fort Hood, Texas
Client: US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
Project Value: $8.5 million
CADA provides support services required for labor, materials,
equipment and qualified supervision, and other items in
accordance with the specifications and drawings.
2
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS

CO2 has been stored in natural rock formations for periods of
over one thousand years and the United States has the
potential to capture over 27 million tons every year — roughly
equivalent to taking 5.4 million cars off the roads. The
combination of hydrogen and CCUS is important for an U.S.
CO2-neutral energy supply and climate policy now fully
supports it.
CADA understands and appreciates the versatility of the
hydrogen
molecule.
Its
main
characteristic
during
the
combustion process is that it does not produce CO2 but water.
It is perfect for supply of CO2-neutral energy for heat
production, electricity, and transportation.
Hydrogen as a commodity is also used in several chemical
processes that can be marketed to specialized off-takers in the
U.S. CADA also see great advantages in the storage of
hydrogen compared to electricity; it can be stored in various
ways, both in tanks and underground. Hydrogen can also be
transported via pipelines. This transport is possible using the
existing extensive U.S. gas pipeline network. Hydrogen can be
converted into electricity in a fuel cell, which means that the
advantages of hydrogen can also play an indirect role in the
electricity system.
Project equity requires a return on investment and return on
invested capital, a challenge for most CCUS projects. Lenders
require interest and principal repayment, and equity requires
a return on their investment, which can come in the form of
current return and terminal value upon sale or another exit.
Blue Hydrogen in combination with CCUS is a win win for both
CADA and emitters in the U.S. market space and will provide
investors with the security needed to deploy capital.
CURRENT PROJECTS
Hydrogen with Carbon Capture Use and Storage
Multiple Sites in Planning
In the past, incentives excluded CCUS projects, leaving them to
struggle to find investors. The 45Q tax credit and recent
amendments to the U.S. tax code provide a nonrefundable,
transferable tax credit to taxpayers that capture CO2 and
either store or use it.
The value of the 45Q credit is statutorily expressed in USD/MT
CO2: the value per metric ton captured and injected for
enhanced oil recovery or commercially utilized is USD35/MT
and USD50/MT for qualified storage. These enhancements to
45Q tax credit and new climate policy in the United States
support financeable projects but are insufficient to overcome
all investor risks.
If CO2 is captured from hydrocarbons before combustion takes
place blue hydrogen production is possible. This contrasts with
post-combustion CCS, where the CO2 must be filtered out of
flue gases after combustion. Large-scale production of “blue
hydrogen” with associated captured CO2 makes it possible to
reduce CO2 emissions for all hydrogen applications. Whether
the hydrogen is used as a commodity or as fuel for industry, as
an energy carrier to produce electricity or transportation, the
hydrogen infrastructure will enable the development of new
pipelines, conversion of existing gas pipelines, storage, and
filling stations. “Blue hydrogen” will therefore pave the way
for “green hydrogen”.
There are no technical barriers to effectively storing CO2
permanently on a large scale. Ninety-eight (98%) percent of
injected CO2 remains permanently trapped in the sub-surface.
3
Ammonia Plant – Trinidad and Tobago
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS

§
Commercial AC systems in government buildings;
§
Industrial Refrigeration systems in the fishing- industrial
sector; and
§
Commercial Refrigeration systems in supermarkets in the
private sector
The pilot projects developed for each refrigeration and air
conditioning (RAC) sub-sector defines technical solutions and
financial opportunities for future implementation.
Pictures are of the Gouyave Fish Market project which has a 
Bait Room, a Blast Freezing Room, a Slow Freezing Storage 
Room, a Freezing Storage Room, a Cold Storage Room, an 
Ice Machine, as well as customer areas.
Sustainable and Climate-Friendly Phase Out of Ozone 
Depleting Substance (SPODS) – Grenada, West Indies
Projects:  1) Grenada Financial Complex; 2) Ministerial 
Complex; 3) Ministry of Education Building; 4) Gouyave Fish 
Market; 5) Southern Fisherman Association, Inc.; 6) Foodfair, 
Carenage; 7) Foodfair Grand Anse;  8) Foodland, Kirani James
Client / Implementing Agency: UNIDO
Project Sponsors: European Union and the German Federal
Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ)
The objective of the contract for the project is to help define
the appropriate mitigation actions to reduce both the
consumption of ozone depleting substances (ODS) and
hydroflurocarbon (HFCs) and at the same time reduce the
energy demand and related GHG emissions. This is being done
through a series of pilot projects in which the SPODS in
Grenada aims to promote low Global Warming Potential
(GWP) refrigerant technology at a national level in three sub-
sectors, namely:
CURRENT PROJECTS
Cooling Towers
Gouyave Fish Market – Grenada
Compressors
4
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS

fire services supplying a riser in each wing. In heated areas of
the building, the dry system is being replaced with a new wet-
pipe system. Unheated areas, such as the attics and porches,
are being protected by a new dry-pipe sprinkler system. The
existing incoming fire service piping and fire department
connections are being reused.
The CADA team is furnishing all equipment, materials, labor,
and testing to provide new complete automatic wet-pipe and
dry-pipe fire sprinkler systems, as well as all asbestos and
lead-based paint testing and removal.
CURRENT PROJECTS
Building 6 – Clement J. Zablocki VA Medical Center
Milwaukee, Wisconsin - Wings A, B, C, and D
Client: Department of Veterans Affairs
CADA provides technical assistance to the 8(a) SDVOSB DBE
design-build contractor for the Milwaukee Soldiers Home
Historic District Building 6 (built in 1879 and 1890) which is on
the grounds of the Clement J. Zablocki VA Medical Center. The
project site is approximately 160,000 square feet.
This project is replacing existing dry-pipe sprinkler system
(originally installed in 1953) consisting of four (4) separate
Grenada Electricity Generation Project
St. George’s, Grenada
Client: Massy Energy Trinidad and Tobago
In 2016, the government of Grenada passed The Electricity
Supply Act. The Act’s intent to open competition for electricity
generation has attracted independent power producers and
renewable
energy
developers
to
Grenada.
CADA’s
development team is working with St. George’s University
(SGU) (a U.S.-owned company) to implement a mix of solar
photovoltaic, energy conservation measures and low emission
natural gas generation. The proposed electricity generation
and energy conservation measures are being designed to meet
SGU’s existing and future energy needs with a simple 11-year
payback. The project consists of new dual fuel generation
equipment, photovoltaic generation, new central chilling,
cooling towers, pumps, fans, lighting retrofits, desalination
equipment, pipelines and controls upgrades.
Building 6 - Wings A, B, C and D – Milwaukee Wisconsin
Wing A
Wing B
Wing C
Wing  D
5
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS

As 28-year IDIQ forms of contract, these Programmes of
Activities continue to offer opportunities for U.S. project
developers in developing countries.
CADA’s founding partners have, between them, extensive
experience in energy and climate change mitigation activities,
as well as in the development and implementation of large
assistance projects through their activities worldwide.
CADA brings concessional finance which offers opportunities
for U.S. project developers in developing countries and energy
saving carbon reducing projects in the U.S. under Article 6.2 of
the Paris Climate Agreement. These programmes bring
significant equity to a project for up to 21 years with
verification of carbon emission reductions that CADA performs
annually.
Additional services offered:
§ ASME and API Code Interpretation
§ Compression Services and Separation
§ Emissions Control Services
§ Pipeline Pigging Solutions
§ Production Optimization
§ Operations and Maintenance
UNFCCC Programmes of Activities (PoAs)
Clients: Governments of Trinidad and Tobago and the
Philippines (3 projects)
CADA registered with the UNFCCC two CO2 gas monetizing and
energy
savings
PoAs,
namely
the
Petrotrin
Oil
Fields
Associated Gas Recovery and Utilization PoA and the RE2Grid
PoA (comprising both solar and wind greenfield projects that
feed electric power into a grid).
CADA identifies and implements low-carbon and energy
conservation
investments;
and
assists
governments
in
developing enabling environments for mobilizing financial,
technical and capacity building support. The current focus of
our portfolio is the West African, Caribbean, Central, North
and South American regions.
CADA provides technical, policy and business advice relevant
to low-carbon development in all sectors.
CADA helps industry and multilateral banks provide financial
assistance
to
developing
countries
for
infrastructure
improvements and construction of facilities that deploy
renewable and low emission energy systems. It accomplishes
this by primarily facilitating technical and monetary exchanges
between the developed country industries and concessional
finance to clean tech developers.
CURRENT PROJECTS
6
UNFCCC PoA 9358 : Petrotrin Oil Fields 
Associated Gas Recovery and Utilization PoA
Philippines
UNFCCC PoA 9206 : RE2Grid PoA | ACM0002 
Grid-connected electricity generation from 
renewable sources
CADA supports the implementation of 
the Paris Agreement at national, 
subnational, and local levels
Philippines
Trinidad and Tobago
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS

FEMA Temporary Housing
New Orleans, Louisiana
Client: US Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA)
Value: $11.5 million
CADA Installed trailers and related
infrastructure.
Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill in the Gulf of Mexico – Louisiana
and Mississippi
Client: BP PLC
Project Value: $2.8 million
CADA provided up to 380 staff members that would be
assigned to cleaning the shores throughout Gulf Coast of the
United States for BP. All staff worked 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week, and were required to obtain OSHA HAZWOPER
certification.
FEMA New Orleans Cleanup
New Orleans, Louisiana
Client: FEMA
Project Value: $22 million
CADA was a debris removal subcontractor.
PROJECTS
7
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS

Hale Boggs Federal Building and Courthouse Repair and 
Alteration
New Orleans, Louisiana
Client:
U.S.
Coast
Guard
(USCG)
and
General
Services
Administration
The contract is for replacement of IT equipment horizontal
cabling
serving
and
transitioning
the
USCG
sensitive
compartmented information facility (SCIF).
8
PROJECTS
US Department of Homeland Security Starr County, Texas Border Security Project (River Wall Project)
Starr County, Texas 
Client: U.S. Department of Homeland Security
This 2019 BOOT project involved a mix of border wall construction and Port of Entry expansion and improvements, as well as the
negotiation of any easements and necessary right of way land acquisitions. CADA’s project scope: survey, report, model,
recommend, plan, design, construct, install, operate, and maintain the investment(s), and identify competitive sources of finance
for the improvements. CADA provided an expedited build (estimated completion in 400-580 days), job creation, local county buy-
in and tax credit opportunities, while avoiding division of private property and litigation, and determined current appropriated
federal funds could be redirected to other priority areas.
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS

New Orleans VA Medical Center
New Orleans, Louisiana
Client: Department of Veteran Affairs (VA)
This is a 5-year maintenance contract for the
Command Blue Light Emergency Call Box
Systems and responsibility for supplying all
parts, service, and the cost and maintenance of
the call box systems to ensure that the systems
are
fully
operational.
All
maintenance
is
completed
in
accordance
with
the
manufacturer
guidelines,
pursuant
to
VA
direction, and adheres to all directive and
records requirements per the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) Life Safety 101,
NFPA 70E, OSHA and Federal Communications
Commission (FCC).
Mississippi River and Tributaries Levee Repair Project
New Orleans, Louisiana
Client: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
CADA’s levee repair work consisted of excavating levee
material between B/L Stations 538+40 to 539+00 and B/L
Stations 545+15 to 545+75: placement of concrete slope
pavement and fertilizing, seeding, and mulching operations for
all disturbed areas. This contract included USACE contract
modifications.
PROJECTS
9
VA Medical Center – New Orleans
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS

CADA uses “green well completions” to capture gas and
condensate that comes up with oil production and fracking
making the valuable hydrocarbons available to the producer
for sale.
Stennis Space Center – Building 3205
Hancock County, Mississippi
Client: National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
CADA’s scope was the design and installation
of a fire suppressions/sprinkler system in two
containers that are used for Lithium battery
charging
and
storage,
furnishing
all
equipment,
materials,
labor,
and
testing:
Simplex 4007ES fire alarm with releasing
peripheral
equipment
and
notification
appliances, Novec 1230 gas, fire alarm cabling,
devices, and components installed on-site at
the National Data Buoy Center.
All work was performed in accordance with
applicable National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) codes.
UNFCCC PoA 9358 – Petroleum Company of Trinidad and
Tobago Limited
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
Client: Petroleum Company of Trinidad and Tobago Limited
Petrotrin Oil Fields Associated Gas Recovery and Utilization
Programme of Activities (PoA)
CADA recovers, compresses, transports, stores vented and
flared associated and non-associated gases; fractionating,
treating and monetizing the resultant natural gas liquids and
dry gas. CADA innovates, delivers benefits, and reduces costs
as a result. It is eligible under UNFCCC rules to operate in
almost every developing country, providing the services and
technology needed to find and fix methane leaks.
CADA services for this project included conducting leak
detection in the field and sourcing the infrared cameras
needed for fugitive emission surveys to oil and gas companies.
Because methane is the main component of natural gas, CADA
helps the oil and gas industry save money, get more product
to the customer, and reduce energy waste.
Working with the World Bank as an observer with the World
Bank’s Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership (GGFR), CADA
sees substantial growth and demand for its services in North
and South America, Trinidad and Tobago and West Africa.
PROJECTS
10
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS

Trinidad Generation Unlimited (TGU) 765MW Combined-
Cycle Power Plant
La Brea, Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
Client: Ferrostaal GMBH
CADA was the supplier of sandblasting, coatings and finishes
services for the modern combined cycle plant consisting of six
General Electric gas turbine-driven generators and two steam
turbine-driven generators of the 160,000 square meter site.
The TGU facility is the largest combined-cycle power plant in
the Caribbean and currently supplies approximately 50% of
Trinidad and Tobago’s electrical energy.
Fluid Catalytic Cracking Unit (FCCU)/Cat Cracker Upgrade
Pointe-a-Pierre, Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
Client: Petroleum Company of Trinidad and Tobago Limited
The project increased capacity and allowed for production of
more low-sulfur gasoline with improved octane ratings at
190,000-barrel-per-day (BBL/d) Pointe-a-Pierre refinery.
PROJECTS
TGU Combined-Cycle Power Plant
11
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS

§
LP and HP fire water, wastewater, utility and potable
water systems
§
Fabrication and installation of HDPE pipe – sub-sea line
§
Installation and commissioning of transmission and
distribution mains and water treatment plant
Mobile Offshore Production Unit (MOPU)
Southwest Soldado Field, Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
Client: Heritage Petroleum Company Limited
CADA
performed
the
pre-development
and
program
management work on this MOPU. Being portable, the platform
was designed and constructed as a feasible and inexpensive oil
producing and gas compression unit for offshore locations. It is
an efficient unit that does the same work as the conventional
permanent platforms.
\
Additional project features:
§
Petrotrin
Trinmar
Operations
(Trinidad)
New
CP#4
Compression Platform Facility – complete design, supply,
install and commission all E&I Equipment, vessels, cabling,
interconnectivity, Siemens PLC and SCADA integration
§
Mechanical services for the pre-commissioning checks and
recommissioning of flash gas compressors and vapor
recovery units
PROJECTS
NASA’s Stennis Space Center - Hancock County, Mississippi
12
MOPU – Trinidad and Tobago
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS

CADA quantifies, recovers and utilizes the methane emissions
from the uncontrolled emission sources, using UNFCCC CDM
approved methodologies (AM).
Green completion systems present a significant opportunity
for cost savings. By using portable equipment to process gas
and condensate, the recovered gas can be directed to a
pipeline and sold. In green completions, gas and hydrocarbon
liquids are physically separated from other fluids and delivered
directly
into
equipment
that
holds
or
transports
the
hydrocarbons for productive use. There is no venting or
flaring. This practice then links upstream activities with mid
and downstream efforts.
CADA implements a recommended mitigation option (or a
more-effective alternative) to the greatest extent feasible,
using criteria that may include:
§
Technical viability
§
Operationally safe to implement and operate
§
Operationally reliable
§
Economic costs and benefits
§
Materiality
(as
defined
by
the
partner
company)
maintenance/operational efficiency improvements
§
Environmental and safety benefits (e.g., enhanced safety
due to lower methane emissions; reduction of methane
emissions and associated volatile organic compounds or
hazardous air pollutants)
§
Maximization of use and/or sale of clean-burning, non-
renewable hydrocarbon resources
§
Reputational benefits
Halifax Harbour Waste to Energy Project
Grenada, W.I.
Client: National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)
CADA led a study for a USD 40 million, 50,000-square-foot
facility at the Perseverance Landfill to mix 10 tons of sewage,
40 tons of biomass with about 100 tons of solid waste, using a
gasification chamber to generate electricity. The benefits
included: reduce methane emissions and pollution from
untreated sewage affecting Grenada’s Caribbean and Atlantic
coasts and create 250 sustainable jobs. CADA’s partner’s
proprietary technology converts nearly any kind of organic
waste into clean, renewable energy with no harmful by-
products. The plant can produce enough energy to power
3000 homes and fuel for off grid sales.
CADA facilitates country-to-country engagement and sharing
of best practices with other national governments and
affiliated oil and gas companies to encourage and support oil
and gas methane emission reduction activities inside UNFCCC
KP participating developing country borders as well as
industrial countries on a commercial basis; CADA provides
technical support and capacity-building to assist customers in
evaluating their methane emissions.
CADA performs pre-feasibility and measurement studies. It
provides
assistance
with
inventory
development
and
implementing methane emission reduction projects. In order
to ensure sufficient pay back in a timely manner, suggested
parameters for use in determining the economic feasibility of
each reduction opportunity include:
§
Capital and installation cost
§
Annual operating costs
q
Total annual savings/revenue
q
Value of incremental gas sales
q
Value of incremental condensate or NGLs sales
q
Savings in purchased fuel or electricity costs when
directing gas to power generation
q
Reservoir benefits from additional gas available for
injection/gas lift
q
Other operational or maintenance savings (e.g., savings
through reduction in maintenance costs, etc.)
§
Return on Investment (ROI)
§
Payback period
§
Internal Rate of Return
§
Net Present Value
SERVICES
PROJECTS
13
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS

Vintura Silva – Director
Latin America Collaboration Office (Panama)
UN Climate Change
T: +49 1575 2575377
E: vsilva@unfccc.int
Zubin Bamji – Program Manager
Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership
World Bank Group
Washington, DC 20433
T: +1 240 888 9896
E: zbamji@worldbank.org
Deborah Cornland Ph.D. – CEO
Cornland International, AB
Expert to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
SE-17996 Svartsjö, Sweden
T: +46 8 560 40850
E: deborah@cornland.com
Rajeev Ralhan – Executive Director
PwC Clean EnergyDirect
PricewaterhouseCoopers – India
T: +91 0124 3306027
M: +9 199 1006 3775
E: rajeev.ralhan@pwc.com
George K Chu – CEO and Founder
FiO Technology Limited
FiO Lab Limited
Hong Kong | Taiwan | Singapore | China | Japan
T: +86 136 0113 2507
M: +886 970760875 (TW)
M: +8613601132507 (China)
E: george@fio.one
Daniel Rios P.E. – President
S&B Infrastructure, Ltd.
Houston, Texas 77207
T: +1 713 845-4691
T: +1 713 845-5401
E: dorios@sbinfra.com
Dr. Thackwray “Dax” Driver – CEO
Energy Chamber of Trinidad and Tobago
Point Lisas, Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
T: +1 868 355 5236
E: dax@energy.tt
Jeffrey Chen – Certified Energy Manager
Massy Energy Trinidad and Tobago
T: +1 868 355 1431
E: jeffrey.chen@massygroup.com
Ricardo Mahadeo B.Sc. – Managing Director
TOSL Engineering Limited
T: +1 868 290 9176
E: ricardo.mahadeo@tosl.com
Mr. Kishan Kumarsingh B.Sc. (Honors); M.Phil. (Chem)
Head - Multilateral Environmental Agreements
Trinidad and Tobago Ministry of Planning and Development
T: + 868 760 0885
E: kishan.kumarsingh@gov.tt
David Blanco Ph.D. – Country Manager
AB Holding Spa Colombia
T: +39 030 9942490
M: +57 350 6327408
E: david.blanco@gruppoab.com
Peter Pembleton Ph.D. – CEO
Carbonergy BCS
Muntinlupa City, Metro Manila, the Philippines
T: +63 917 8262 688
E: peter@climatebusiness.net
Sam Vale – President
Starr-Camargo Bridge Company
Rio Grande City, Texas 78582-0156
T: +1 956 487 5606
E: sfvale@starrbridge.com
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS
REFERENCES
14

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0045 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
Page 1 of 4 
 
 
March 18, 2022 
 
Re: Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration Guidance 
 
AGENCY: Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ). 
AGENCY Chair: Brenda Mallory 
ACTION: Notice of Availability, Request for Comments 
Docket No. CEQ-2022-0001 
 
 
Dear Chair Brenda Mallory, 
 
After reading through the White House Council on Environmental Quality Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration 
Guidance, I find this guidance isn’t for environmental quality.  It is instead to create another pipeline industry niche that 
the natural gas pipeline companies can capitalize on. 
 
Do you realize that the EPA doesn’t effectively measure the methane and carbon dioxide emissions from the natural gas 
supply chain?  The EPA skips over many facilities starting with 1. Well sites; 2. Processing plants; 3. Hydraulic fracturing 
waste slurry disposal; 4. Gathering pipelines; 5. Transmission pipelines; 6. End use points such as industrial, blue 
hydrogen and export; and 7. distribution pipelines to homes and businesses.  All 7 components emit tons of methane 
from each and every competing natural gas company in each segment. Did you know that each pipeline requires 
compressor stations approximately every 50 miles to push the natural gas along and that each facility emits tons of 
methane every year?  With more than 3 million miles of natural gas pipelines across the United States, how could the 
CEQ be proposing to rapidly implement more pipelines?   Especially when these new pipelines carrying carbon dioxide 
will require compressor stations and also be emitting methane emissions from every facility along the pipeline. 
 
 
High
Pressure
Fracturing
Injection
               
                              
Distribution
To homes &
businesses
Power Plants
Industrial
Export
Transmission Pipelines
MM Gals/day
Wellheads 
Pulverizing naturally 
occurring shale carbon 
sink, extracting sludge.
Separating natural
gas from sludge & 
pumping sludge into 
holding pools.
Transmission of natural gas through hundreds 
of miles of pipeline with compressor stations 
approx. every 50 miles to move gas along 
pipeline. 
Every compressor station is a major source of  
GHG & air pollutant emissions.
Natural Gas Supply Chain
Blue
H2
Shale Carbon Sink regions
Wellheads
Processing
Holding Pools
Transmission pipeline Facilities
? Tons / Year
? Tons / Year
? Tons / Year
? Tons / Year for every facility along pipeline
Natural Gas Supply Chain Methane Emissions
Holding Pools
Constant expansion of transmission 
pipelines under FERC from 
competing companies, increasing
pipelines, capacity & impact. 
EPA is finally changing rules since currently no agency has any actual methane emissions data.  Currently, it is left up to 
the few selected facilities to provide annual estimates.  There are many facilities that are not required to report 
methane emissions.  
The US has no actual data on emissions and the estimates are only a subset of all facilities.
Natural Gas is Not Clean

Page 2 of 4 
 
The EPA recognized that they don’t have the real numbers and I pointed out to the EPA in my comment 
https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OAR-2022-0001-0008/attachment_1.pdf that points out that all electric 
compressor stations are not included in the greenhouse gas emissions inventory, despite most emitting over 100 tons of 
methane per year.  I also pointed out that all of the natural gas fired compressor stations under report their methane 
emissions – to an extent, where the under reported emissions are impossible unless the turbines were turned off for 10 
years (which is highly unlikely).   
 
We don’t a good handle on current emissions and only recently has FERC and EPA modified their rules to enable more 
accurate reporting, auditing and future forecast of greenhouse emissions.  In CP21-94, the most recent draft 
environmental impact statement (DEIS) since the new FERC rules, the DEIS does not forecast growth and still skips over 
the electric compressor stations.   
 
When hydraulic fracturing was introduced for extracting natural gas, the chemicals used were hidden as proprietary and 
the details of the amount water contaminated, injected into the ground and the slurry retrieved from the ground were 
not published.  After digging around (referenced in my above mentioned comment), I found information for 2018 in the 
Marcellus Shale carbon sink region: 20 billion gallons of water were contaminated and injected into the Marcellus shale 
for just that 1 year.  10 trillion cubic feet of hydraulic fractured (which includes chemical reactions) slurry was removed 
from the naturally occurring carbon shale sink in the Marcellus Shale region just for the year of 2018.  I am sure that 
these numbers are under reported also, but these are the only numbers available.  The Empire State Building is 37 
million cubic feet.  The natural gas industry removed the volume of 270,270 empire state buildings worth of shale from 
the Marcellus Shale region in just the year 2018.  Natural gas supply increased since 2018 and that volume quantity has 
equally increased in the removal of a natural carbon sink. 
 
This is so similar to the White House Council on Environmental Quality Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration 
Guidance.  I am sure we had no idea how much shale would be removed, how much water would be contaminated and 
injected into the ground.  The only thing that was being advertised was that we could potentially become energy 
independent and fossil fuel companies could make more profit exploiting the shale carbon sink resources in the US.  The 
WH CEQ CCUS Guidance and Report do not detail the adverse effects, do not review the added emissions, do not review 
the deforestation impact, do review the land destruction, do not review the impacts of injecting carbon dioxide deep 
into the ground.  Instead, this is proffered up as the quick brute force method of maybe meeting 2050 carbon dioxide 
and methane reduction goals.  I guarantee you, it won’t help reduce methane emissions.  In fact, it will increase 
methane emissions from the additional compressor stations and a natural gas industry that is pushing to not have the 
industry reduce natural gas capacity flow.   
 
The natural gas industry, elected officials and some agencies advertise natural gas as a clean fuel.  With many states 
already switched to natural gas, it is now the behemoth greenhouse gas emissions industry with substantial 
unaccounted for methane emissions.  The EPA, with its revised rules, will improve their inventory over time, but right 
now it appears that the WH CEQ has only focused on carbon dioxide as the greenhouse gas emissions culprit.  It is one of 
the culprits and the most significant other is methane, which starts out at the time of emissions as 120 times the 
potency of carbon dioxide.  In my comment reference above, I provide the warming potential of methane for each year 
after the emission based on the IPCC AR6 data set.  This enables a person to quantify the emissions impact of methane 
and its potency each year from the year of emission.  Currently, the EPA pretends that each year’s methane emissions 
magically disappear and the new emission occurs and magically disappears the following year.  This is not correct, none 
of it disappears.   
 
 

Page 3 of 4 
 
As reported in a recent peer reviewed research paper: 
(link: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsta.2021.0104)   
"Methane emissions induce an atmospheric feedback by decreasing the hydroxyl concentration, thereby 
increasing methane’s lifetime. The strength of this feedback factor, approximately 1.3–1.4, causes the lifetime of 
a marginal emission, known as the perturbation lifetime, to be significantly higher than the lifetime of methane 
already in the atmosphere [7,8]." 
 
Methane emissions warming potential is cumulative and as this paper presents, potentially more impacting to remove 
than carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. 
 
It appears that the WH CEQ has already decided to go down the more pipelines path.  That is a severe mistake that will 
be most harmful to disadvantaged communities.  It also doesn’t alleviate the methane emissions. 
 
I urge the White House Council on Environmental Quality to please consider the livelihood of the Americans and 
consider the following recommendations: 
1. Please extend the comment period and provide public venues for engaging and educating the public. 
2. Please withdraw the Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration Guidance as a mistake from the previous 
administration that was implemented for the sole benefit of the pipeline industries with no tangible evidence 
this will have a net positive impact. 
3. Please consider engaging communities, schools and the public for creating cost effective, localized greenhouse 
gas emissions reduction and possible applications for greenhouse gas capture and altered to inert forms of 
carbon. 
4. We need to stimulate the country into conserving energy and increasing efficiency of buildings, homes and 
apartments.  Some folks can’t afford turning the heat up during the winter anymore and could really use options 
that subsidize insulating their home and or adding renewable sources of energy.  
5. Please consider partnering with the EPA and FERC Office of Public Participation to create a unified consistent 
message that focuses on the science and the science of health and impacts to the environment. 
6. We need increased visibility on the impact fro the Natural gas industry in regards to the wells (methane and 
toxic air pollutant emissions and water table contamination), the processing plants (methane and toxic air 
pollutants), the facilities along the gathering pipelines and transmission pipelines that all emit tons of methane 
and toxic air pollutants.  I urge WH CEQ to work with EPA and FERC to build out a complete visible emissions 
and contaminations of the natural gas supply chain.   
Natural gas is dirty and the supply chain emits tons of methane, carbon dioxide and many toxic air pollutants 
such as benzene and formaldehyde from each and every facility along the entire supply chain.   
7. I urge the WH CEQ to aggressively review renewable localized solutions along with hydrogen electrical storage.  
As I mentioned in my prior comment to this docket, there are 3 companies offering solutions in the US for each 
home to have a renewable sourced hydrogen electric storage, which: 
a. Available now - currently 3 companies offering safe solutions for homes and businesses. 
b. Can provide peak load offsets to the local electric grid. 
c. Increases resiliency by acting as microgrid supplier during peak times. 
d. Acts as power backup for each home and business during power outage. 
e. Directly reduces fossil fuel consumption, directly reduces electrical consumption. 
f. Hydrogen can be produced anywhere – doesn’t require massive plants nor requires transport for 
hundreds of miles.   
g. Reduces the requirement to increase grid electrification. 
h. Also provides charging and H2 refueling at the home. 

Page 4 of 4 
 
 
The more we target alternatives at the end use, the more substantially we eliminate the natural gas infrastructure and 
substantially reduce carbon dioxide, methane and toxic air pollutant emissions.  We have to move away from fossil fuels 
and rapidly enable transitions at the homes, apartments and business across the United States as soon as possible.  This 
is the green path, and it doesn’t require adding more pipelines and infrastructure just for the sake of the industries and 
unicorn economic never-ending growth. 
 
Our natural resources are limited, they are not unlimited.  Creating new economic commodities doesn’t solve climate 
change, it introduces more complex variables that so far have not been fully researched.  Big examples are the increased 
infrastructure footprint that clear cuts trees, and reduces the nature footprint so desperately needed in processing 
carbon dioxide back into oxygen.  We don’t have unlimited forests. 
 
I have reviewed the Passaic Valley County Sewerage Commission (PVSC) that wants to install two very large natural gas 
fired turbines as a standby power source.  For two years, the PVSC said it would consider viable alternatives.  However, 
the contractor they hired only knows natural gas.  Turns out they already purchased the turbines and want to install 
them in the Newark Iron District because that is close the sewer processing facility and right where the most 
disadvantaged communities live.  Adjacent to existing natural gas fired compressors and many high toxic pollutant plants 
exist.  These people are struggling and fighting for the PVSC to consider other alternatives.  How many other 
disadvantaged communities will be impacted by the proposed carbon dioxide pipelines?  It is easy to say that the WH 
CEQ will work hard to mitigate that, but the reality is, no community wants the pipeline going through their backyards.   
 
I very much appreciate your consideration.  I hope that you can bring reason to the CEQ to recognize that adding more 
nationwide pipeline infrastructure that attempts (not even certain it will work) to reduce carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere - isn’t the answer.  I hope that you can see that blindly pumping tons of carbon dioxide into the ground near 
hydraulic fracturing lines is also not a very good solution.  We have no idea the ramifications that will have short term 
and especially long term.   
 
We need smart solutions that focus on the local communities, homes, apartments and businesses.  This isn’t a use the 
big industry to fix it, because the industry caused it and will only do that again.  Check out what the Ironbound District 
community is doing (twitter feed: https://twitter.com/IronboundCC). They are trying rehabilitate abandoned properties, 
build community gardens, engage a disenfranchised youth and create some semblance of community amidst the strife 
that all of the industrial buildings and facilities impose on their community.  We need that type of survival instinct 
presented for all of the United States.   
 
The IPCC has great resources in the AR6, but they are not the answer either.  I have spoken with a data engineer working 
on the methane warming potency.  A brilliant person, but only focused on the algorithm of the data.  Do you realize that 
the turbines the natural gas pipeline companies use emit unburned methane in the exhaust?  Do you remember when 
cars used to leak gas out the exhaust pipe?  That is how old and how inefficient the turbine technology is.  Yet, if you 
read the FERC dockets, these natural gas companies market the Solar turbines as latest greatest technology, they are 
not.  We shouldn’t be chasing technology either.  We should be focusing on community driven innovation, once the 
communities understand the tipping point of where we are. 
 
Sincerely, 
Kirk Frost

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0004 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
February 25, 2022 
 
Brenda Mallory, Chair 
White House Council on Environmental Quality 
730 Jackson Place NW 
Washington, DC  20503 
Re: Request for Extension of Comment Period on the Council for Environmental Quality’s 
“Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance,” 87 Federal Register 8808 
(February 16, 2022), Docket CEQ–2022–0001 
Submitted via regulations.gov and email to Brenda.Mallory@ceq.eop.gov 
Dear Ms. Mallory: 
The White House Council on Environmental Quality (“CEQ”) announced its goals to 
“incorporate the input of communities and reflect the best available science” by providing 30 
days for public comment on its Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance, 87 
Federal Register 8808 (February 16, 2022) (“Proposed CCUS Guidance,” or “the Guidance”).1 
Yet 30 days is simply not enough time to achieve these goals. On behalf of our collective 
millions of members and supporters nationwide, the over 100 undersigned organizations request 
that you extend the period for public comment on the Proposed CCUS Guidance to at least 60 
days in order to allow for review of CEQ’s complex proposal, particularly by communities that 
stand to be most directly impacted by CCUS projects.  
An extension of the comment period on the Proposed CCUS Guidance is warranted given (1) the 
novelty of CCUS at scale and broad scope of issues raised by the proposal; (2) the risks to public 
safety, health, and the environment posed by CCUS; and (3) the tremendous public interest in 
this topic.  
(1) The novelty of CCUS at scale and broad scope of issues raised in the Proposed CCUS 
Guidance warrant an extension of time for public comment  
Thirty days is not enough time for the public to comment on guidance for an array of 
technologies, some novel and all unproven at scale, that are being proposed for massive 
deployment around the country. As noted in the CEQ Press Release, federal agencies are 
preparing to spend more than $12 billion in CCUS investments provided by the Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law, and even this investment figure fails to capture the magnitude of the 
 
1 The White House, “CEQ Issues New Guidance to Responsibly Develop Carbon Capture, Utilization, 
and Sequestration” (Feb. 15, 2022), https://www.whitehouse.gov/ceq/news-updates/2022/02/15/ceq-
issues-new-guidance-to-responsibly-develop-carbon-capture-utilization-and-sequestration/ (“CEQ Press 
Release”).  

Request for Extension -- Docket CEQ–2022–0001 
Feb. 25, 2022 
 
2 
approaching wave of CCUS projects and infrastructure proposed nationwide.2 One proposal cited 
in CEQ’s Report to Congress on Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration noted that 
CCUS on a large scale could require a pipeline network of up to 110,000 kilometers (over 65,000 
miles).3 Other proposals have calculated networks of similar scale, ranging from 29,0004 to 
120,000 miles.5 
Many members of the public have never encountered a permit or other federal action meant to 
enable CCUS before, and CEQ has never issued guidance on CCUS. It is therefore imperative 
that the public be given adequate time to educate themselves on what CCUS entails–including its 
risks to public safety, health, and environment–and then consider how the Proposed CCUS 
Guidance could impact them and the activities of federal agencies for the foreseeable future. This 
education and consideration of the Guidance cannot be completed within a mere 30 days. 
The Proposed CCUS Guidance also asks the public to consider a broad range of issues and types 
of CCUS. For example, the Guidance covers point-source carbon dioxide removal (“CDR”), 
direct air capture (“DAC”), as well as bioenergy with carbon capture and sequestration 
(“BECCS”).6 Each of these technological approaches carry their own distinct risks to public 
health, safety, and environment, as well as their own permitting and legal compliance 
requirements and complexities.7 CEQ’s own CCUS report lists ten categories of permits and 
permissions that may be required for a CCUS project, all of which could implicate the Proposed 
CCUS Guidance,8 and the Guidance itself lists fifteen statutes that may be triggered by CCUS 
projects with a federal nexus.9 The complexity of CCUS permitting and the role of CEQ’s 
Guidance require more than 30 days for the public to parse and carefully consider. 
 
 
2 See, e.g., Council on Environmental Quality, “Report to Congress on Carbon Capture, Utilization, and 
Sequestration” (June 2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/CEQ-CCUS-
Permitting-Report.pdf (noting that there are approximately 45 CCUS facilities in operation or 
development in the U.S. and over 5,000 miles of dedicated carbon dioxide pipelines) (hereinafter, “CEQ 
CCUS Report”); see also EPA, “Table of Class VI Wells Permitted by EPA”, 
https://www.epa.gov/uic/class-vi-wells-permitted-epa (listing nine pending Class VI wells as of February 
15, 2022).  
3 Eric Larson et al., Princeton University, Net-Zero America 219 (2021), 
https://netzeroamerica.princeton.edu/the-report.  
4 Elizabeth Abramson, Dane McFarlane & Jeff Brown, Transport Infrastructure for 
Carbon Capture and Storage v (2020), https://www.betterenergy.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/06/GPI_RegionalCO2Whitepaper.pdf. 
5 JJ Dooley, et al., Comparing Existing Pipeline Networks with the Potential Scale of Future U.S. CO2 
Pipeline Networks 7 (2008), https://www.pnnl.gov/main/publications/external/technical_reports/PNNL-
17381.pdf. 
6 87 Fed. Reg. 8808, 8809 (February 16, 2022). 
7 Id. 
8 CEQ CCUS Report at 30, Table 1.  
9 87 Fed. Reg. 8809. 

Request for Extension -- Docket CEQ–2022–0001 
Feb. 25, 2022 
 
3 
(2) The risks to public safety, health, and the environment posed by CCUS warrant an 
extension of time for public comment  
CEQ acknowledges that CCUS deployment “understandably raises concerns about public health 
and environmental impacts, as well as questions about who stands to benefit from the 
deployment of these systems.”10 CEQ goes on to note that, “[r]esponsible CCUS projects should 
engage communities and Tribes in co-development of projects and approaches; protect 
communities from pollution; and incorporate environmental justice and equity considerations, 
especially in communities that are already exposed to multiple pollution sources.”11 The 
Proposed CCUS Guidance also recommends a number of actions for federal agencies to take in 
order to “facilitate . . . meaningful public engagement” and “prioritize the development and 
application of environmental justice best practices” for CCUS projects.12  
Black, Brown, and Indigenous communities already overburdened by polluting industries and the 
harms from the climate crisis are being targeted for CCUS infrastructure. CEQ cannot both 
allude to the importance of meaningful public engagement and consideration of environmental 
justice concerns while offering only 30 days for public comment on its Guidance that could 
shape the future of CCUS permitting in this country.  
CCUS projects threaten the local environment and public health of frontline communities in 
areas where CCS infrastructure and storage facilities are located. The capture, compression, 
transportation, injection, and storage of carbon dioxide pose significant environmental, health, 
and safety risks that are not adequately assessed or addressed under existing regulations. Those 
risks are heightened in areas where geological formations, aquifer structures, weather patterns, 
and climate conditions increase the likelihood of leakage, rupture, and contamination due to 
subsidence, erosion, salinization, and other factors affecting the interaction of ground and surface 
waters and soils. The public–and particularly, frontline communities to CCUS deployment–must 
be given more time to share their concerns and perspectives with CEQ, as well as the best 
available science on these risks. 
Moreover, CCUS projects have consistently failed to meet their carbon dioxide capture promises. 
One Stanford study calculated the lifecycle emissions associated with CCS projects used with 
energy production from fossil fuels and found that “the equipment captured the equivalent of 
only 10-11 percent of the emissions they produced, averaged over 20 years.”13 The 28 CCS 
facilities currently operating globally have capacity to capture only 0.1 percent of fossil fuel 
emissions, or 37 megatons of CO2 annually. Of that capacity, just 19 percent, or 7 megatons, is 
 
10 Id. at 8810-11. 
11 Id. at 8811. 
12 Id. 
13 Mark Z. Jacobson, The health and climate impacts of carbon capture and direct air capture, 12 Energy 
Envt. Sci. (Aug. 24, 2019), 
https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2019/ee/c9ee02709b/unauth#!divAbstract. 

Request for Extension -- Docket CEQ–2022–0001 
Feb. 25, 2022 
 
4 
being captured for actual geological sequestration.14 The vast majority is being used to produce 
more oil, therefore calling into serious question promises of CCUS being a climate solution. By 
transitioning the transportation, industry, and building sectors to 100 percent clean, renewable 
energy through rapid electrification and the phasing out of fossil fuels and enhancing natural 
carbon sequestration through improved land management and restoration, it is possible to keep 
warming at or below 1.5° C without CCUS. Given the disagreement over whether CCUS is 
effective and to what extent it is necessary, the public needs time to meaningfully consider how 
the Proposed CCUS Guidance addresses–or fails to address–the uncertainties and failed promises 
of CCUS.  
(3) The significant public interest in this topic warrants an extension of time for public 
comment  
There is significant public interest in CCUS, including widespread opposition to the technology 
due to its failure as a climate solution and risks to public safety, health, and the environment. 
Examples of this interest in and concern about CCUS include:  
● A January 2021 shared position statement adopted by the 1,500 member-organizations of 
Climate Action Network (“CAN”) International, stating that the members “do[] not 
consider currently envisioned CCS applications as proven sustainable climate 
solutions.”15 The organizations warned that CCS “risks distracting from the need to take 
concerted action  across multiple sectors in the near-term to dramatically  reduce 
emissions.”16 CAN urged that “[a]ll government subsidies, loans, grants, tax credit,  
incentives, and financial support for fossil fuels and technologies that use or otherwise 
support the continued use of fossil fuels, including CCS, should be phased out as soon as 
possible.”17 
● The White House Environmental Justice Advisory Council’s May 2021 Interim Final 
Recommendations on Justice 40 stating that “carbon capture and storage (CCS) or carbon 
capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS)” are examples of projects that will not benefit a 
community;18 
● A July 2021 letter signed by over 500 international, U.S., and Canadian organizations 
calling on lawmakers to reject CCS.19 The letter referred to CCS as a “dangerous 
 
14 S. Garcia Freites & C. Jones, Tyndall Centre, A Review of the Role of Fossil Fuel-Based Carbon 
Capture and Storage in the Energy System (2021), at 12. 
15 CAN Position: Carbon Capture, Storage, and Utilization, Climate Action Network Int’l at 6 (2021), 
https://climatenetwork.org/resource/can-position-carbon-capture-storage-and-utilisation/. 
16 Id.  
17 Id.  
18 White House Environmental Justice Advisory Council, Interim Final Recommendations at 57-58 (May 
13, 2021), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2021-
05/documents/whejac_interim_final_recommendations_0.pdf.  
19 Center for International Environmental Law, “Carbon capture is not a climate solution” (July 19, 2021), 
https://www.ciel.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/CCS-Letter_FINAL_US-1.pdf. 

Request for Extension -- Docket CEQ–2022–0001 
Feb. 25, 2022 
 
5 
distraction” that “delays the needed transition away from fossil fuels and other 
combustible energy sources, and poses significant new environmental, health, and safety 
risks, particularly to Black, Brown, and Indigenous communities already overburdened 
by industrial pollution, dispossession, and the impacts of climate change.”20 
These are but a few examples of the groundswell of public interest in CCUS, and the significant 
concerns and questions communities have regarding its deployment. If CEQ is going to achieve 
its goal of “incorporat[ing] the input of communities and reflect[ing] the best available science,” 
it must extend the comment period on the Guidance to at least sixty days.  
We appreciate your consideration of our request, and we urge you to act quickly to extend the 
deadline to ensure the public has a full and fair opportunity to comment on these important 
issues.  
Please contact Victoria Bogdan Tejeda, Staff Attorney at the Center for Biological Diversity  
(vbogdantejeda@biologicaldiversity.org), or Ka’sha Bernard, Staff Attorney/Legal Organizer at 
the Center for International Environmental Law (kbernard@ciel.org), if you have any questions 
regarding this request. 
Respectfully submitted, 
198 methods 
350 Seattle 
350 Triangle 
Animals Are Sentient Beings, Inc. 
Beaver County (PA) Marcellus Awareness Community (BCMAC) 
Berks Gas Truth 
Beyond Extreme Energy 
Biofuelwatch 
Bold Alliance 
Breathe Easy Susquehanna County 
Breathe Project 
Center for Biological Diversity  
Center for International Environmental Law  
Center for Progressive Reform 
Central California Asthma Collaborative 
Central California Environmental Justice Network 
Central Valley Air Quality Coalition 
Clean Air Council 
Clean and Healthy New York 
Clean Energy Action  
Climate Justice Alliance  
 
20 Id.  

Request for Extension -- Docket CEQ–2022–0001 
Feb. 25, 2022 
 
6 
Climate Reality Project: Susquehanna Valley PA Chapter 
Concerned Health Professionals of New York 
Concerned Health Professionals of Pennsylvania  
Dakota Resource Council 
Dakota Rural Action 
Deep South Center for Environmental Justice 
Delaware Riverkeeper Network 
Earth Action, Inc. 
Earth Care 
Elders Climate Action 
Empower Our Future - Colorado 
Engineering Social Justice and Peace 
Environmental Concerns Committee 
Environmental Justice Health Alliance for Chemical Policy Reform 
Environmental Protection Information Center 
Fairbanks Climate Action Coalition 
Farmworker Association of Florida 
Food & Water Watch 
FracTracker Alliance 
FreshWater Accountability Project  
Friends of the Earth 
Grassroots Global Justice Alliance 
Green Amendments For The Generations 
Greenpeace USA  
Gulf Coast Center for Law & Policy 
Home Privet  
Hometown Organizing Project 
In the Shadow of the Wolf  
Indian Point Safe Energy Coalition 
Indigenous Environmental Network 
Indivisible Colorado 
Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy 
Institute for Policy Studies Climate Policy Program 
International Marine Mammal Project of Earth Island Institute 
John Muir Project  
Just Transition Alliance  
Little Manila Rising 
Locust Point Community Garden 
Loudoun Climate Project 
LWVPA 

Request for Extension -- Docket CEQ–2022–0001 
Feb. 25, 2022 
 
7 
Native Movement 
NC Council of Churches 
NC Interfaith Power & Light 
New York Lawyers for the Public Interest 
NTS Group 
Ocean Conservation Research 
Organized Uplifting Resources and Strategies 
Our Common Wealth 670 
Partnership for Policy Integrity 
Pennsylvania Interfaith Power and Light 
Physicians for Social Responsibility Pennsylvania 
Power Shift Network 
Property Rights and Pipeline Center 
Protect Northern PA 
Protect PT 
Pueblo Action Alliance 
River Valley Organizing 
Save Our Illinois Land 
Science and Environmental Health Network 
Sierra Club 
Southern Oregon Climate Action Now 
Stand.earth 
Sunflower Alliance 
Sunrise Movement 
Terra Advocati 
Texas Campaign for the Environment 
The Future Left 
Thrive At Life: Working Solutions 
Western Organization of Resource Councils 
White Rabbit Grove RDNA 
Women’s Voices for the Earth 
Zero Hour

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0011 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
March 9, 2022 
 
Comments of Blueprint 2025  
 
Re:  
Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration Guidance 
 
AGENCY:  
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ). 
ACTION:  
Notice of Availability, Request for Comments 
 
Docket No.  CEQ-2022-0001 
 
The Blueprint 2025 (“BP2025”) initiative is a collaboration among infrastructure professionals, 
leading infrastructure development companies and public and private sector project managers, 
which advances and supports plans and policies to restore the U.S. position as the country with 
the world’s best, and most efficient, sustainable and productive infrastructure.  A central tenet of 
BP 2025’s policy has always been that reform of the permitting process for major infrastructure 
projects is essential if the U.S. is to timely and efficiently modernize its infrastructure to meet the 
new needs of this century.  This truth is particularly evident now – when it is clear that new, 
innovative infrastructure is absolutely critical to the global transition to cleaner energy 
technologies and much of the new infrastructure to be permitted in the near and not so near 
future will be projects which are urgently needed in order to save the planet. 
 
This being the case, we are pleased with CEQ’s apparent recognition that, particularly in the case 
of projects intended to advance environmental objectives, there is a need to facilitate reviews to 
support “efficient, orderly and responsible deployment…” 
 
On the other hand, we are gravely disappointed with CEQ’s failure to exercise the level of 
imagination, innovation and creative thinking that must be expected from both the private and 
public sectors if there is to be any prospect of meeting carbon reduction goals and minimizing 
the effects of global warming.  We simply cannot achieve climate objectives if it takes years, 
rather than months, to conceive, develop and authorize projects.1  
 
We call your attention to the attached comments submitted in response to CEQ’s earlier notices 
regarding Updates to Regulations for Implementing the Procedural Provisions of the National 
Environmental Policy Act.  The essence of these recommendations was that CEQ must take 
advantage of modern technology—telecommunications, advanced data analysis, digitalization 
and Artificial Intelligence “to expedite NEPA reviews, enhance the ability of the Public to 
participate effectively in the process, improve the quality of the analysis conducted, and achieve 
more informed decisions and more sustainable and environmentally sensitive projects.”  
 
Now, over two years later, CEQ acknowledges the need to expedite review, analysis, and 
 
1 See, e.g. Nordhaus, The Wall Street Journal, February 17, 2022; Norman Anderson, Vision: Our Strategic 
Infrastructure Roadmap, pp. 94 et seq. 

   
 
 
approval of projects to advance environmental objectives, but suggests only 1970s, 1980s and 
early 1990s approaches to fulfill that need.  This reliance on outmoded past “solutions”, which 
have proven to be ineffective, is obviously inadequate. The private sector is expected to use “best 
available technology” in meeting environmental objectives.  We have the right to expect a 
similar level of performance from an agency whose sole mission is environmental protection. 
 
The Guidance proposed here is not good enough. It is too narrowly focused and insufficiently 
ambitious.  The planet and its people deserve better. 
 
Blueprint 2025’s member companies possess a broad range of expertise in this context, are 
committed to innovative solutions and are ready to participate fully in the concerted effort which 
is now so clearly necessary.  
 
Thank you in advance for your vigorous attention to this critical need. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gordon Arbuckle, Esq.  
 
 
 
Patricia Pietravalle 
Co-Founder, Blueprint 2025 
 
 
 
Senior Director, Blueprint 2025 
2025 Law and Policy LLC 
 
 
 
Strategic Infrastructure Performance Institute 
2550 M Street NW 
 
 
 
 
729 15th Street NW, Suite 900 
Washington, DC 20005  
 
 
 
Washington, DC 20005 
T: 202 775 2025  
 
 
 
 
T. 202..776.0990 
M: 303 619 5123 
 
 
 
 
M. 202.595.4837 
gordona123@earthlink.net 
 
 
 
ppietra@cg-la.com  
https://2025lawandpolicy.com 
 
 
 
www.sipinst.org  

729 15th St NW Suite 600, Washington, DC 20005; Tel: +1 202.776.0990; Email: isaac@cg-la.com 
February 13, 2020 
Comments of Blueprint 2025 
Re: 
Update to the Regulations for Implementing the Procedural Provisions of the National 
Environmental Policy Act 
AGENCY: 
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ). 
ACTION: 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. 
Docket No.  CEQ-2019-0003 
The Blueprint 2025 (“BP2025”) initiative is a collaboration among infrastructure professionals, leading 
infrastructure development companies and public sector project managers, which advances and 
supports plans and policies to restore the U.S. position as the country with the world’s best, most 
efficient and most productive infrastructure.  A central tenet of BP 2025’s policy is the recognition that 
reform of the permitting process for major infrastructure projects is absolutely essential if the U.S. is to 
modernize its infrastructure in time to allow development of the developing new technologies which 
will keep pace with the modernization programs of our major global competitors.  The current process is 
cumbersome, inefficient and antiquated, it needs to be modernized and brought into the 21st century 
through better use of available technology.   Our position, as set out in earlier comments on CEQ’s 
Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, is that use of modern technologies to expedite NEPA reviews 
can enhance, rather than diminish, the ability of the Public to participate effectively in the process, 
improve the quality of the analyses conducted and achieve more informed decisions and more 
sustainable and environmentally sensitive projects. 
As we have noted previously, the environmental review process has yet to embrace the efficiencies 
associated with software development and technological integration. While people who wish to 
comment on a draft EIS can now do so through online portals instead of having to mail in written 
comments, there are additional opportunities to introduce efficiencies that are currently missing and, 
more importantly, to provide immediate access to information on sustainability and environmental 
effects which is far superior to that which can be developed during the current review process. 
After reviewing the testimony presented at the recent Denver hearings, we are even more strongly 
convinced that NEPA’s problems can be most effectively addressed through the aggressive application 
of modern technologies.   For that reason, we were extraordinarily pleased by the NPR’s encouragement 
of the use of modern electronic communications technology as a primary means of public engagement 
in the NEPA process and even more pleased by CEQ’s support for the development of 
…a single NEPA application that facilitates consolidation of existing datasets 
and can run several geographic information systems (GIS) analyses to help standardize 
the production of robust analytical results.  
This invites development of a “National Environmental Database” -- a modern, digital, analytic protocol 
in which there would be opportunities to make critical information available more effectively than the 
many pages of hard copy currently characterizing the NEPA process.  

    
729 15th St NW Suite 600, Washington, DC 20005; Tel: +1 202.776.0990; Email: isaac@cg-la.com 
 
Broad use of interactive digital platforms would enable the development of a widely accessible national 
environmental data network which would limit the need to “reinvent the wheel” in environmental 
reviews of previously studied areas.  Further, it could enable creation of a comprehensive environmental 
database that would include subject-specific information capable of being drawn upon to inform future 
projects. For example, U.S. Fish and Wildlife has a rudimentary system for archiving conservation plans 
across the country. While not terribly user-friendly, it does provide landowners, developers and others a 
chance to see what’s been done before and what they might reasonably be expected going forward in 
similar situations. Artificial intelligence and networking capabilities ought to be employed to compile 
something that is (i) more informative; (ii) more comprehensive; (iii) more user-friendly; (iv)capable of 
cutting down redundancy with previous work and, importantly inclusive of essentially all relevant 
information currently available. 
 
The immediate availability of relevant information and the ability to turn around comments quickly 
should not only cut down the time and expense required for environmental reviews, but also should 
lessen the intensity of debate over what information is to be considered.  If, for example, information on 
cumulative impacts is readily available and accessible rather than requiring a lengthy study, there likely 
would be less debate as to its relevance. 
 
Also, as suggested by the enclosed information circulated at a recent global infrastructure forum, a 
database of this nature, in addition to functioning as an aid to environmental analysis, can be of great 
assistance in siting, project engineering and design, up front environmental mitigation and early “go-no-
go” decisions that can result in huge savings for all concerned 
 
We are submitting these preliminary comments early in an effort to encourage those with technical 
expertise in this area to respond to CEQ’s request for comments as to 
  
 
Whether additional regulatory changes could help facilitate streamlined GIS 
 
analysis to help agencies comply with NEPA 
 
An aggressive and carefully conceived effort to put this sort of information resource in place should be 
relatively non-controversial  and should be equally beneficial to both the public and project promoters,  
It should pay for itself in reduced NEPA analysis costs and, additionally, pay dividends thorough reduced 
delays, better projects and lower project costs.  The effort need not be held in abeyance pending final 
resolution of the many knotty questions presented at the Denver hearing but can be commenced 
immediately in order that the platform can be operable as soon as practicable and adjustable to 
accommodate variable resolutions of the key questions currently being addressed. Blueprint 2025 
strongly recommends intensive engagement and priority efforts to advance this important objective and 
is ready to assist in every way within its capability. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Norman F. Anderson 
President & CEO 
CG/LA Infrastructure, Inc.  
Founder Blueprint 2025 

Federal Assets to Accelerate American Infrastructure 
Challenge—Our natural environments are 
inadequately characterized and constantly changing; 
this uncertainty increases cost and risk to our 
infrastructure 
Our Nation is engaged in a conversation about how we will 
renew our infrastructure, the diversity of which challenges the 
imagination. Our infrastructure includes roads, railways, bridges, 
dams, levees, waterways, tunnels, pipelines, coastal facilities 
and seawalls, airfields and navigation, power generation and 
distribution, wireless and wired communications, and drinking 
water and waste water conveyance and treatment. These assets 
span both built and natural infrastructure. All of this diverse 
infrastructure is built within a natural environment that is 
inadequately characterized and constantly changing. When 
we build our infrastructure, the subsurface is largely hidden, 
and the lands, waters and habitats of the surface are constantly 
changing. In the aftermath of floods, fires, hurricanes, tsunamis, 
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, harmful algal blooms, avian 
influenza outbreaks, commodity supply chain disruptions or cost 
overruns in subsurface projects, we see too clearly that the fate 
of our infrastructure is subject to nature. 
Overcoming this challenge will require cooperation. 
Both public and private entities have shared interests in our 
infrastructure, including the capital to plan, build and operate 
infrastructure. Consequently, public and private entities must 
work together to build our future. These partnerships require the 
trust that comes from a common family of facts and forecasts  
for our Nation, easily accessible to all in a timely manner. These 
facts and forecasts are necessary to overcome natural conditions 
and shape a better future. 
Since 1879, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) has 
developed the facts and forecasts the Nation needs for its lands, 
waters, and ecosystems. Our staff work with Federal, State and 
local partners, Tribes, non-governmental organizations and the 
private sector to focus efforts where they are most needed. We: 
• Characterize our Nation’s natural assets and threats by 
sampling and mapping them;
• Monitor to provide situational awareness;
• Model to provide forecasts;
• Make these products readily available to industry, non-
governmental organizations and the public.
When these four elements are wisely focused, they can 
provide our American enterprise with the right tools for the 
challenges we face together. The Nation trusts these tools 
because we provide facts and forecasts without advocacy. In a 
natural environment that has been inadequately characterized 
and will always be constantly changing.   
The recommended USGS strategies can provide knowledge 
before national action. Below, we describe three broad 
strategies that leverage USGS assets to accelerate national 
infrastructure renewal. 
Strategy one—Facts Fully Used, the next National 
Resource 
USGS is home to a National clearinghouse of geologic, 
topographic, biologic, and hydrologic maps, digital geospatial 
data, imagery, real-time sensor data, models, and scientific 
publications that characterize our lands, waters and ecosystems. 
This breadth is a strength, if: 1) Users can easily find the 
information and 2) USGS provides an efficient, intuitive, on-line 
visualization tool that allows key infrastructure community 
stakeholders to seamlessly (across the Enterprise) search, 
discover, visualize, and access immediately relevant, application- 
ready USGS data. If these conditions are met, the USGS can 
help accelerate rebuilding of the Nation’s infrastructure by: 
• Fostering economic growth by fusing innovative
combinations of our data
• Providing one-stop connection to data and models to make
the permitting process more efficient
• Lowering the costs of finding and using data for the
infrastructure enterprise
• Providing situational awareness tools to reduce loss and
improve maintenance
• Highlight and fill national gaps in data, awareness or
forecasts that can be filled by partnerships
Why do we need an easy-to-use, “blue-marble” 
visualization tool for our data? It now costs users time and 
money to discover and ingest our scientific information or to 
duplicate it at their own expense. We can reduce these costs if 
we improve accessibility to our data, making it easier to find, 
and delivering it in formats that do not need pre-processing 
for rapid use in industry-standard software. This will also 
offer industry opportunities to fuse different data to make new 
value-added products. Working with other Federal and State 
agencies and industry, USGS could tailor this tool to support 
a number of important applications for the infrastructure 
community including accelerating permitting processes, 
developing estimates of available construction raw materials, 
performing site planning, creating national estimates of existing 
infrastructure such as miles of interstate, numbers of airports, 
bridges, etc. Working with industry to develop these types of 
applications would highlight the availability and usefulness of 

 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
U.S. Geological Survey 
the available data as well as providing 
partnership opportunities between USGS 
subject matter experts and other  
partners. A “blue-marble” visualization 
tool that links to data would provide the 
Nation with a rich set of authoritative 
data provided in “plug and play” 
application-ready form so that it can 
easily be ingested and used. 
For instance, what if any user 
could overlay user-selected maps of our 
Nation’s wildlife habitat over existing 
infrastructure (see callout 1)? 
 
Strategy two—Partnerships to 
accelerate delivery of Federal 
assets with technology 
New technologies like digital project 
models (i.e., digital “twins”), Virtual 
Reality, Machine Learning/Artificial 
Intelligence, Uncrewed Aerial Systems 
(UAS) and many more are reducing 
infrastructure project costs (e.g., 10-20%) 
and leading to better outcomes across 
the enterprise. These same tools offer 
the possibility of creating improved, 
more efficient ways to map, monitor 
and model our Nation’s lands, waters 
and ecosystems. These products will 
accelerate the Nation’s infrastructure 
enterprise if they are easily accessible via 
a centralized portal, and technologically 
up-to-date. But we need partnerships with 
industry, non-governmental organizations 
and other Federal Agencies to pursue 
these opportunities, and we need modest 
investment to modernize our technology 
infrastructure so that it works more 
seamlessly with that of users 
 USGS is looking to develop partnerships 
in the following areas to accelerate our 
national infrastructure enterprise: 
 
Raw materials and supporting 
industries data 
• Use high-resolution topography (3D 
Elevation Program) and new geologic 
mapping to re-map key portions of 
the Nation for industrial minerals 
and materials (e.g., sand, gravel, 
aggregate, cement, asphalt) 
• Use new geological and geophysical 
data (Critical Minerals Initiative) to 
look beneath the surface and report 
back to the Nation on critical and 
strategic minerals (e.g., lithium) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Optimizing where and how to build 
• Make value-added maps from our 
lidar and other geospatial products for 
planning and construction (industry), 
while providing base landscape data for 
digital twins 
• Map three-dimensional geology at 
a scale necessary to inform site and 
design foundations for new and existing 
facilities, waste-disposal sites and 
construction projects. 
• Integrate analysis-ready remote sensing 
data into Land Change Monitoring, 
Assessment, and Projection (LCMAP) 
for management of natural resources and 
an improved understanding causation of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
historical land change to develop better 
land change forecast models, hazard 
vulnerability/consequence assessments, 
and water resources planning. 
• Provide next-generation maps of 
flood extent and recurrence interval 
estimates 
• Map, monitor and model sediment 
supply to extend the life of reservoirs, 
forecast foundation scour, provide 
data for new ones, and keep Nation’s 
nearshore waters blue, not brown 
• Map the distribution of critical plants, 
animals and habitats across space and 
time to facilitate project design and 
planning 
What if anyone could display wildlife habitat over infrastructure with 
a few clicks? 
Wind turbine locations across 
the Nation (green). Inset shows 
intersection of individual wind 
turbines (dots) in Wyoming with 
golden eagle nest-site habitat 
quality. Green and blue colors 
show best potential eagle 
habitat and wind potential, with 
pink showing zones of greatest 
potential conflict. Underlying 
map from Tack & Fedy (2015) PLoS ONE: e0134781 and turbine 
locations from Hoen et al. (2018) 
US Wind Turbine Database V1.0. 
Courtesy Jason Tack, 2018. 
Wind turbine visualization from 
https://eerscmap.usgs.gov Cheyenne
 Laramie
 Green River
 Rawlins
 Douglas
 Casper
 Riverton
 
WY OMING  Gillette
 Cody
 

CANADA 
Pacific 
Ocean 
0 
U.S. Department of Interio
U.S. Geological Survey 
Real-time sensors and monitoring 
for situational awareness 
• Deploy networks of expendable sensors 
for real-time awareness of hazards 
• Deliver real-time situational awareness 
of species to minimize environmental 
impact, promote human safety, and 
expedite permitting 
• Increase situational awareness of 
water for transport and hazards 
using next-generation sensors and 
telemetry 
• Delivery of near-real-time satellite and 
UAS remotely-sensed data to support 
land and natural resource management 
and disaster response/recovery efforts. 
Forecasting and risk models for 
infrastructure design 
• Provide water quantity and quality 
assessments for water supply forecasts 
• Map and model geologic hazards 
and estimate risk, with the goal of 
optimizing infrastructure placement 
(tsunami, earthquake, flooding, coastal 
erosion, landsliding, sediment pollution) 
• Map and forecast processes in extreme 
and rapidly-changing environments 
(e.g., permafrost terrain, arid lands, 
coasts and estuaries) to provide risk 
for infrastructure planning 
• Provide ecosystem data and forecasts 
that would accelerate ecotourism and 
lead to new business opportunities 
(e.g., carbon storage, coral reef and 
fisheries recovery) 
• Forecast species activity for 
siting and real-time operations of 
infrastructure (e.g., dam release to 
support fish migration, maximizing 
turbine production during migration, 
head-up notifications of animal activity 
for transportation 
• Anticipate the demands of evolving 
technology and infrastructure to 
identify the energy and mineral 
resource needs of the future 
• Explore new models for sustainable 
domestic mining and energy resource 
development 
 
 
 
 
Geospatial products help address planning and 
construction scenarios 
Smart infrastructure planning and design begins 
with accurate topography. High resolution elevation data 
provides the foundation for infrastructure planning and 
design, be it earth-moving operations and estimates, or 
improving resiliency to environmental conditions. Relying on 
an authoritative source to deliver high-quality data free to all 
users reduces the need for industry or States to duplicate 
collection for individual projects, following a Map It Once – 
Share it Many Times philosophy. 
The planned Atlantic Coast Pipeline provides one 
example. High-resolution elevation data from the 3DEP 
program is available for it (right) without a license or 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pacific 
Ocean 
 
 
 
 
N 
 
 
0 
250 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
500 KILOMETERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Atlantic 
Ocean 
 
 
 
 
 
Map shows geographic 
extent of existing and 
ongoing data acquisition 
3DEP Specifications. 
cost, adheres to a strict community- 
driven specification, and can be used for 
a wide variety of engineering, design, or 
construction purposes with no additional 
investment. Because of the open nature 
of the data, multiple contractors and firms 
can all jointly benefit without duplicative, 
inconsistent, and costly additional 
collections. 
 
Ask us about: 
0 
250 MILES 
 
 
  RUSSIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ALASKA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pacific 
N   
Ocean 
920 KILOMETERS 
0 50 100 KILOMETERS 
 
 
 
 
EXPLANATION 
Infrastructure Projects with 3DEP 
Quality Data 
 
 
 
Existing or in-progress IfSAR (AK) data 
that meet 3DEP specifications 
projects that meet current 
 
 
3DEP Specifications: 
• Quality level 2 or better 
lidar data (IfSAR in AK)2 
• Publicly available 
2as defined in USGS Lidar Base 
Specification v1.2 
 
Sources: 
3DEP FY18 Broad Agency Announcement 
USIEI data from March 2018 
 
 Puerto Rico/US Virgin Islands 
 
 
N 
0 50 100 KILOMETERS 
• Existing and planned geospatial 
products will help address planning and 
construction scenarios 
460 MILES 
0 50 MILES 
No data available that meet 3DEP 
specifications 
0             50 MILES      Caribbean Sea 
Infrastructure projects courtesy of CG/LA 
nfrastructure Projects without 3DEP 
Quality Data 
Visit the US Interagency 
Elevation Inventory (USIEI) at: 
http://coast.noaa.gov/inventory 
For more on the 3D Elevation 
Program (3DEP) visit: 
http://www.nationalmap.gov/3DEP 
3D Elevation Program: Lidar and IfSAR (AK) Coverage of Infrastructure Projects 
 (July 2018) 
As of 07/11/2018 
46
0 
Exisiting or in-progress lidar data that 
meet 3DEP specifications
HAWAII 
MEXICO N
3DEP Statis: Atlantic Coast Pipeline 
U.S. Department of Interior 
U.S. Geological Survey 
0 
0 
40 
EXPLANATION 
Approximate Pipeline 
Route 
Pipeline Route with 
3DEP Quality Data 
Pipeline Route without 
3DEP Quality Data 
In-Progress and 
Existing 3DEP 
Quality Lidar Data 
Planned FY18/19 3DEP 
Quality Lidar Data 
Atlantic 
Ocean 
N 
80 KILOMETERS 
40 MILES 
As of June 2018 

191 
Infrastructure designs to minimize maintenance costs 
and maximize safety: Wyoming Example 
Satellite tracking of big game migrations is leading to the 
identification of locations where highway crossing structures can 
be optimally located. In 2012, two overpasses and six underpasses 
where constructed at the Trappers Point bottleneck near Pinedale, 
WY, where mule deer and pronghorn caused vehicle collisions 
while migrating across Hwy 191 each spring and fall. The new 
highway infrastructure project was used by over 60,000 mule deer 
and 26,000 pronghorn within the first three years, reducing wildlife- 
vehicle collisions by 80 percent. Map and graphic from Wild 
Migrations: Atlas of Wyoming’s Ungulates (in press) OSU Press © 
2018 University of Wyoming and University of Oregon. 
 
Ask us about: 
• Ecosystem models and data accelerate ecotourism and lead 
to new business opportunities (e.g., coral reef and fisheries 
recovery) 
 
 
 
Securing the Future Supply of Industrial Minerals for 
Infrastructure 
Industrial minerals such as sand, gravel, and crushed stone 
are the largest nonfuel mineral commodities produced in the United 
States and in the world, and they constitute the “critical minerals” 
for infrastructure projects. Geophysical surveys can assist the 
exploration for and characterization of industrial mineral deposits. 
Airborne, surface, and borehole geophysical methods can be 
faster and less expensive than extensive drilling and trenching. In 
addition, these surveys can provide three-dimensional information 
on the spatial and depth extent of deposits. In addition, intrusion and 
damage to the environment are limited when geophysical surveys 
are used as part of comprehensive exploration and development 
programs. At right is a map derived from state-of-the-art airborne 
gravity surveys showing relative thickness and lateral extent of sand 
deposits in the San Luis Basin of Colorado. Surveys of this type can 
delineate industrial mineral deposits regardless of vegetation and 
often through shallow cover by deposits of little or no economic 
interest. In the figure, deposit thicknesses range from ~400 meters (E 
~10) to more than 2000 meters (E < -20). (Drenth, B.J., Grauch, V.J.S., 
Ruleman,C.A., and Schenk, J.A., 2017, Geosphere, v. 13, no. 3, p. 
974–990,doi:10.1130/GES01439.1.) 
 
Ask us about: 
• Onshore and offshore geological and geophysical mapping, 
coupled with targeted mineralogical and geochemical studies, 
will help identify new sources of high-quality construction 
materials and provide the foundation for future project 
development 
• Characterization and assessment of these resources will also 
support infrastructure projects dedicated to improving resilience 
and accelerating recovery from future infrastructure-damaging 
hazards 
Overpass crossings 
Underpass crossings 
Mule Deer    12,889 
47,098 
Pronghorn    22,710 
2,546 
2012 
Wildlife Mortality before and after Crossing Structures 
2007 
0 
2.5 
5 KILOMETERS 
0 
2.5 MILES 
–20 
–25 
37°40’ 
30 
20 
10 
5 
0 
–5 
–10 
–15 
37°45’ 
37°50’ 
105°30’ 
105°35’ 
EXPLANATION 
            Suspected fault zone from AGG 
 Blanca piedmont fault 
Suspected fault zone from 
Range-front fault mapped at 
magnetics 
surface 
Pinedale Anticline 
Project Area 
Daniel 
Pinedale 
Trappers Point 
overpass 
189 
Daniel 
Junction 
352 
Daniel 
overpass 
1 MILE 
0 
Pinedale Anticline 
Project Area 
0 1 2 KILOMETERS 
Daniel 
Pinedale 
Daniel 
Junction 
EXPLANATION 
Wildlife Deaths 
Road Symbols 
Mule deer 
Fence 
Pronghorn 
Wild life overpass 
Elk 
Wildlife underpass 
Moose 
Sand Creek 
structural high 
dunefield 
structural 
high 
structural 
high Hwy191Crestone Section
PHOTO BY JOE RIIS Zapata SectionS dunefield margin

GS Science shows unintended benefits of 
wastewater infrastructure upgrades 
The Nations publicly-owned wastewater treatment 
plants are first-world components of our infrastructure. 
They are designed to protect public and wildlife health by 
removing contaminants and pathogens from domestic and 
industrial waste sources and in some cases from storm sewer 
discharge. According to USEPA, an estimated $271 billion is 
needed to meet current and future centralized wastewater 
treatment demands including facility treatment process and 
maintenance of over 800,000 miles main pipes and 500,000 
miles of later pipes that connect to homes and businesses. 
Our wastewater infrastructure was originally designed 
to destroy pathogens and minimize the demand for oxygen 
in surface water bodies that receive effluent discharges. 
In recent years, communities have begun to see the 
negative impacts of other contaminants, including nitrogen, 
phosphorus, pharmaceuticals and estrogens. While there 
is an emerging municipal effort on costly infrastructure 
improvements to remove nitrogen and phosphorus, mitigating 
pharmaceuticals and estrogens could be even more costly. 
USGS science now shows that wastewater treatment 
infrastructure upgrades for nitrogen and phosphorus may also 
mitigate pharmaceuticals and estrogen pollution. Research 
done at Boulder Creek in Boulder, CO, showed that mixtures 
of natural and synthetic 
estrogens and other 
similar chemicals 
discharged from the 
wastewater treatment 
plant had adverse 
effects on the endocrine 
systems of individual 
fish and were linked 
to a change in the 
ratio of female to male 
fish in Boulder Creek 
downstream of their 
wastewater discharge. 
However, Boulder Waste Water Treatment Plant subsequently 
upgraded treatment of 15 million gallons of effluent discharged 
per day to meet State requirements for nutrient reduction. 
Although the $45,000,000 upgrade was designed to increase 
capacity and reduce nutrients only (i.e. it was not designed to 
remove estrogens), it serendipitously decreased estrogen-like 
substances in the effluent and reduced endocrine disruption 
in both laboratory and wild fish. This unintended benefit of a 
large public investment in infrastructure improvements would 
not have been known without the science provided by the 
USGS. Similar results would be expected elsewhere in the 
United States. 
 
 
Leverage Real-Time River Monitoring systems 
for Inland-Waterways Navigation 
The USGS operates more than 8,200 real-time 
streamflow monitoring stations that tell the Nation 
when floods are coming, their incoming water supply, 
and many other needs. This national asset can be 
leveraged to yield more value. Along the Nation’s inland 
waterways, USGS is beginning to use this network to 
make navigation safer and more efficient. Navigation 
hazards include water velocity and depth and their rate 
of change. These affect how vessels steer, stay afloat, 
and avoid colliding with expensive infrastructure like 
bridges and locks. The USGS is conducting a pilot effort 
to add critical sensors and data streams to a few new 
and existing monitoring sites, and feeding the data to the 
US Army Corps of Engineers, and to private navigation 
software providers to reduce the threat of damage and 
impassible to our navigable rivers and associated locks, 
dams, and levees. Resiliency within the Nation’s inland- 
waterway systems is critical to the well-being of the 
Nation. This is an example of where federal resources 
can be leveraged to build that resiliency. Similar 
opportunities to leverage USGS streamgaging include 
monitoring sedimentation and nitrification of reservoirs 
and waterways, adding short-term monitoring networks 
for coastal and inland flood warning; and extending the 
observed monitoring network using national streamflow 
models. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ask us about: 
• Surface and ground water quantity and quality assessments 
will help estimate future water supply 
• Next-generation maps of flood extent and recurrence interval 
estimates will save lives and dollars 
MA 
RI 
CT 
NJ 
DE 
MD 
DC 
NH 
VT 
PR-VI  
AK  
HI 
Wastewater Treatment Facility 
Boulder Creek 
Fish Exposure 
Laboratory 

Forecast Tools for Natural 
Hazards 
USGS uses its science to create tools to 
forecast the effects of natural hazards, 
including earthquakes and coastal 
storms. Two examples below highlight 
this capability. 
 
1. 
Shakecast: A near-real time, 
on-line tool to estimate earthquake 
damage to infrastructure 
 
Earthquake shaking can damage 
much of our national infrastructure. 
A USGS earthquake hazard map (to 
right) shows high-shaking hazard 
as hot colors. The USGS operates a 
nationwide network of seismometers 
that record and telemeter earthquake 
data in near-real time. We use this 
data, leveraged with models of damage 
based on past earthquakes, to provide 
the Nation with maps of potentially 
damaging shaking. These ShakeMaps 
are used for emergency response, loss 
estimation, and public information. 
To forecast potential damage to 
infrastructure, the USGS created 
ShakeCast, an automated on-line 
tool that generates potential damage 
 
 
2. 
A Coast Storm Modeling System 
(CoSMoS) to forecast coastal 
flooding maps 
 
The Coastal Storm Modeling 
System (CoSMoS) is a dynamic tool 
to forecast coastal flooding due to 
storms and sea level rise over the 21st 
Century. CoSMoS integrates models of 
 
 
 
 
assessment notifications, facility 
damage maps, and other Web-based 
products for emergency managers and 
responders. The image above shows 
State transportation departments using 
ShakeCast, with the number of bridges 
and overpasses evaluated in each state 
for any domestic earthquake. With 
ShakeCast, they can automatically 
determine the shaking value at their 
facilities, set thresholds for notification 
of damage states for each facility, 
and then automatically notify (by 
 
 
long-term coastal erosion to beaches 
and cliffs with the detailed physics 
of coastal storms (e.g., tides, waves, 
river discharge, and storm surge) and 
high-resolution topography to estimate 
local flooding. It allows communities to 
choose from a range of storm scenarios 
(daily conditions, annual storm, 20-year- 
and 100-year-return intervals), and 
 
 
 
 
pager, cell phone, or email) specified 
operators and inspectors within their 
organizations who are responsible for 
those particular facilities. ShakeCast is 
in wide use in other sectors, including: 
Hospitals (U.S. Department of Veterans 
Affairs), Critical Facilities (U.S. Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission), Schools 
(Los Angeles United School District), 
Infrastructure and Dams (U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Services), Energy (e.g., Puget 
Sound Energy), and Businesses (e.g., 
Walmart), among others. 
 
 
sea-level rise scenarios. This allows 
users to manage and meet their own 
planning horizons and specify degrees 
of risk tolerance. 
CoSMoS modeling results have 
been used by a large number of federal 
and state partners as well as local 
communities throughout California. In the 
San Francisco Bay area and southern 
California regions, 14 municipalities, 
including the cities of San Francisco and 
Los Angeles, and 7 coastal counties (e.g., 
Marin, San Mateo, San Francisco, and 
Los Angeles) are actively using CoSMoS 
for local coastal planning efforts. The 
major utilities - Pacific Gas & Electric, 
Southern California Edison, San Diego 
Gas & Electric and the Los Angeles 
Department of Water & Power - are 
similarly using CoSMoS to assess their 
assets’ vulnerability to sea level rise and 
coastal storms. CoSMoS also supports 
a number of state agencies and federal 
partners. 

USGS Land Resources satellites show areas that 
help make floods 
Floods take lives and damage regional economies. The 
images at right show 2017 Hurricane Harvey inundation (blue) 
in the Houston area of Texas, and impervious surfaces (pink 
& purple) that generated rapid runoff during Harvey’s intense 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rainfalls. Under these layers, high-resolution topography shows 
levees, floodplains and building footprints. Fusing these USGS 
layers shows the impact of levees on inundation limits, and the 
source for some of that water, impervious surfaces where water 
runs rapidly off during rainfall. The USGS Land Resources Mission 
has maps of impervious surfaces across the Nation, collected 
by rigorous back-analysis of satellite imagery since the 1980s. 
When these layers are fused with high-resolution USGS 3DEP 
topography, they can be used to show where to expect rapid runoff 
from intense storms like Hurricane Harvey. Combined with effective 
flood forecasting, this analysis makes a case for where new flood 
infrastructure will save lives and slow the spiraling costs of flood 
damages to the Nation. Maps of impervious surface changes 
over the last four decades also make a business case for where 
wastewater infrastructure will likely need upgrading. 
 
Strategy three—Natural Disaster Risk Reduction 
Natural disasters focus the attention of the Nation on restoring 
infrastructure through Supplemental bills that fast-track action in a 
reduced regulatory environment. Rapid response coupled with the 
emotional impact of disasters on individuals and communities can 
challenge wise use of funds. In partnership with other government 
agencies, industry, and communities, USGS assets can help guide 
post-disaster infrastructure investments to deliver durable reductions 
in long-term costs and gains in economic prosperity. We can help the 
Nation be more resilient to future disasters by delivering: 
 
• Scientific data, information, and forecasts of natural disasters 
(likelihood and consequences) to support regional disaster 
planning and risk reduction efforts. 
• Rapid post-disaster reconnaissance of infrastructure damage using 
in-situ monitoring and remotely-sensed data from satellites and 
airborne platforms. 
• Assessments and inventories of raw materials required for 
construction, maintenance, and repair of infrastructure and 
associated risk-reduction measures. 
• A trusted team of experts in the physical and biological sciences, 
supporting emergency managers, first responders, and those 
involved in long-term recovery efforts with the interpretation of 
scientific information about the natural environment (hazards, 
materials, and fish and wildlife). 
 
Implementing these assets for fast-moving natural disasters is 
challenging for our Agency, and for others. In some cases, the 
USGS scientific infrastructure the Nation depends on to manage risk 
is damaged or inoperable. For instance, in Puerto Rico, our Water 
Mission assets were largely destroyed during the 2017 hurricane, 
limiting our ability to map, monitor and model the damage. At 
Kilauea, our Hawaii Volcano Observatory has been compromised by 
the 2018 eruption. Recent experience indicates that: 
 
• National assets managed by the USGS may be overlooked during 
disaster response and recovery, even though many are frequently 
leveraged by FEMA. 
• Our assets (facilities, equipment, and people) are often exposed 
and at risk or compromised by the disaster (e.g., Kilauea, Puerto 
Rico), frequently due to their association with studying/monitoring 
the hazards themselves. 
• Delayed or disrupted asset and staff deployments result in lost 
opportunities for rapid delivery of data and information to aid 
response and recovery efforts. 
Hardin 
0 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.4 KILOMETERS 
0.2 MILES 
Jasper 
Newton 
5 MILES 
10 KILOMETERS
5 
0 
0 
Jefferson 
Orange 
Bridge City 
100% 
50% 
Inundation Extent 
Percent Impervious Surface 
0% 
EXPLANATION N

surfaces, 
 
 
 
A national plan to deploy infrastructure to save lives, 
money, and drive the economy. 
Infrastructure can save lives, property 
and industry from natural disasters. 
Hurricane Harvey’s intense rains flooded 
parts of Houston in 2017 (above, and 
right). USGS field observations and high- 
resolution 3DEP topography helped map 
the exact pattern of flooding (blue in upper 
right). Sharp boundaries between blue and gray show where levee 
infrastructure confined flood waters. Below, images of the pre-flood 
community draped over the same high-resolution topography. What if 
we could have mapped floodwater extent before the heavy rains of 
Hurricane Harvey? 
USGS brings the ability to map likely flood extent across the 
Nation using high-resolution topography, maps of impervious 
our network of sensors, and the record of past floods extracted 
from their deposits. Based on our new high-resolution topography, a 
national set of maps for areas that are vulnerable to flooding would 
guide the design and deployment of hard and soft infrastructure. This 
Federal science would provide momentum for local communities to 
begin financing and building the infrastructure that could save them. 
Could we do this for other hazards? Floods are one of the 
many of natural hazards that bring change. Earthquakes, volcanic 
eruptions, coastal erosion, landslides, sinkholes, droughts and other 
rapid changes also challenge our national enterprise. In partnership 
with other Federal Agencies and NGOs, USGS can bring mapping, 
monitoring and modeling to create maps that will allow communities 
to begin planning infrastructure to save lives and the economy. 
 
We have begun to solve these challenges with partnerships and 
planning. The post-disaster infrastructure challenge offers us a 
focused topic with an engaged constituency. USGS should: 
 
• Develop shovel-ready plans to replace or harden the key sci- 
entific infrastructure guiding the Nations’ response to disasters 
(facilities, labs and sensor networks) 
• Reduce deployment response times for staff and assets with 
activation-ready plans coordinated with other federal and non- 
federal government agencies. 
• Focus partnerships with primary Agencies and industries that 
rebuild infrastructure after disasters to understand what data 
gaps are most critical and how to deliver that information in 
timely ways. 
 
Summary 
We have illustrated a National opportunity to work 
together to accelerate infrastructure development, use, 
maintenance and renewal, using existing and aspirational 
Federal assets. The current USGS is resource- limited, and our 
existing mapping, monitoring and modeling 
products are ripe for technology acceleration. New technologies 
offer capabilities that will save costs and lead to better outcomes 
for industry, non-governmental organizations and the public. 
This paper is the start of a conversation with these partners to 
inform our efforts and lead to better outcomes. 
To begin this conversation, contact: 
 
Jonathan Stock, Ph.D., Director of USGS National Innovation 
Center, jstock@usgs.gov 
Mike Tischler, Ph.D., Director of National Geospatial Program, 
mtischler@usgs.gov 
Colin Williams, Ph.D., Director of Geology, Minerals, Energy, 
and Geophysics Science Center, colin@usgs.gov 
Mike Focazio, Ph.D., Program Coordinator: Toxic Substances 
Hydrogeology and Contaminant Biology Programs, 
Environmental Health Mission Area, mfocazio@usgs.gov 
Jake Weltzin, Program Manager: Status & Trends Program, 
Executive Director: USA National Phenology Network, 
jwelzin@usgs.gov 
Peter Doucette, Ph.D., Deputy Program Coordinator: National 
Land Imaging Program, pdoucette@usgs.gov 
Keith L. Knudsen, Deputy Director Earthquake Science Center, 
kknudsen@usgs.gov 
Mark Landers, Ph.D., National Streamgage Network 
Coordinator, landers@usgs.gov 
John E. Brown II, Ph.D., Reston Branch of Management 
Services, jebrown@usgs.gov 
 
 
Bridge City 
Bridge City 
EXPLANATION 
High Water Marks 
EXPLANATION 
High Water Marks 
Inundation Extent NN

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0026 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
Page 1 of 3 
 
March 16, 2022 
 
Brenda Mallory, Chair 
White House Council on Environmental Quality 
730 Jackson Place NW 
Washington, DC 20503 
 
Re: Request for Extension of Comment Period on the Council for Environmental Quality’s 
“Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance,” 87 Federal Register 8808 
(February 16, 2022), Docket CEQ–2022–0001 
 
 
Dear Ms. Mallory: 
 
The White House Council on Environmental Quality (“CEQ”) announced its goals to 
“incorporate the input of communities and reflect the best available science” by providing 30 
days for public comment on its Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance, 87 
Federal Register 8808 (February 16, 2022) (“Proposed CCUS Guidance,” or “the Guidance”).1 
We are writing to request a 60-day extension on the comment period for the Proposed CCUS 
Guidance to allow for review of CEQ’s complex proposal. We share concerns expressed in a 
letter submitted by Center for Biological Diversity and Center for International Environmental 
Law on February 25, 2022 and signed by nearly 100 organizations representing millions of 
members.2 
Our organizations represent communities in Texas that stand to be the most impacted by 
onshore and offshore carbon storage, carbon dioxide pipeline expansion, industrial chemical 
processing for CCUS purposes, and utilization of carbon dioxide for enhanced oil recovery. We 
need more time to gather information and articulate our concerns on the Proposed CCUS 
Guidance.
 
 
1 The White House, “CEQ Issues New Guidance to Responsibly Develop Carbon Capture, Utilization, 
and Sequestration” (Feb. 15, 2022), https://www.whitehouse.gov/ceq/news-
updates/2022/02/15/ceqissues- 
new-guidance-to-responsibly-develop-carbon-capture-utilization-and-sequestration/ (“CEQ Press 
Release”). 
2 Council on Environmental Quality. Mar 2, 2022. Comment from Center for Biological Diversity and 
Center for International Environmental Law. Accessed on March 16, 2022. Retrieved from: 
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/CEQ-2022-0001-0004 

Page 2 of 3 
Request for Extension -- Docket CEQ–2022–0001 
March 16, 2022 
First, Texas produces more oil and gas than any other state in the nation. To the extent that 
CCUS results in increased “utilization” or enhanced oil recovery in the Permian Basin,3 our 
communities can expect a massive expansion of pipeline miles in Texas,4 creating widespread 
habitat destruction, eminent domain disputes, and potential environmental contamination issues. 
Texas is also known to have colocation of salt aquifers in oil and gas development zones, 
creating the ideal chemical conditions for carbon capture and storage (CCS). Similarly, the Texas 
Gulf Coast is home to salt domes that are also considered ideal locations for CCS. 
Unsurprisingly, many of our communities in the Texas Gulf Coast, the Eagle Ford Shale, and the 
Permian Basin regions are predominantly people of color, low income, and/or are already 
overburdened by heavy industrial activity and poor state oversight. Texas will be 
disproportionately affected by CCUS strategies, and our communities deserve ample time 
to comment and propose strategies that will reduce potential negative impacts of this 
development. 
Our state oil and gas regulator, the Railroad Commission of Texas, is led by individuals who 
have repeatedly cast doubt on the scientific consensus that climate change is human caused.5, 6 
Because of this, we have serious concerns about the efficacy of CCUS strategies in mitigating 
climate change if oversight authorities are delegated to the Railroad Commission. We need more 
time to discuss and propose solutions that will mitigate negative impacts and restore our 
communities’ health. 
We appreciate your consideration of our request, and we urge you to act quickly to extend the 
comment deadline to ensure Texas community members have a full and fair opportunity to 
comment on these important issues. 
Please contact Virginia Palacios, Executive Director of Commission Shift at 
vpalacios@commissionshift.org, if you have any questions regarding this request. 
Respectfully submitted by the undersigned 21 Texas-based organizations: 
3 Medlock, K. B., & Miller, K. (2021). Expanding Carbon Capture in Texas. 
https://www.bakerinstitute.org/media/files/files/8e661418/expanding-ccus-in-texas.pdf 
4 U.S. Department of Energy. (2017). Siting and Regulating Carbon Capture, Utilization and Storage 
Infrastructure. 
5 Christian, W. (2018, April 24). ICYMI: Commissioner Christian Column - “The science on climate change 
is not settled.” Railroad Commission of Texas. https://www.rrc.texas.gov/news/042418a/ 
6 WFAA. (2020, October 17). Inside Texas Politics: How environmental protections factor into Texas 
Railroad Commission race. [Timestamp: 7:30] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ddey-4_sZAI  

Request for Extension -- Docket CEQ–2022–0001 
March 16, 2022 
Page 3 of 3 
Air Alliance Houston 
Chispa TX 
Citizens for Clean Air and Water in Brazoria County 
Clean Energy Now Texas 
Coalition of Community Organizations (Houston) 
Commission Shift 
Earthworks 
For the Greater Good 
Greater Edwards Aquifer Alliance 
Healthy Gulf 
Karnes Area Residents for the Environment 
Lone Star Chapter, Sierra Club 
Port Arthur Community Action Network 
Property Rights and Pipeline Center 
Public Citizen 
Rio Grande International Study Center  
Texas Campaign for the Environment 
Texas Environmental Justice Advocacy Services 
Texas NAACP 
The Healthy Port Communities Coalition 
Turtle Island Restoration Network

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0037 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
WORC
Western Organization of Resource Councils
Mar 18, 2022
Hon Brenda Mallory
Chair of the Council on Environmental Quality
The Executive Office of the President
730 Jackson Place, NW, Washington, DC 20503
Also submitted via the Federal Register at
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/02/16/2022-03205/carbon-capture-utilization-a
nd-sequestration-guidance#open-comment
RE: Docket No. CEQ-2022-0001, Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance
Chair Mallory,
On behalf of the Western Organization of Resource Councils (WORC) we are writing to express
the following concerns and comments regarding the Council on Environmental Quality’s (CEQ)
draft Guidance for Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration (CCUS).
WORC is a regional network of grassroots community organizations that include 12,200
members and 39 local chapters. WORC is committed to building sustainable environmental and
economic communities that balance economic growth with the health of people and stewardship
of their land, water, and air resources. WORC and its first member groups were founded by
ranch families whose land and livelihoods were threatened by the booming coal industry in the
1970s, when dozens of coal strip mines and power plants were proposed across the Northern
Great Plains. We have been at the forefront of shaping coal-related policies ever since, limiting
the scale of mine expansion and damage to land and water, and protecting the interests of
taxpayers and communities.
As rural Americans we know the profound effects that energy infrastructure has on our
landscapes and are all too familiar with the risks associated with projects proposed for
speculative and unproven technologies. We also see the climate crisis unfolding in real time via
forest fires and unprecedented droughts, and see any deviance from our nation's goals to
decarbonize the economy as dangerous to our livelihoods and safety. Any public funds allocated
to CCUS projects should be subject to rigorous guidelines. After reviewing the proposed
guidance, we offer these recommendations to further strengthen the proposal and ensure wise
investment of public funds.
220 S. 27th Street, Suite B, Billings, MT  59101
(406) 252-9672      FAX (406) 252-1092      E-mail:  billings@worc.org     http://www.worc.org

Strengths
Establishing guidance specific to CCUS-related federal actions is a worthwhile endeavor. The
high cost, complexity, and novelty of CCUS projects – demonstration or commercial – warrant
thorough analysis as many of the associated risks are unique to CCUS.
1.
Relative to CCUS, the guidance reiterates the goal of appropriately implementing the
[already existing] “robust and effective regulatory regime to safeguard the environment,
public health, and public safety.” Opportunities to improve on this regime are discussed in
the “Deficiencies” section below.
2.
The guidance supports additional funding for implementation of the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) Class VI Underground Injection Control (UIC) Program. This
program is vital to the protection of underground drinking water sources and adds a second
line of defense beyond the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) by enabling public
involvement in permitting of CO2 injection wells.
3.
CEQ recommends that EPA consider enhanced reporting for CCUS in the proposed rule
revisions to the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program. The guidance appropriately supports
transparency and reliably quantifying the amount of carbon dioxide permanently
sequestered, as well as post-injection monitoring and verification.
4.
The guidance recommends a national program for monitoring deep geologic carbon
sequestration, accompanied by universal standards and practices.
5.
The guidance states that impacts of climate change should be planned for and addressed in
the design, construction, and maintenance of CO2 pipelines.
6.
CEQ recommends that agencies undertake measures to facilitate a transparent process and
meaningful public engagement. In addition to developing robust Tribal consultation and
stakeholder engagement plans and conducting regular outreach, the guidance calls for
agencies to prioritize the development and application of environmental justice best
practices for CCUS efforts.
7.
CEQ cites the need to further assess and quantify potential direct and cumulative impacts
on local criteria air pollutants and other emissions resulting from carbon capture retrofits at
industrial facilities (this has been poorly implemented in past CCUS projects – see below).
Deficiencies
CEQ guidance should reflect lessons learned from Petra Nova, the largest CCUS project in the
U.S., for which the final Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) was released in 2013 . In
retrospect, this project has exposed weaknesses in the NEPA process as applied to CCUS,
from the narrow statement of purpose and need to the absence of alternative actions to the lack
of scrutiny and transparency in accounting for air quality impacts from criteria pollutants.
CEQ guidance should also address the concerns expressed in a December 2021 report from
the General Accounting Office, which identified significant risks to DOE's (Department of
Energy) management of coal CCUS demonstration projects in general. These include a
high-risk selection and negotiation process, the bypassing of cost controls, and a lack of
220 S. 27th Street, Suite B, Billings, MT  59101
(406) 252-9672      FAX (406) 252-1092      E-mail:  billings@worc.org     http://www.worc.org

accountability for meeting milestones. The report states that absent a congressional mechanism
to provide greater oversight and accountability, DOE may risk expending significant taxpayer
funds on CCUS demonstrations that have little likelihood of success (indeed, that has already
occured). The study was motivated by the 2021 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, which
authorizes and appropriates billions of dollars in new investments in CCUS demonstration
projects. GAO’s findings reinforce a history of failed CCUS projects and a bias toward rescuing
the coal industry over rescuing the climate.
Pulverized coal plants can only use relatively expensive post-combustion CCUS, with little
promise of widespread adoption due to the rapid retirement and non-replacement of coal-fired
power generation. On the other hand, pre-combustion CCUS is far less expensive and has
greater potential due to the growth in gasification applications like chemical and hydrogen
production. Despite this disparity, a faulty selection process has thus far directed the bulk of
federal funds to post-combustion CCUS research.
1.
One way to avoid the pitfalls identified by GAO would be to designate EPA as the lead
agency on CCUS-related NEPA studies. A true regulatory agency is better suited than a
facilitating agency to making decisions that safeguard the public interest and furthering the
goals of NEPA. Certain programs within DOE have a conflict of interest as they are tied
inextricably to the disbursement of money for technology-specific CCUS research. A
contemporary example of the DOE facilitator role is the Clean Coal Power Initiative (CCPI)
program, which provided the context for the Petra Nova EIS. A past example is the National
Energy Technology Center in Morgantown, WV (METC). From the late 1970s into the 1990s
METC spent hundreds of millions of dollars on coal upgrading research and development.
The agency’s staffing expanded accordingly. Dozens of projects attempted to make
higher-grade fuel and liquids from coal. None succeeded commercially, yet METC remained
committed to coal upgrading until its merger with Pittsburgh Energy Technology Center
(PETC) and its adoption of a wider mission in 1996.
2.
CEQ’s underlying premise of the “technical and economic feasibility of CCUS at significant
scale,” is unsubstantiated. The guidance cites an unreachable web link as evidence (a
search for the specific document was unsuccessful, suggesting it has been removed).
Regardless, a literature review does not constitute a determination of technical and
economic feasibility. Much of the CCUS literature originated with DOE or private applicants
for DOE funding, all of whom had incentives to understate costs and technical hurdles. DOE
has even used the term “aspirational” to describe its own CCUS cost estimates. The
agency’s optimism is offset by reports from the energy and financial industries concluding
that (a) coal-based CCUS is economically infeasible; and (b) even the more promising
CCUS technologies are too expensive without a reliable carbon-pricing mechanism. Petra
Nova shut down in 2020 to stem financial losses, despite having a $167 million subsidy from
DOE, a production tax credit, and a commercial market for the captured CO2. DOE’s 2020
report on the Petra Nova project understated, “the economics of large-scale carbon capture
facilities are challenging.” Prior to mothballing the project, Petra Nova recorded $310 million
in impairment charges (reductions in the book value of its assets) over a four-year period.
220 S. 27th Street, Suite B, Billings, MT  59101
(406) 252-9672      FAX (406) 252-1092      E-mail:  billings@worc.org     http://www.worc.org

3.
The guidance should discourage narrow statements of “Purpose and Need” for cost-shared
federal funding of CCUS research projects. The Petra Nova EIS tied the need for the project
to the CCPI program mandated by Congress – implicitly prioritizing the expenditure of
money over finding breakthrough solutions. A broader purpose, such as mitigation of
greenhouse gas emissions through CCUS, would not have confined the funding to
coal-based projects. This might have allowed consideration of CCUS ventures with lower
carbon capture costs per ton, such as ammonia production, blue hydrogen, biofuels, natural
gas combined cycle, and cement manufacturing. Broadening the statement of purpose and
need would allow for an array of meaningful alternative actions. This would avoid picking
winners and losers before a thorough evaluation of alternatives.
4.
The guidance should establish a better framework for evaluating net environmental
consequences of a CCUS funding action. In the Petra Nova EIS, DOE determined
“negligible to minor adverse impacts” to air quality through some creative accounting. The
EIS acknowledged the project would increase Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) and NOx
emissions by amounts exceeding the thresholds documented in the conformity rules. "This is
typical of liquid-amine-based carbon capture, due to the amine solvent and the demand for
additional steam and auxiliary power."  Both VOC and NOx are precursors to ground-level
ozone formation, particularly relevant since the Petra Nova facility was built in an area of
Texas classified as “severe nonattainment for ozone.” Petra Nova sponsor Nuclear Electric
Power Generation Company Incorporated (NRG) agreed to retire a certain number of
unused pollution allowances to offset increases in emissions, allowing DOE to claim
negligible air quality impacts. This paper exercise concealed the true impacts from criteria
pollutants, impeding CEQ’s stated objective of “increased transparency to build public
confidence in the emissions reductions associated with these projects.”
5.
CEQ advocates the use of programmatic environmental impact statements to streamline
project-specific studies. This may be appropriate for developing pipeline infrastructure, but it
is generally inadequate for carbon capture and underground sequestration. CCUS
technologies, emission sources, and geologic storage destinations vary considerably from
one project to another. Impacts and risks posed by such diverse proposals can only be
assessed on a project-specific basis. To accelerate CCUS implementation, prioritizing
commercially ready projects would be more effective than abbreviating regulatory oversight.
6.
While the guidance is aimed at environmental impact studies, the experimental nature of
CCUS demands consideration of financial impacts as well. Given the urgency to mitigate
carbon emissions, federal funding of technologically immature or economically unfeasible
ventures incurs an opportunity cost that should weigh on funding decisions. Notwithstanding
constraints imposed by Congress, CEQ should encourage agencies to evaluate alternative
uses of federal funds that could mitigate carbon emissions sooner, more efficiently, and
more cost effectively.
220 S. 27th Street, Suite B, Billings, MT  59101
(406) 252-9672      FAX (406) 252-1092      E-mail:  billings@worc.org     http://www.worc.org

WORC remains skeptical of CCUS projects. This is especially so in light of the lessons learned
at Petra Nova and other failed projects across the country, wasting billions of taxpayer dollars in
the process. The fact remains that Congress has authorized funds for the development and
delivery of these technologies, and now it is in the hands of the agencies guided by the CEQ to
ensure that these funds are allocated with the utmost transparency and scrutiny. We urge you to
adopt the above recommendations and welcome any questions or further communication on the
issues we raise in this letter that you might have.
Thank you for your time and consideration,
Sincerely,
Robert LeResche
Vice-Chair, WORC Board of Directors
Sheridan, Wyoming
220 S. 27th Street, Suite B, Billings, MT  59101
(406) 252-9672      FAX (406) 252-1092      E-mail:  billings@worc.org     http://www.worc.org

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0035 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
1000 Louisiana Street, Suite 3900 
 Houston, TX 77002 
+1 713-574-1880 
www.next-decade.com 
1 
 
March 18, 2022 
Via Regulations.Gov 
Brenda Mallory 
Chair  
White House Council on Environmental Quality  
730 Jackson Place NW  
Washington, DC 20503 
 
Re: 
Docket # CEQ–2022–0001 
 
87 Fed. Reg. 8808-8811 (February 16, 2022) 
NEXT Carbon Solutions’ Comments on Council on Environmental Quality’s Carbon Capture, 
Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance 
 
Dear Chair Mallory: 
NEXT Carbon Solutions (“NCS”) appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the Council on 
Environmental Quality’s (“CEQ”) proposed interim guidance document, Carbon Capture, Utilization, and 
Sequestration (“CCUS”) Guidance (“Guidance”), to assist Federal agencies with the regulation and 
permitting of CCUS activities in the United States.  
CEQ notes in the Guidance document that to achieve President Biden’s ambitious climate goal of net-zero 
emissions economy-wide by 2050, the United States will likely have to capture, transport, and 
permanently sequester significant quantities of carbon dioxide. In addition, CEQ acknowledges the 
growing scientific consensus that CCUS technologies and permanent sequestration are likely needed to 
prevent the worst impacts of climate change. Put simply, there is no other way to achieve the world’s 
global climate goals. 
NCS agrees with these objectives and seeks to provide end-to-end carbon capture and storage (“CCS”) 
solutions for industrial facilities to reduce and permanently store CO2 emissions. In fact, NCS is currently 
developing one of the largest geological carbon capture and storage projects in North America at Next 
Decade’s Rio Grande LNG facility in Brownsville, Texas. At full scale, we expect that the Rio Grande LNG 
CCS project will capture and permanently store more than 5 million metric tonnes of CO2 per year. This is 
equivalent to the amount of CO2 absorbed by nearly 300 million mature trees or avoided by removing 
more than one million vehicles from the road. 
NCS supports CEQ’s intentions to “facilitate reviews associated with the deployment of CCUS and promote 
the efficient, orderly, and responsible development and permitting of CCUS projects at an increased scale  

 
 
1000 Louisiana Street, Suite 3900 
 Houston, TX 77002 
+1 713-574-1880 
www.next-decade.com 
2 
 
in line with the Administration’s climate, economic, and public health goals.”1 However, NCS has concerns 
regarding the implementation of the Guidance and the potential that the Guidance will delay important 
CCUS projects and create regulatory uncertainty for CCUS developers. NCS requests that CEQ consider 
and address the following in any update or implementation of the Guidance: 
• 
Clarify that the consideration of programmatic environmental reviews should not hinder federal 
review processes in the near-term for CCUS projects in development stages; 
 
• 
Recognize and promote that existing permitting, safety standards, and review requirements 
already address many of the issues in the Guidance; and 
 
• 
Refocus efforts on streamlining review and permitting for CCUS. 
To achieve net zero climate objectives, private developers, investors, and regulators must move swiftly to 
deploy CCUS resources at scale. The layers of additional study and process recommended in the Guidance, 
while well intentioned to harmonize the environmental review of a variety of agency actions under 
disparate regulatory mandates, should not sideline or delay projects like Rio Grande LNG’s CCS project. 
Toward that end, NCS offers the following specific comments. 
1. Facilitating federal decision making on CCUS projects and CO2 pipelines should not delay 
processing environmental review and permit applications for CCUS projects 
The Guidance recommends a number of actions to facilitate federal decision making on CCUS projects and 
CO2 pipelines. Most notably for NCS, the Guidance suggests that agencies consider completing 
programmatic environmental reviews, such as programmatic environmental impact statements under the 
National Environmental Policy Act (“NEPA”) or programmatic biological opinions under the Endangered 
Species Act (“ESA”) to facilitate federal decision-making of multiple CCUS projects.2 Programmatic 
environmental review is a sound policy and may indeed facilitate CCUS projects in the future; particularly 
for CCUS projects on federally managed lands. However, NCS is concerned that the Guidance will signal 
to federal agencies that they should pause review of permit applications until completion of a 
programmatic environmental review process.  
If adopted without clear direction and sideboards, the programmatic environmental review strategy 
outlined in the Guidance could add years to existing projects and unnecessarily delay deployment of 
critical CCUS projects when they are needed now to reach ambitious climate goals set by this  
 
1 88 Fed. Reg. 8808, 8809. 
2 88 Red. Reg. 8808, 8809-10. 

 
 
1000 Louisiana Street, Suite 3900 
 Houston, TX 77002 
+1 713-574-1880 
www.next-decade.com 
3 
 
Administration. These projects are prepared to move forward now and prepared to work with Federal 
agencies to complete adequate NEPA review of CCUS proposals. The Guidance should not serve to limit 
an agency’s discretion to proceed under its existing authority. NCS requests that CEQ clarify in an updated 
guidance that for CCUS projects that are in or soon-to-be in development, federal agencies have their full  
discretion to and should proceed under the existing environmental review framework, including individual 
NEPA and ESA processes, rather than wait for scoping and developing programmatic review documents. 
3 Federal agencies can gain valuable insight and experience through site-specific environmental reviews 
of CCUS projects, which in turn can provide critical information to help shape programmatic 
environmental review processes where appropriate.  
2. Existing permitting, safety, and review requirements already address many of the issues in the 
Guidance 
The Guidance emphasizes federal coordination, a robust regulatory regime, transparency of potential 
effects and impacts associated with CCUS, and meaningful public engagement. NCS agrees that these 
issues are important but, many of the issues are adequately addressed under the existing regulatory 
regime. As CEQ acknowledges, “the Federal Government has an existing regulatory framework that is 
capable of safeguarding the environment, public health, and public safety as CCUS projects move 
forward.”4 Before CEQ prompts federal agencies to issue new studies, regulations, or new guidance, it 
should consider and promote these existing and well-established frameworks for CCUS technologies. 
Below we highlight key examples. 
CCS. In 2010, EPA finalized its Safe Drinking Water Act Class VI underground injection well 
regulations for geological sequestration, which address CCS siting, construction, operation, testing, 
monitoring, and closure.5 In addition to its regulations, EPA has already issued several guidance 
documents to support developer and regulators alike in implementing the Class VI program, including 
testing and monitoring guidance, project plan development guidance, and the geological sequestration 
data tool.6  
 
3 CEQ, Final Guidance for the Effective Use of Programmatic NEPA Reviews (December 18, 2014) (emphasizing that 
agencies should use judgement and discretion when determining whether to prepare a programmatic 
environmental review document and outlining the numerous questions and issues agencies should consider in 
making that decision).  
4 CEQ, Report to Congress on CCUS, p. 56 (June 2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/CEQ-CCUS-Permitting-Report.pdf; see also 88 Fed. Reg. 8808, 8809. 
5 76 Fed. Reg. 56982; 40 CFR Parts 124, 144, 145, 146, and 147.  
6 See EPA, UIC Class VI – Wells used for Geologic Sequestration of CO2, https://www.epa.gov/uic/class-vi-wells-
used-geologic-sequestration-carbon-dioxide#well-inventory.  

 
 
1000 Louisiana Street, Suite 3900 
 Houston, TX 77002 
+1 713-574-1880 
www.next-decade.com 
4 
 
EPA’s Class VI well requirements already place the burden of proof on the applicant to ensure 
opportunities for leakage or contamination are mitigated. EPA then spends multiple years to review and 
validate that information. All the while, the applicant also must insure the project against the possibility 
of leaks that both the applicant and the EPA have shown to be mitigated to the greatest extent possible. 
In addition, one of the required plans is an Emergency Response and Remediation Plan, which details 
steps to take in the event that all of the mitigations established and validated were to fail.  
The Guidance suggest that “agencies such as DOI, DOE, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) should consider expanding existing efforts, and (when feasible) implementing a 
national program for monitoring deep geologic carbon sequestration.”7 However, EPA, through its UIC 
Class VI permitting requirements, already has this covered. Further, EPA also finalized under the Clean Air 
Act detailed reporting requirements under the Greenhouse Gas Reporting program for all facilities that 
inject CO2 underground.8  
Pipelines. The Guidance suggests that more regulations are the answer to enhanced safety in 
CCUS projects. In the case of pipelines, however, industry is already utilizing what is historically the safest 
means of transport. CO2 pipelines will need to comply with existing federal safety requirements 
promulgated by the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (“PHMSA”) under Hazardous 
Liquid Pipeline Safety Act.9 The Guidance states that PHMSA should consider “updating criteria for 
geohazard risk evaluation and emergency planning and enforce the application of those criteria to carbon 
dioxide and other pipeline operations in the United States.”10  This suggests, without explanation, that 
PHMSA should go above and beyond the existing regulations for pipelines. PHMSA is already in charge of 
hazardous materials,11 so new CCUS regulations should not be needed. Moreover, undertaking a 
significant notice-and-comment rulemaking undoubtedly will delay the much-needed deployment of 
CCUS capabilities in the United States, thereby limiting our ability to advance critical climate objectives. 
Understanding Environmental Impacts. As described above, programs implemented by EPA 
already include robust programs for evaluating, monitoring, and reporting on environmental impacts for 
CCS. The Guidance also notes the need for additional assessment of the impacts associated with criteria  
 
7 88 Fed. Reg. 8808, 8810. 
8 See 75 Fed. Reg. 75,078 (and as amended and updated); 40 CFR 98 Subpart RR. 
9 49 U.S.C. § 60102(i); See CEQ, Report to Congress on CCUS, p. 33 (June 2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/CEQ-CCUS-Permitting-Report.pdf. 
10 88 Fed. Reg. 8808, 8810. 
11 CO2 is not considered a hazardous liquid, but PHMSA applies liquid pipeline safety standards because CO2 is 
transported as a dense phase liquid. 

 
 
1000 Louisiana Street, Suite 3900 
 Houston, TX 77002 
+1 713-574-1880 
www.next-decade.com 
5 
 
air pollutants and other emissions resulting from CCUS projects. This already occurs through Clean Air Act 
emissions permitting (Title V Operating Permits and New Source Review Pre-Construction Permits) for 
facilities and reporting is publicly available in most cases. Further, NEPA review associated with project 
development and permitting include an assessment of direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts, including 
for air quality.  
Public Engagement. The Guidance emphasizes the importance of public engagement and 
environmental justice considerations and outlines a number of action items federal agencies should 
undertake to achieve these goals. NCS considers public engagement and environmental justice an 
important element of project development, but notes that the existing regulatory regime already includes 
a robust program to achieve these goals.  
For instance, in terms of evaluating and communicating to stakeholders the impacts of proposed CCUS 
actions on potential host communities early in the planning process, this is already a requirement found 
in 40 CFR Part 124 as it applies to Class VI well CCS projects. In terms of ensuring transparent decisions 
and accountability to Tribes and communities with respect to any applicable mitigation measures 
designed to reduce environmental impacts, under EPA’s Class VI program, project proponents and the 
EPA have to demonstrate effective mitigation and contingency plans. EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Reporting 
Rule requires CO2 stream composition analysis and metering at the start of the pipeline and at the 
injection point. The existence of this Rule, and compliance with it through providing analysis and data to 
the regulator, should satisfy transparency requirements. Further, the existing scoping and public notice 
and comment opportunities in NEPA provide additional transparency in the evaluation and 
communication of project impacts, costs, and benefits.  
3. Streamlining Review and Permitting of CCUS Projects 
 
As acknowledged by CEQ and reported by the National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine 
“To put the United States on a path to net-zero emissions by 2050, . . . the United States should build out 
a national CO2 capture, transport, and disposal network, and in the next decade, carbon capture and 
storage should increase by a factor of ten above current levels.”12  
If we truly want to have a chance to meet the stated goals of net-zero CO2 emissions by 2050, post 
combustion carbon capture and storage is a critical part of the solution. What is needed is more efficient, 
streamlined regulation. To that end, NCS encourages CEQ to refocus its Guidance on specific opportunities 
to streamline and ensure timely review and permitting of CCUS projects. 
 
12 CEQ, Report to Congress on CCUS, p. 11 (June 2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/CEQ-CCUS-Permitting-Report.pdf. 

 
 
1000 Louisiana Street, Suite 3900 
 Houston, TX 77002 
+1 713-574-1880 
www.next-decade.com 
6 
 
CEQ should take the opportunity now as it reevaluates regulatory updates to NEPA regulations to increase 
efficiency and shorten the timeframe to complete environmental reviews. Agencies should be encouraged 
to rely on their organic statutory authority to satisfy NEPA obligations. 
For instance, as it relates to efficiency in developing CCS projects under EPA’s Class VI well program, the 
agency must demonstrate that injection activities do not pose a threat to human health and environment. 
To that end, EPA should have to complete a similar analysis under NEPA. NEPA should be additive to the 
review process and not duplicative of agency action. Likewise, CEQ should encourage EPA to rely on the 
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (“IIJA”) to provide additional funds that could be devoted toward 
increased staff at EPA to process Class VI applications and evaluate state request for primacy under the 
Class VI program.13 Currently North Dakota and Wyoming are the only states with primacy over the Class 
VI program.14 North Dakota, which received Class VI program primacy in April of 2018, is a prime example 
of what can be accomplished by leveraging state staffing resources and knowledge, having already 
permitted one CO2 storage facility and with two more draft permits in the works.15 Additional states, such 
as Louisiana and Texas, have taken steps to assume Class VI program permitting and enforcement 
responsibility. CEQ should promote and facilitate, in coordination with EPA, the timely delegation of Class 
VI program primacy to interested states. 
Thank you for the opportunity to offer these comments on the Guidance. NCS is committed to lowering 
global CO2 emissions and creating sustainable solutions to help achieve global climate goals and accelerate 
the path to a net-zero future. To do so, the federal government should support the CCUS industry through 
streamlined review and permitting and leveraging the existing regulatory framework that CEQ 
acknowledges is “capable of safeguarding the environment, public health, and public safety as CCUS 
projects move forward.” Please do not hesitate to contact me should you have any questions or would 
like more information.  
Sincerely,  
 
 
Vera de Gyarfas 
General Counsel 
 
13 88 Fed. Reg. 8808, 8810.  
14 EPA, UIC, Primary Enforcement Authority for the Underground Injection Control Program, 
https://www.epa.gov/uic/primary-enforcement-authority-underground-injection-control-program.  
15 See North Dakota State Government, Class VI Wells, Geologic Storage of CO2, 
https://www.dmr.nd.gov/oilgas/GeoStorageofCO2.asp.

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0038 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
Government Affairs Office 
1300 Eye Street NW 
Suite 701W 
Washington, DC 20005-3314 
T 202.628.8303 
F 202.628.2846 
March 18, 2022 
Amy B. Coyle 
Council on Environmental Quality 
730 Jackson Place NW 
Washington, DC 20503 
 
SUBMITTED ELECTRONICALLY 
 
Re: 
Comments on CEQ’s “Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance” (CEQ-2022-
0001) 
 
Dear Ms. Coyle: 
 
The American Water Works Association (AWWA) appreciates the opportunity to comment as a part of the 
Council on Environmental Quality’s proposed guidance titled “Carbon Capture, Utilization, and 
Sequestration.”  We hope that these comments will assist CEQ as it revises the guidance. 
Programmatic EIS and other national or area-wide permitting strategies are not appropriate at this time 
On 87 FR 8809, CEQ recommends that “agencies should consider developing programmatic 
environmental reviews” with examples that include processes within NEPA and EIS.  
 
Although much of the technology associated with Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Storage (CCUS) has 
now existed for some time, the application of CCUS at large scale, and the associated regulatory 
frameworks that will support and manage them, are still in their infancy. For example, only a handful of 
Class VI Underground Injection Control program permits have been issued, and only a few states have 
applied for Class VI primacy.  Many of the CCUS projects not issued under Class VI were completed 
through permits that were considered either experimental (mostly prior to the development of Class VI 
regulations) or were considered enhanced oil recovery projects not intended to permanently sequester 
the carbon. The development of a programmatic EIS under NEPA or similar mechanisms under other 
statutes is most appropriate for more mature industries where more specialized attention to each project 
may not be as necessary as in an emerging industry.  CEQ’s comparisons to solar installations are not 
appropriate as there are tens of thousands of solar installations in the United States versus only a handful 
of CCUS projects.  
 
Per the U.S. Geologic Survey (USGS), over 115 million people in the United states rely on groundwater for 

March 18, 2022 
CEQ-2022-0001 
Page 2 
 
 
 
drinking water, including 43 million from private wells that are less likely to receive treatment or frequent 
monitoring1. Recognizing that failing to provide appropriate oversight to CCUS projects could result in 
considerable unintended consequences such as negative impacts to groundwater, CEQ should not include 
a recommendation for utilizing programmatic reviews, but rather leave it to each agency to pursue that 
style of review only when there is sufficient experience in each regulatory framework on this application 
to warrant such a move.  
 
CEQ should consider and differentiate temporary CCUS projects from those designed to be permanent 
This document discusses CCUS in the context of permanent geologic storage of carbon dioxide.  However, 
most of the historic CCUS and nearly all of the existing CO2 pipeline infrastructure is actually for the 
purposes of enhanced oil recovery (EOR), which is not designed to be nor regulated as a form of 
permanent geologic storage2. CEQ’s guidance should be updated appropriately to recognize this and 
clearly differentiate uses that are and are not designed and regulated for permanent geologic storage.  
 
CEQ should expand this guidance to provide substantive support for its reasoning.  
At present, throughout this guidance document CEQ provides limited support for each of its 
recommendations.  In order to be effective in supporting agencies, CEQ must provide substantive 
technical and policy information to support its recommendations.  
 
AWWA appreciates the opportunity to provide comment on this matter. Please feel free to contact me or 
Adam Carpenter (202-628-8303, acarpenter@awwa.org) if you have any questions regarding these 
comments. 
 
Respectfully, 
Submitted on behalf of the American Water Works Association 
 
 
 
G. Tracy Mehan, III 
Executive Director of Government Affairs 
American Water Works Association 
 
 
 
 
1 USGS. 21 January 2015. Groundwater – The Invisible and Vital Resource.  https://www.usgs.gov/news/featured-
story/quality-nations-groundwater.  
2 Congressional Research Service. 18 October 2021. Carbon Capture and Sequestration (CCS) in the United States. 
https://sgp.fas.org/crs/misc/R44902.pdf.  

March 18, 2022 
CEQ-2022-0001 
Page 3 
 
 
 
CC:  
Radhika Fox – EPA/OW 
Jennifer McLain – EPA/OW/OGWDW 
 
Andrew Sawyers – EPA/OW/OWM 
 
 
About AWWA: 
AWWA is an international, nonprofit, scientific and educational society dedicated to providing total water 
solutions assuring the effective management of water. Founding 1881, the Association is the largest 
organization of water supply professionals in the world. Our membership includes nearly 4,500 utilities 
that supply roughly 80 percent of the nation’s drinking water and treat almost half of the nation’s 
wastewater. Our over 50,000 total memberships represent the full spectrum of the water community: 
public water and wastewater systems, environmental advocates, scientists, academicians, and others who 
hold a genuine interest in water, our most important resource. AWWA unites the diverse water community 
to advance public health, safety, the economy, and the environment

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0030 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
Washington, D.C., March 17, 2022
Brenda Mallory,
Chair White House Council on Environmental Quality
730 Jackson Place NW
Washington, DC 20503
Re: Request for Comments Council for Environmental Quality’s “Carbon Capture, Utilization,
and Sequestration Guidance,” 87 Federal Register 8808 (February 16, 2022), Docket
CEQ–2022–0001
Dear Ms. Mallory:
The National Family Farm Coalition (NFFC) is thankful for the opportunity to comment on this
important matter, although we agree with many of our partners in the farming and environmental
community that the limited time frame and the complexity of the topic did not result in an adequate
process (Center for Biological Diversity and Center for International Law, 2022).
The National Family Farm Coalition (NFFC) is an alliance of grassroots food producers- and
advocate-led groups across 42 states, representing the rights and interests of independent family
farmers, ranchers, and fisherfolk in Washington, DC. NFFC’s 32 state, national, and regional farm
and rural organizations are bound by a common belief that communities have the right to determine
how their food is grown and harvested; that everyone in the food system should receive fair prices or
wages; that all producers have equitable access to credit, land, seeds, water, markets, and other
resources; and, that our food and agriculture policies must support sustainable farming, ranching,
and fishing practices.
First, we welcome the bipartisan passage of the Infrastructure Bill for many reasons: rural
communities, particularly, are growing more isolated with limited access to broadband services and
wifi providers, and with the decay of their roads and bridges; water supplies are polluted or there are
insignificant efforts to provide enough fresh water to their irrigation system. What we did not expect
was a significant investment on carbon dioxide pipelines and the unproven theory of injecting such
carbon deep into the ground.
It’s easy to feel discouraged when listening to stories defining the problems facing farmers and
ranchers across the midwest and northern plains. Everyone, it seems, is fighting some sort of
behemoth – Smithfield, Monsanto, Walmart, oil and gas corporations, water shortages, shamefully
beholden politicians, low farmgate prices, rising land prices, feelings of isolation, pesticide drift,
long-gone infrastructure, soil infertility, or high energy costs.

NFFC’s members understand the urgency of climate change and have embraced many techniques
for conservation. In this respect we coincide with CEQ assessment that “the first priority for
addressing climate change must be to avoid emissions” but we question the idea that significant
amounts of carbon dioxide should be captured, transported, and permanently sequestered.  First,
the “growing scientific consensus” cited by the call for comments is limited and excessively
optimistic. A recent meta-analysis of 263 CCUS projects undertaken between 1995 and 2018
demonstrated their failure (Wang, et al. 2021); moreover, “the present state-of-the-art numerical
models are not able to give a complete quantitative prediction of geochemical evolution of CO2
injection.” (Salvi and Jidal, 2019).
Even more concerning to this initiative is the recurrent proposal to create carbon markets. What is
the best way to influence farmers’ practices on the scale and in the timeframe needed to address the
climate crisis? Some influential players find carbon markets tempting—they could create new
revenue streams for farmers and ranchers hurting after years of low prices. Carbon markets pay
those sequestering carbon or reducing greenhouse gas emissions, thereby generating “credits”
which are then sold to buyers, typically large corporations interested in or required to offset their own
carbon emissions. However, carbon markets’ poor track record suggests that this approach is
unlikely to result in significant net decarbonization. Relying solely on these markets will not provide
the support and incentives needed to help farmers transition to a more resilient climate future.
Carbon markets should not be a substitute for strong federal programs that bolster the practices and
people already in place that have been committed to sustainability and land stewardship for years.
While these comments are limited because of the rushed time given by your agency to analyze,
consult, and build from our members' ideas, we feel that the scope of the requested comments
deserve individual observations. For example, the Guidance covers point-source carbon dioxide
removal (“CDR”), direct air capture (“DAC”), as well as bioenergy with carbon capture and
sequestration (“BECCS”). Each of these technological approaches carry their own distinct risks to
public health, safety, and environment, as well as their own permitting and legal compliance
requirements and complexities.
As CEQ notes,  “responsible CCUS projects should engage communities and Tribes in
co-development of projects and approaches; protect communities from pollution; and incorporate
environmental justice and equity considerations, especially in communities that are already exposed
to multiple pollution sources.” It is surprising that the agency only allocated 30 days for consultations.
We, however, can’t stop to express our frustration, concerns, and disappointment in the ways the
initiative is implemented.
“The historical and largely white incrementalist environmental movement, including its agricultural
manifestations, has failed to adequately protect the environment, let alone the rights and wellbeing
of BIPOC communities.  Only an intersectional movement that embraces and supports leadership
from BIPOC communities most affected, and in the service of fundamental political and democratic
economic change, will successfully address these issues” (Gurian-Sherman, 2020). The current
proposal, including the process of comment request, falls short of the current administration
discourse for inclusiveness and equity.

Once again thank you for this opportunity, and if you have any question regarding these comments
please feel free to contact me at antonio@nffc.net
Sincerely
Antonio Tovar PhD
Senior Policy Associate
National Family Farm Coalition
References
Center for Biological Diversity and Center for International Law , 2022, Re: Request for Extension of
Comment Period on the Council for Environmental Quality’s “Carbon Capture, Utilization, and
Sequestration Guidance,” 87 Federal Register 8808 (February 16, 2022), Docket CEQ–2022–0001.
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/CEQ-2022-0001-0004
Gurrian-Sherman D. 2020, Pipeline Project, Industrial Agriculture and the Need for Mutual Support.
Disparity to Parity Project.
https://disparitytoparity.org/death-by-a-thousand-cuts-the-enbridge-line-3-oil-pipeline-project-industri
al-agriculture-and-the-need-for-mutual-support/
Salvi, B. L., & Jindal, S. (2019). Recent developments and challenges ahead in carbon capture and
sequestration technologies. SN Applied Sciences, 1(8), 1-20.
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s42452-019-0909-2
Wang, N., Akimoto, K., & Nemet, G. F. (2021). What went wrong? Learning from three decades of
carbon capture, utilization and sequestration (CCUS) pilot and demonstration projects. Energy
Policy, 158, 112546. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S030142152100416X

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0033 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
March 18, 2022 
 
Re: Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration Guidance 
 
AGENCY: Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ). 
AGENCY Chair: Brenda Mallory 
ACTION: Notice of Availability, Request for Comments 
Docket No. CEQ-2022-0001 
 
 
Dear Chair Brenda Mallory, 
 
I pose this comment to you, not at you.  You were just nominated to chair the CEQ and I hope you bring a sweeping new 
focus towards helping society break free of the industry and economic controlled unicorn pursuit of endless GDP growth 
that rises on the backs of an enslaved society, further divided between the wealthy and the workers.  
 
Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration Guidance as outlined on the Federal Register: 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/02/16/2022-03205/carbon-capture-utilization-and-sequestration-
guidance 
 
CEQ CCUS Report: https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/CEQ-CCUS-Permitting-Report.pdf 
 
WH CEQ Proposal abstract: 
• Fast track as many as possible carbon dioxide (CO2) pipelines across the US 
• Reduce permitting requirements  
• Create tiered EIS templates to enable easy approval 
• Pump as much CO2 into the ground and hope it stays there 
• Authorize use of geologic pore space on Federal lands 
• Create a group under the EPA called the Underground Injection Control (UIC) Program – enabling fast track of CO2 
injection into ground 
• Provide grants to states with UIC certification to build pipelines 
• Speed up grant leases, easements and rights of way to support CCUS activities on the outer continental shelf (OCS) 
 
WH CEQ Rational: 
• The US will never reduce carbon dioxide and methane emissions in time 
• There are some industries that require the burning of natural gas because the US hasn’t figured out yet how to 
replace with burning hydrogen (far lesser environmentally impacting alternative) 
• A burgeoning new industry already in progress (existing 5,200 miles of pipeline) commoditizing carbon dioxide to a 
massive infrastructure platform created under the claimed reduction of greenhouse gas emissions (doesn’t reduce 
emissions, just hides emissions) 
o “CCUS already plays an important and valuable role in the U.S. economy, and the technology continues to evolve.” 
o “Carbon capture technology can reduce emissions of other kinds of pollution (such as sulfur oxides) in addition to 
carbon pollution, and can provide well-paying union jobs.” Can means unproven hypothetical possibilities. 
o “CCUS has a critical role to play in decarbonizing the global economy.” 

 
 
 
• Since the US has already starting funding, we have to continue this pursuit regardless of the environmental or human 
costs (ironically since this is done in the name of fighting climate change). 
o Bill H.R.133 Consolidated Appropriations Act 2021, 116th Congress provided funding to both natural gas pipelines 
and to building out carbon dioxide capture to put it where it “will not enter the atmosphere.” 
https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/133  
• NETL Grand Scalable Plan found pipelines and injecting into OCS as the winning roadmap while other innovations that 
might come to fruition in the next several decades.  Meanwhile, pushing full steam ahead with more pipelines. 
 
• Carbon dioxide pipelines might enable H2 solutions that are not clean and does not account for fossil fuels required 
towards generating.  Similar to “Blue Hydrogen” which takes natural gas transmission end source both as an input as 
well as used as energy to heat the Steam Methane Reforming process in generating hydrogen.  This is after hydraulic 
fracturing wells (methane emissions), processing (methane emissions), gathering pipelines (methane emissions) and 
transmission pipelines (methane emissions) – where the methane emissions in supplying the natural gas are not 
included in the Steam Methane Reforming inputs:  
    
 
Inputs
• 2.2 tons Methane 
From Natural gas
• 4.9 tons of water
• 5.7 MWh heat
Outputs
• 1.1 ton Hydrogen
• 6 tons Carbon 
Dioxide (CO2)
Blue Hydrogen - Steam Methane Reforming

• 15,000 miles “pipeline networks” and 52,000 miles of “spur pipelines” (why would the research paper provide these 
numbers in kilometers instead of miles?) spurs new economy and commodity. 
   
 
 
 
What is wrong with the CCUS proposal?   
1. First, it resembles the 1938 Natural Gas Act, where without any idea of the ramifications, Congress implemented 
the act, which created FERC in 1977.  FERC for the past 43 years approved every pipeline project regardless of 
the immediate health and environment impacts as well as cumulative impacts including climate change. 
a. There were no conclusive studies in the CEQ CCUS Report regarding impact to environment, OCS  
2. It proposes implementing large infrastructure with statements can, might, or possibly – since no studies have 
been around the mistakes of the current natural gas infrastructure that have severe impact to low income 
communities, which is always where pipelines traverse since they are least resistant.  
3. We have allowed the fossil fuel industry to push initiatives that prolong the fossil fuel industry without 
performing due diligence or independent analysis.  How do you think Bill H.R.133 was passed (which also 
provided funding to the natural gas pipelines)? 
4. It focuses on “build more” agenda rather than reevaluating the existing build more agendas and the damage 
these infrastructures are having to Americans and the environment.  
5. The public is not engaged as a participant with full explanations, instead these dockets are created and only the 
very few engage trying to discern through the quagmires of baloney in the reports generated from public funded 
‘research.’ 
 
 
 

Questions: 
1. How many compressor station facilities are required for the pipelines to push the carbon dioxide along the 
pipeline (in the natural gas industry, it is approximately every 50 miles). 
2. How will these compressor facilities be powered?  In the natural gas supply chain, they are predominately 
natural gas fired with a smaller portion of electric compressor stations  - all of which emit millions of tons of 
methane every year.  
3. Why doesn’t the CEQ CCUS Report perform analysis on environmental impact studies on proposed pipelines in 
terms of damaging more miles of land; the contamination to ground, water and air; the increased emissions of 
methane; and how does carbon dioxide impact the outer continental shelf and the gulf of Mexico, which 
appears to be one of the main designation point where there are already increasing dead zones in the ocean?   
 
 
I don’t see any analysis of how the proposed CCUS projects will affect ecosystems where they are planned to be 
deployed.   Will the US agencies overseeing this make a rule that they will only use pipeline pathways that will only 
travel through wealthy communities?  The answer is no, anyone with money will fight that in the courts for years. 
 
The whole proposal is how to make CCUS go faster with pipelines, when we should be reviewing how to dismantle the 
existing conglomerate behemoth fossil fuel infrastructure. 
 
In reading through the Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration Guidance and the Report, it just appears to be 
industry shaping policy to preserve industries continued growth and profits.   
 
There is a recently published report (link: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/pdf/10.1098/rsta.2021.0104) that 
suggests that removing methane from the air might be more impacting and also methane has the potential to be 
converted into other nonvolatile end uses.   
 
 
 
Recommendations 
• 
I urge CEQ to reject this propose guidance and instead focus on decarbonation that do not include massive 
infrastructure. 
• 
I urge CEQ to research all viable pathways towards eliminating fossil fuels and the emissions from fossil fuels in 
addition to carbon capture. 
• 
I urge CEQ to target replacing end use change instead of proposing new large infrastructure that literally bury our 
current infrastructure mistakes in fossil fuels. 
• 
I urge CEQ to view the Fossil Fuel industry as a faction worse than the tobacco industry that has infected even our 
elected leaders and agencies with false misinformation is translated to end users that there is clean coal, clean 
natural gas and other completely false concepts.  
 
 
 

There are other alternatives that can be started now in the US: 
1. Stop all natural gas expansion projects – will dramatically reduce methane emissions 
2. Start implementing home and business renewable hydrogen electrical storage solutions 
a. Available now - currently 3 companies offering safe solutions for homes and businesses 
b. Can provide peak load offsets to electric grid 
c. Increases resiliency by acting as microgrid supplier 
d. Acts as power backup for each home and business during power outage 
e. Directly reduces fossil fuel consumption, directly reduces electrical consumption 
f. Hydrogen can be produced anywhere – doesn’t require massive plants 
g. Reduces grid rebuilding for electrification 
3. Use local generated hydrogen in place of natural gas for high heat requirement industries 
4. Start investing into innovations that directly impact end uses rather than dreaming up macro level solutions that 
involve big infrastructure solutions and inevitably end up sacrificing low-income communities. 
5. Eliminate fossil fuel influence, which has followed what the Tobacco industry did in keeping their industry 
thriving.  The fossil fuel industry is one of the single largest contributors to climate change and yet we are still 
unable to fully quantify the methane emissions from the supply chains.  EPA underreports methane emissions 
from the natural gas supply chain because the EPA does not include methane emissions from all sources in the 
supply chain (wells, processing plants, shale slurry holding pools, gathering pipelines, transmission pipelines and 
end use designations such as industry, distribution and export). 
 
 
Please don’t start off CEQ with that we won’t make the IPCC 2050 targets unless we build more infrastructure.  We can 
make it and we can serve the low-income communities in getting there.  These guidelines are all about big money, big 
industry and greenwashing very destructive proposals where not enough research has been performed to assess the 
adverse impacts and who ends up being harmed most. 
 
There are new innovations in vertical and horizontal micro wind turbines that produce significant output for a home and 
don’t require massive 100-foot turbine installed.  I urge the CEQ to better enable each community, each county to 
participate and start aggressive public engagement and sponsorship towards increasing renewable deployments for 
every home and every apartment.   
 
We do not need massive infrastructure footprints, except for highly dense cities, which can be fed by local communities. 
Even the cities do not need hundreds of miles of pipelines for anything other than water. 
 
New solutions should not be about using a new trash dumping zone, which is exactly what the carbon dioxide pumped 
into the ground solution is.  
 
I wish that the CEQ would push EPA and FERC to work together and have a formalized method of educating the public in 
the threats that greenhouse gas emissions are posing, the other toxic air emissions from fossil fuel supply chains and the 
local green solutions that are available.  Engage the public, make their voice count more than the large conglomerates 
that currently control fossil fuels and energy.  Take a look at FERC Docket PL21-3 and how the fossil fuel industry is 
fighting FERC’s new rule on equitable justice and requiring future reasonable greenhouse gas emissions.   
 
I very much appreciate your consideration and I hope you fight for US, not the industries.  
Sincerely, 
Kirk Frost

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0036 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
Comments on the Carbon 
Capture, Utilization, and 
Sequestration Guidance 
 
Council on Environmental 
Quality, CEQ-2022-0001  
 — 
Submitted by Enbridge  
March 18, 2022

 
1 
Introduction 
Enbridge Inc. (Enbridge) appreciates this opportunity to comment on the Council on 
Environmental Quality’s (the CEQ) Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance (the 
Guidance). Enbridge is actively developing several carbon capture, utilization, and sequestration 
(CCUS) projects across our extensive North American footprint, including in the U.S. Gulf Coast 
and the U.S. Midwest. Some project highlights include: 
• The Open Access Wabamun Carbon Hub being advanced in Alberta, Canada to support 
near-term carbon capture projects by Capital Power Corporation (natural gas-fired 
power generation) and Lehigh Cement (cement production). Enbridge, along with local 
Indigenous partners, will build, own, and operate carbon transportation and 
sequestration infrastructure to support the abatement of nearly 4 million tonnes of 
carbon dioxide annually (Mtpa). 
• Enbridge recently announced a collaboration with Shell to develop low carbon energy 
solutions where synergies exist across the companies’ North American businesses, 
including CCUS projects, green and blue hydrogen production, and renewable power 
generation. 
• Enbridge recently announced a collaboration with carbon capture developer Svante 
Inc., Cross River Infrastructure Partners LLC and OTS Ltd. to explore opportunities to 
develop, build, own, and operate carbon capture projects that will decarbonize carbon 
intensive industries across North America.  
We continue to advance these projects and initiatives, among others, and seek other 
opportunities across the CCUS value chain where our significant assets and customer 
relationships overlap with strong regulatory, tax and policy environments, proximate and 
suitable carbon dioxide storage options, and clusters of industrial emitters keen to deploy 
carbon capture solutions.  
About Enbridge 
Enbridge operates across North America, fueling the economy and people’s quality of life. We 
move about 30% of the crude oil produced in North America. We transport nearly 20% of the 
natural gas consumed in the U.S. We operate Canada’s largest natural gas utility. Further, our 
renewable energy projects (either operating or under construction) have the capacity to 
generate nearly 2,000-megawatts of net-zero emission energy.   
Enbridge is also highly engaged in the energy system transformation and transition underway 
today, with early strategic investments in CCUS, hydrogen, and renewable natural gas. 
Enbridge was among the first North American midstream energy companies to set a hard target 
of net-zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by the year 2050, with an interim target to reduce 
the intensity of GHG emissions from our operations by 35% by 2030. To meet our 2030 
emission targets and our 2050 net-zero ambition, we’ll be pursuing multiple pathways that are 
strongly aligned and embedded in our strategy and business plans. 

 
2 
Comments 
Enbridge is pleased to submit the following comments. 
Context 
In paragraph 1 of the context section, the CEQ writes,  
“… to reach the President’s ambitious climate goal of net-zero emissions economy-wide 
by 2050, the United States will likely need to capture, transport, and permanently 
sequester significant quantities of carbon dioxide. There is growing scientific consensus 
that, while the first priority for addressing climate change must be to avoid emissions, 
CCUS technologies and permanent sequestration are likely needed to prevent the worst 
impacts of climate change.” 
We strongly agree that the widespread deployment of CCUS technologies and permanent 
storage solutions are essential to meeting the President’s climate goal of net-zero emissions 
economy-wide by 2050. This is consistent with, for example, International Energy Agency 
analysis.1 This position is also echoed by the Labor Energy Partnership, which recently stated, 
“[f]ew emissions reduction pathways besides CCUS can so directly preserve and enhance the 
prosperity of communities while contributing to national climate ambitions.”2 CCUS is critical to 
the decarbonization of many strategically important hard-to-abate sectors of the U.S. economy, 
including cement, steel and iron manufacturing, natural gas-fired power generation, oil and gas 
refining, and petrochemicals.    
In paragraph 4, Enbridge is very encouraged to read,  
“… the President is committed to increasing support for CCUS research, development, 
demonstration, and deployment (RDD&D), enhancing the Section 45Q tax incentive for 
CCUS…, appropriately implementing the robust and effective regulatory regime that 
exists in the United States, and ensuring that CCUS technologies are informed by 
community perspectives and are consistent with the Administration’s climate, public 
health, and economic goals.” 
Guidance 
1. Facilitating Federal Decision Making on CCUS Projects and Carbon Dioxide Pipelines 
Enbridge is strongly supportive of efforts to “facilitate more efficient and effective 
environmental reviews of multiple projects while maintaining strong community engagement.” 
Further, the use and development of “programmatic environmental reviews” is a positive and 
welcome recommendation. 
Similarly, Enbridge is strongly supportive of the CEQ’s plans to “convene the relevant agencies 
to assess opportunities for improvement in carbon dioxide pipeline permitting.” 
 
1 See, for example, CCUS in Clean Energy Transitions (International Energy Agency, September 2020) 
2 See Building to Net-Zero (Labor Energy Partnership, June 2021) 

 
3 
We have a several other recommendations for the CEQ’s consideration: 
• Enbridge continues to see a need to address long-term liability for stored carbon 
dioxide. In several U.S. jurisdictions (including North Dakota and Indiana), as well as 
many international jurisdictions, national or regional (state or provincial) governments 
assume liability for stored carbon dioxide after a defined period of time following 
closure of the sequestration asset, which is done according to clear measurement, 
monitoring and verification (MMV), abandonment and remediation procedures. These 
jurisdictions typically have in place a post-closure stewardship fund (that carbon 
sequestration operators pay into during operations) to cover any costs incurred after 
the government has assumed liability and responsibility for the asset. Further clarity on 
long-term liability and final MMV, abandonment and remediation procedures and 
timelines would support further investment in this critical investment.  
• Enbridge recommends that the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
(NOAA) develop a national program for monitoring deep geologic carbon sequestration. 
• For bioenergy and natural CCUS projects, Enbridge recommends that project 
proponents and participants be required to firmly establish incremental improvements 
from the naturally occurring “baseline” carbon capture processes, not simply assuming 
credit for all carbon captured in connection with naturally occurring process. 
• Enbridge recommends the federal government publish simplified “cradle-to-grave” flow 
diagrams for permitting CCUS projects. 
• Enbridge believes the CCUS industry would benefit from further clarity around the 
ability of the Secretary of the Interior to grant (with or without competitive bidding 
processes) carbon dioxide transportation and sequestration leases, easements, and 
rights-of-way. 
• Enbridge believes further clarity around the definition of “direct and indirect” emissions 
impacts would be useful (i.e. Scopes 1 and 2? Scope 3?). 
2. Public Engagement and Interdisciplinary Research 
Enbridge strongly agrees with the statement, “Responsible CCUS projects should engage 
communities and Tribes in co-development of projects and approaches.” By way of illustrating 
our approach with new CCUS projects, Enbridge is developing a new carbon transportation and 
storage hub in Alberta, Canada (see above) and recently announced plans to co-develop the 
new infrastructure with local Indigenous communities, including an opportunity for the 
Indigenous partners to own up to 50% of the carbon transportation and storage assets. 
Enbridge is also working with these local Indigenous communities to co-develop engagement 
plans as well as environmental and safety studies. We would seek to replicate and expand on 
this approach as we develop new CCUS opportunities throughout North America. 
 
 

 
4 
3. Understanding Environmental Impacts 
Enbridge strongly agrees with the recommendation that “agencies share best practices with 
respect to data collection and reporting on CCUS projects.” At Enbridge, we strive to avoid 
and/or minimize all impacts our projects and operations may have on sensitive habitats, species 
at risk and ecosystems. Our engineering operations and technical services teams help ensure 
that all our assets are designed, constructed, maintained, and operated to minimize the risk of 
habitat disturbance. Accordingly, we:  
• Conduct environmental and cultural assessments to identify sensitive areas and use pre-
existing rights-of-way where possible 
• Work with landowners and regulatory agencies to address the spread of invasive species 
that threaten valuable native species and natural plant and animal diversity 
• Monitor wetland and watercourse crossing sites regularly, following construction, to ensure 
they are fully restored to their previous function and value 
• Restore pipeline rights-of-way through rural areas so that agricultural activities can resume 
promptly following construction 
• Use appropriate vegetation management methods at our facility and pipeline rights-of-way 
locations 
• Employ habitat restoration methods including reclamation, environmental monitoring and 
mitigation, and follow-up landowner outreach 
• We work cooperatively with regulatory agencies such as the Environmental Protection 
Agency, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers, National Parks Service, Environment and Climate Change Canada, and 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada, as well as state and local permitting and wildlife management 
agencies. Our philosophy is to meet, if not exceed, expectations set by any state, provincial 
or federal regulator 
Enbridge is also strongly committed to principles of Environmental Justice. We agree that 
project proponents should carefully consider air, land, and water impacts to areas immediately 
surrounding the proposed siting, construction, and operation of CCUS related infrastructure. 
This includes racial demographics and socio-economic characteristics.  It is also important that 
enhanced air quality monitoring is installed in proximity to CCUS infrastructure to ensure that 
these facilities do not negatively impact surrounding communities.  For example, our Sabal Trail 
Project (STT), which constructed approximately 460 miles of greenfield mainline facilities from 
the interconnection with Transco near Hillabee, Alabama to a point in central Florida south of 
Orlando, used a proven, structured, tiered approach to stakeholder engagement that has 
resulted in an on-time and on-budget project. To help ensure that issues and questions were 
being addressed in a consistent manner during the initial phases of the pipeline project, 
outreach personnel assisted in training contract personnel, including civil, environmental, and 
cultural resource survey crews. The goal of public outreach at this stage of the process is 
twofold: 1) to educate the local officials about the company’s efforts to design a project that 
meets the growing needs of customers and the region while minimizing environmental and 
public impacts; 2) to notify local officials and host informational meetings with the communities 

 
5 
to inform them of upcoming field activities in the project area and timelines for those activities, 
including land agents conducting title searches in local courthouses and tax offices, requests for 
survey permission from potentially affected landowners, and survey crews working in the 
project area. For Sabal Trail there were 283 reroutes requested and considered, resulting in 182 
approved changes. Enbridge conducted over 77 town hall/informational meetings, held over 
500 elected official visits and other outreach, and issued 10 labor union/ vendor/ industry 
association support letters on the project’s behalf. In looking at community giving, Enbridge 
participated in 23 Helping Hands in Action Projects, which included over 350 volunteers in 
communities across this project. 
4. Carbon Capture and Utilization and Carbon Dioxide Removal 
Enbridge supports the recommendations, “Agencies with activities and responsibilities for CCU 
and CDR regulations, standards, and greenhouse gas reporting, such as the EPA, DOE, the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, and other relevant agencies, should consider 
consolidating and publishing a repository for lifecycle analysis methodology, results, and 
information related to CCUS and CDR…”

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0047 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
March 18, 2022 
 
Brenda Mallory, Chair 
White House Council on Environmental Quality 
730 Jackson Place NW 
Washington, DC 20503 
 
RE:  
Docket ID: CEQ–2022– 0001, Council on Environmental Quality  
 
Project Vesta, PBC, a Delaware public benefit corporation (Project Vesta), is submitting this comment in 
response to the Council on Environmental Quality’s (CEQ) request for comment in relation to its interim 
guidance document, “Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration (CCUS) Guidance.”  
The proposed document seeks to streamline CCUS projects in the context of the Administration's 
current domestic climate goal of net-zero emissions economy-wide by 2050. The proposed guidance 
addresses opportunities for clarifications and improvements to ensure that CCUS projects, including 
specifically Direct Air Capture (DAC) and Bioenergy with Carbon Capture & Storage (BECCS), are 
responsibly scaled in a timely manner by leveraging diverse federal agency collaboration, all the while 
maintaining the integrity of public health, the environment, and the economy.  
Project Vesta’s Views 
Project Vesta broadly agrees with these goals. In order for CCUS projects to deliver on the promise to 
achieve large-scale CO2 emissions reductions, federal agencies must leverage a robust regulatory 
framework that maximizes both safety and effectiveness, and at the same time, does not restrain the 
demonstration or deployment of various CCUS projects. As the document explains, technical approaches 
for Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR) initiatives differ in “...technical maturity, market potential, cost, and 
carbon dioxide reduction potential [as well as] societal and environmental impacts and benefits.” Thus, 
achieving commercialization of these diverse projects will require increased federal agency 
collaboration, especially focused on both increasing transparency and consolidating Monitoring, 
Reporting & Verification (MRV) standards and technology.  
Our focus in terms of this document regards CEQ’s focus on DAC and BECCS. CEQ's focus excludes 
various other established CDR techniques, as well as emerging, nascent technologies within the CDR 
industry. Given the number of new technologies as well as the rapid scale of innovation and 
development in the CDR industry, the paucity of existing CDR solutions with high levels of permanence, 
and the sheer amount of existing emissions which will need to be removed in order to avoid further 
environmental harm, CEQ should adopt a technology-neutral approach to enable all types of promising 
CDR technologies to play their part.  
Current regulatory policies and programs showcase the necessity to support a suite of diverse CCUS 
approaches. The Infrastructure Investment & Jobs Act guarantees substantial funding for a wide variety 
of CDR technology demonstrations, and the DOE’s new Carbon Negative Earthshot Program 
intentionally includes many CDR approaches in order to ensure that CDR is “...sufficiently well 
understood to promote appropriate deployment, matched to specific place-based and community 

needs.” The Earthshot program cites six promising approaches apart from DAC and BECCS: Soil Carbon 
Sequestration, Afforestation/Reforestation, Enhanced Mineralization, and Ocean-Based CDR. As a 
massive wave of promising CDR technologies funnels through the research, testing, and validation 
stages provided by these federal agencies, many will approach the deployment and implementation 
process that CEQ’s guidance document aims to streamline. Thus, CEQ should focus on pathway 
inclusivity for other promising CDR technologies to achieve commercialization and scale.  
Consistent with the foregoing, Project Vesta believes there are major benefits to widening the definition 
of CCUS projects within CEQ’s guidance. First, other CDR approaches, such as enhanced weathering, 
ocean-based CDR and soil carbon sequestration, generally do not require navigating the complex web of 
federal pipeline permitting that is required for DAC and BECCS. CEQ should consider adopting a holistic, 
inclusive approach to scaling all CDR initiatives. Each approach should be rigorously and consistently 
evaluated for its potential to meet stringent justice, sustainability, and cost targets for appropriate 
deployment at scale.  
Another major benefit of adopting a technology-neutral approach is its alignment and compatibility with 
other federal policy. Project Vesta has drafted and circulated textual amendments to Section 45Q of the 
Internal Revenue Code that would make the tax credit arrangement contemplated thereby technology-
neutral. The draft bill also ensures that various federal agencies are responsible for approving MRV 
standards in the same manner that third party verification organizations are operating today. Thus, a 
solidified, standardized MRV process that is ingrained within 45Q ensures that promising CDR initiatives 
are filtered through these approval structures, thus streamlining the process of validation, verification, 
and commercialization. 
In accordance with CEQ’s proposed guidance, Project Vesta agrees that connecting appropriate 
stakeholders, such as working groups, subject matter experts, NGOs, local community leaders, and 
industry, will be crucial in defining the standards, certifications, and requirements of commercially viable 
CDR approaches. Ultimately, Project Vesta believes the adoption of a technology-neutral stance on 
scaling CCUS will maximize CEQ’s ability to align its guidance with the objectives set out in the 
Administration’s current climate policies and goals.  
 
Additional Issues & Information 
There are a multitude of CDR approaches that are well-understood and have been appropriately 
deployed with measurable benefits and results thus far. One of the most promising nature-based 
approaches is ocean-based CDR. The National Academy of Sciences recently published a comprehensive 
review of ocean-based CDR methodologies, assessing its knowledge base, efficacy, durability, MRV, 
viability, governance, and social dimensions. Although much research and development is still being 
done, it is clear that ocean-based CDR should be considered as part of the Administration’s holistic 
climate response strategy and portfolio given its potential to drastically limit climate change. CEQ should 
build out an ocean-specific CDR pathway that provides companies within this space with the federal 
resources, support, and structure necessary to scale responsibly in a timely manner.  
Conclusion 

Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this proposed guidance. As referenced herein, Project 
Vesta believes the intent of CEQ can be accomplished in a much more inclusive, effective way, while still 
protecting our communities and our environment. Ultimately, as federal agencies continue to develop 
standards and certifications necessary to drive the commercialization of CDR technologies, Project Vesta 
recommends that CEQ consider broadening the scope of its guidance to include other CDR approaches 
apart from DAC and BECCS in order to ensure that the implementation of all solutions are both 
equitable and impactful in the long run. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Project Vesta, PBC

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0028 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
March 17, 2022 
Mary Moerlins 
Environmental Policy & Corporate Responsibility Director    
NW Natural 
250 SW Taylor Street 
Portland, OR 
97204 
 
Council on Environmental Quality 
730 Jackson Place NW 
Washington, DC 
20503 
 
RE: Council on Environmental Quality CEQ-2022-0001 Carbon Capture, Utilization, and 
Sequestration Guidance document comments 
 
NW Natural is a pipeline utility that currently provides natural gas to approximately 2.5 million 
customers in Oregon and Southwest Washington with one of the most modern pipeline systems in 
the nation. We have been evolving to meet the changing needs of the communities we serve for 
our 163 years in business. We have a longstanding commitment to safety, environmental 
stewardship, and taking care of our employees and communities. We are especially proud of our 
voluntary goal to be a carbon neutral pipeline by 2050, decarbonizing our own operations as well 
as the essential product we deliver to our customers, and appreciate the opportunity to comment 
on the subject guidance document. 
The climate imperative requires significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions from all sectors, 
especially the nation’s energy supplies, as quickly as possible. This must be done as equitably 
without leaving anyone behind; therefore, the cost and reliability of energy sources must also be 
taken into consideration. Having as many options and pathways possible to decarbonize enables a 
just transition, and we applaud the Council on Environmental Quality for including carbon capture, 
utilization, and sequestration (CCUS) as a key mechanism to meet the President’s net-zero goal by 
2050. 
Overall, the guidance document put forward is reasonable, and presents logical pathways for 
existing governmental organizations to consider CCUS projects. It is critical for these entities to 
analyze projects as transparently and equitably as possible to ensure timely and efficient project 

 
development and funding and therefore confidence in these projects in the market. And we agree 
that in turn, full transparency of captured and sequestered emissions measurements should be put 
into place across all organizations. 
NW Natural agrees that CCUS projects need full public engagement and regulatory oversight to 
ensure pipeline construction and operational safety, not only for the people but also for the land 
on which the projects sit. We agree that Tribal Nations should provide robust consultation and 
engagement on these projects not only to ensure this safety, but also to benefit from any economic 
opportunities these CCUS projects may provide. 
Carbon dioxide pipelines, capture equipment, and storage facilities provide new ways for the 
existing workforce to participate in the transition to a low-carbon future. They will enable 
economic opportunities while expediting decarbonization at lower costs than pathways without 
incorporating CCUS. We thank you again for the opportunity to comment on the guidance 
document and look forward to using it in future CCUS projects. 
Regards, 
Mary Moerlins 
Environmental Policy & Corporate Responsibility Director

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0032 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
PUBLIC DOCUMENT 
Wiley Rein LLP  |  2050 M Street NW  |  Washington, DC 20036  |  202.719.7000
March 18, 2022 
VIA REGULATIONS.GOV 
Amy B. Coyle 
Deputy General Counsel 
Council on Environmental Quality 
730 Jackson Place NW 
Washington, DC 20503 
Re: 
Comments on the Council on Environmental Quality’s Carbon Capture, 
Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance (CEQ–2022–0001) 
Dear Ms. Coyle, 
On behalf of American Cast Iron Pipe Company, Berg Steel Pipe Corp., Berg Spiral Pipe 
Corp., Dura-Bond Industries, Stupp Corporation, Welspun Global Trade LLC, JSW Steel USA 
(each a member of the American Line Pipe Producers Association (“ALPPA”)); Greens Bayou 
Pipe Mill, LP; Skyline Steel; and Trinity Products LLC, U.S. manufacturers of large diameter 
welded pipe (collectively, “ALPPA Trade Committee”), we hereby submit the following 
comments to the Council on Environmental Quality (“CEQ”) regarding its Carbon Capture, 
Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance, pursuant to CEQ’s February 16, 2022 Federal Register 
notice.1 
The members of the ALPPA Trade Committee are U.S. line pipe and structural pipe 
manufacturers concentrating on the large (greater than 16-inch) diameter segment of the pipe 
market.  The ALPPA Trade Committee supports the development and strengthening of American 
energy infrastructure and seeks to promote the use of steel pipe manufactured in the United States 
in such infrastructure.  The ALPPA Trade Committee supports fair trade and has taken action 
1
Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance, 87 Fed. Reg. 8,808 (Council on Env’t Quality 
Feb. 16, 2022). 

Amy B. Coyle  
March 18, 2022 
Page 2
PUBLIC DOCUMENT 
under the law against foreign producers and importers who have violated and ignored U.S. trade 
and customs laws and international trade rules.   
The ALPPA Trade Committee manufacturers have traditionally focused on pipe 
production for use in constructing oil and gas pipelines, and they have produced pipe for thousands 
of miles of safe and efficient American pipelines.  With the increasing focus on sources of more 
renewable energy in the United States, these U.S. pipe manufacturers are also interested in 
exploring opportunities to produce pipe for use in carbon capture, utilization, and sequestration 
(“CCUS”) project pipelines.  Certain ALPPA Trade Committee manufacturers currently have the 
capability to produce such pipe and have done so in the recent past, while other manufacturers 
could have the capability to produce such pipe quickly, with modest investments. 
CEQ’s interim CCUS Guidance acknowledges that achieving CCUS and permanent 
sequestration will require the creation of an expanded carbon dioxide pipeline and sequestration 
network in the United States.2  It is critical that this key pipeline infrastructure be built with 
American-produced pipe.  While CEQ’s Guidance notes several other important factors for 
agencies to consider in promoting the development and permitting of CCUS projects (including 
public health and, of course, climate goals), the CCUS Guidance should also explicitly state that 
new CCUS pipeline projects should utilize pipe that is manufactured in the United States, 
consistent with the Biden Administration’s “Made in America” priorities.  Particularly given the 
significant federal funding to be involved in CCUS projects (including tax incentives under 
Section 45Q and federal loans and grants through the Carbon Dioxide Transportation 
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Program), it is crucial that CCUS pipeline pipe used in those 
2
Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance, 87 Fed. Reg. at 8,810. 

Amy B. Coyle  
March 18, 2022 
Page 3
PUBLIC DOCUMENT 
projects be produced in the United States, so that the benefits of those federal funds flow to U.S. 
manufacturers, not, for example, Chinese-owned or Russian-owned manufacturers. 
The use of American-made pipe in CCUS project pipelines is not just important to the U.S. 
economy and to U.S. steel pipe producers.  It is critical to the environmental goals that increased 
CCUS deployment is designed to pursue.  When steel products like pipe are produced in the United 
States, the process is substantially cleaner and more environmentally friendly than when the 
production occurs in other major pipe-producing countries.  Rather than importing foreign pipe 
and its pollution, the United States should produce the pipe right here.  And U.S. producers are 
ready and willing to do so.  In fact, most American large diameter steel pipe producers currently 
have substantial excess production capacity as a result of the decline in new oil and gas pipelines 
and as a result of continued imports of steel pipe.  This available U.S. capacity can be directed 
toward production of pipe for CCUS project pipelines. 
In addition, as CEQ notes in its interim Guidance, “the successful widespread deployment 
of responsible CCUS will require strong and effective permitting.”3  The ALPPA Trade Committee 
urges CEQ to ensure a streamlined and efficient permitting process for CCUS project pipelines. 
Obstacles to or delays in permitting can cause significant disruptions to the process of building 
pipelines, and the ALPPA Trade Committee encourages CEQ to evaluate existing regulatory 
frameworks for improvements that can be made to further simplify and expedite the permitting 
process. 
Finally, as noted, while some U.S. pipe manufacturers are capable of producing pipe for 
carbon capture currently, others need to make additional investments in their manufacturing 
3
Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance, 87 Fed. Reg. at 8,809. 

Amy B. Coyle  
March 18, 2022 
Page 4
PUBLIC DOCUMENT 
facilities to do so.  Ongoing research and development may also be needed to ensure that CCUS 
pipelines are as safe and efficient as possible.  Federal funding sources, such as those made 
available under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, should be made available to manufacturers like 
steel pipe producers, which will play a vital role in the building of American infrastructure for the 
renewable energy transition. 
The means by which CCUS projects are sourced and deployed are extremely important to 
U.S. steel pipe manufacturers, including the ALPPA Trade Committee.  We ask that CEQ 
implement our comments above in its final CCUS Guidance to ensure that the Guidance 
appropriately prioritizes Made in America steel pipe for the country’s vital future infrastructure 
needs. 
Should you have any questions regarding this submission, please do not hesitate to contact 
us. 
Respectfully submitted, 
/s/ Timothy C. Brightbill 
Timothy C. Brightbill, Esq. 
Laura El-Sabaawi, Esq. 
Counsel to American Cast Iron Pipe 
Company, Berg Steel Pipe Corp., Berg Spiral 
Pipe Corp., Dura-Bond Industries, Stupp 
Corporation, Welspun Global Trade LLC, 
JSW Steel USA, Greens Bayou Pipe Mill, LP, 
Skyline Steel and Trinity Products LLC

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0040 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
March 18, 2022  
  
Via E-Filing 
  
Council on Environmental Quality 
730 Jackson Place NW 
Washington, DC 20503  
  
Re: 
CEQ Comments to Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration (CCUS), 
Docket number, CEQ-2022-0001 
  
Dear Commissioners and Commission Staff:   
 
 
In consideration of the indirect and cumulative impacts of Bioenergy with Carbon 
Capture and Storage (BECCS) facilities, we must take into account biomass facilities that exist 
in the earlier stages of the BECCS supply chain. The environmental justice impacts of biomass 
facilities generally, or wood pellet mills specifically, are vast. Wood pellet plants emit 
hazardous air pollutants, fine particulate matter, and other harmful pollution, and contribute 
to human health illnesses that disproportionately impact racial-ethnic minorities in 
southern U.S. communities. An increase in tree logging to supply the wood pellet plants can 
lead to lower air and water quality and increased risk of flooding in local communities.  
 
The United States (U.S.) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) associates these 
toxic exposures to illnesses ranging from respiratory and heart disease to cancer to slowed 
lung function in children. Posing a significant danger to human health, the 2018 report of the 
Environmental Integrity Project (EIP1) revealed that 21 wood pellet mills in the U.S. emit a 
total of 16,000 tons of health-threatening air pollutants per year. Specifically, they emit more 
than 2,500 tons of particulate matter (PM2.5), 3,200 tons of nitrogen oxides (NOx)—smog, 
2,100 tons of carbon monoxide (CO), and 7,000 tons of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). 
These plants also emit 3.1 million tons of greenhouse gases annually, including carbon 
dioxide (CO2). Pellet mills also emit hazardous air pollutants such as methanol, 
formaldehyde, and acrolein. PM2.5 is especially harmful to human health, causing up to 
200,000 excess deaths in the United States every year.2 PM2.5 consists of tiny airborne 
particles that can pass deep into a person’s lungs and even into the bloodstream, causing 
heart attacks, decreased lung function, worsening asthma symptoms, and leading to 
premature death, especially among people of color.  
 
1 Dirty Deception: How the Wood Biomass Industry Skirts the Clean Air Act. Environmental Integrity Project.  
 https://www.environmentalintegrity.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Biomass-Report.pdf.  
2 Biomass Threatens Vulnerable Communities. Cut Carbon Not Forest. 
https://www.cutcarbonnotforests.org/cut-carbon-not-forests-biomass-threatens-vulnerable-communities/.  

2 
 
 
 Wood pellet mills are also large sources of fugitive dust, noise pollution, and 
increased traffic—factors that negative impact local communities’ health and quality of life. 
Moreover, of the 15 largest operating pellet mills, at least eight have had fires or explosions 
since 2014, including at mills in North Carolina, Georgia, Arkansas, Alabama, and Texas, that 
released vast amounts of air pollution and/or injured employees. In addition, a fire at a wood 
pellet storage facility in Texas burned for two months in 2017, exposing residents to toxic 
levels of pollutants requiring medical attention.  
 
To date, BECCS has not been proven at scale and the large-scale implementation of 
BECCS using forest biomass should not be incentivized or promoted to address climate 
change. More than 500 scientists addressed the leaders of the U.S., the European Union, 
Japan, and South Korea, to unpack the erroneous assumptions contained in the “carbon 
neutrality” categorization of forest bioenergy and to outline the ways these assumptions may 
undercut climate and biodiversity goals.3 Because forest biomass itself is not carbon neutral, 
BECCS cannot achieve negative emissions.4 Specifically, offsite emissions from wood pellet 
processing, drying, and transport can never be captured, nor can BECCS account for foregone 
sequestration—the carbon storage that would have occurred over time in the uncut forest.  
 
Including forest biomass to the BECCS facilities pose a grave risk to marginalized 
communities. The present impact to southern U.S. communities, especially the racial-
minority subsections, has presented human health concerns and natural ecosystem 
implications. Ensuring that the BECCS’ assessment takes into account the entire supply chain 
will provide additional protection for disproportionately affected communities from further 
harmful air pollutants, displacement of the natural ecosystem, and potential degradation of 
water resources.  
  
Chandra T. Taylor-Sawyer 
Senior Attorney  
Leader of Environmental Justice Initiative 
   
 
 
  
Heather Hillaker  
Staff Attorney  
 
3 Letter Regarding Use of Forests for Bioenergy. (11 February 2021). https://assets-woodwell.s3.us-east-
2.amazonaws.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/12102409/Scientist-Letter-to-Biden-von-der-Leyen-
Michel-Suga-Moon-Re.-Forest-Biomass-February-11-2021.pdf.  
 
4 A Bad Biomass Bet: Why the Leading Approach to Biomass Energy with Carbon Capture and Storage Isn’t 
Carbon Negative. Natural Resources Defense Council. https://www.nrdc.org/resources/bad-biomass-bet.

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0042 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
Department of Environmental Quality 
    To protect, conserve and enhance the quality of Wyoming’s 
 
    environment for the benefit of current and future generations. 
 
 
Mark Gordon, Governor 
        Todd Parfitt, Director 
 
 
 
200 West 17th Street,   Cheyenne, WY  82002  ·  http://deq.wyoming.gov  ·  Fax (307)635-1784 
 
ADMIN/OUTREACH    ABANDONED MINES       AIR QUALITY       INDUSTRIAL SITING       LAND QUALITY      SOLID & HAZ. WASTE       WATER QUALITY 
(307) 777-7937          (307) 777-6145             (307) 777-7391          (307) 777-7369                (307) 777-7756             (307) 777-7752                 (307) 777-7781 
 
March 18, 2022 
White House Council on Environmental Quality  
 
 
Attention: Amy B. Coyle, Deputy General Counsel 
730 Jackson Place, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20503 
 
Submitted via https://www.regulations.gov/commenton/CEQ-2022-0001-0001 
 
Re:  White House Council on Environmental Quality’s (CEQ)  
Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration Guidance dated February 15, 2022 
Docket #: CEQ-2022-0001 
 
Dear Ms. Coyle, 
 
Based on the Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality (WDEQ), Water Quality Division 
(WQD) review of the CEQ’s interim “Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration Guidance” 
(hereinafter “Guidance”) published in the Federal Register on February 16, 2022, 87 Fed. Reg. 8808, 
the following comments are provided: 
 
1. Facilitating Federal Decision Making on CCUS Projects and Carbon Dioxide Pipelines 
 
a. WDEQ/WQD currently implements the Underground Injection Control (UIC) Class VI 
program under primacy as approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in October 
2020.  Wyoming is the second state to receive primacy of the UIC Class VI program, and upon 
receiving primacy, the WDEQ has fielded numerous questions regarding primacy, permitting, 
and how the state will implement the program.  In addition, Wyoming has enacted numerous 
statutes beginning in 2010 to address CCUS.  
 
As the Guidance references, federally funded CCUS projects or CCUS activities on federally 
managed lands may trigger regulatory obligations such as the National Environmental Policy 
Act.  The Guidance recommends that federal agencies should develop programmatic 
environmental reviews to be more efficient and effective while maintaining strong community 
engagement.  The Guidance does not mention working with state agencies on this process.  In 
addition, the consideration of implementing a memorandum of understanding to establish the 
process by which those federal agencies will collaborate appears to exclude state agencies.  As 
mentioned above, Wyoming has received primacy of the UIC Class VI program and has 
various statutes to address CCUS in Wyoming.  Developing a process to streamline federal 
permitting processes without input from Wyoming and other states with UIC Class VI primacy 
could unnecessarily result in significant permitting delays or conflicts with state statutes and 

White House Council on Environmental Quality’s 
Interim “Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration Guidance” 
Docket #: CEQ-2022-0001 
Page 2 of 3 
 
regulations.  Any guidance should address how federal and state agencies will work 
collaboratively to streamline the permitting processes required under both state and federal 
regulations.   
 
b. Grant funds have been designated to increase staff capacity and training at agencies with 
geological sequestration permitting authorities. Currently, the WDEQ/WQD Groundwater 
Section, which oversees the UIC Class VI program, has 11 staff members, five of whom have 
the technical expertise to implement UIC Class VI permitting and oversight.  The Section has 
received one UIC Class VI application to date and anticipates two to six additional applications 
before the end of this calendar year.  CCUS projects are technically and regulatorily complex 
and will require significant staff time to permit and oversee under the UIC Class VI program.  
Therefore, in addition to guidance supporting how grant funds can be used to support staff 
resources at federal agencies, guidance should include how grants will be used to support staff 
resources for states with UIC Class VI primacy and states seeking primacy.  Furthermore, 
funding appears to be available for only the timeframe of 2022 through 2026.  The permitting 
process and implementation of the program may require major permit modification during the 
life of the project with projects lasting many years.  In addition to permitting, oversight of 
compliance will also require significant staff time.  The guidance should speak to the 
comprehensive implementation of the program past 2026 and how funding will be managed 
to assist both state and federal regulatory agencies into the future for continued staffing support 
and training assistance. 
 
c. The Guidance briefly mentions collaboration with agencies and monitoring progress related 
to the CCUS activities and regulations proposed in the guidance in the coming months, 
including authorizing use of geologic pore space on federal lands.  Wyoming has statutes on 
pore space ownership.  It should be clear that states will be included in the discussions.  WDEQ 
encourages CEQ to include collaboration with states to address such issues.   
 
d. The Guidance discusses the need for transparency to build public confidence in CCUS 
activities. This is associated with the presentation of information or data collected for 
monitoring and verification, which is required as part of UIC Class VI permitting and 
Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program requirements.  The Guidance recommends consideration 
of expanding existing efforts, and (when feasible) implementing a national program for 
monitoring deep geologic carbon sequestration.  The Guidance does not provide information 
on what this expanded national program would consist of.  Monitoring and verification are 
reporting requirements and are set as permit conditions under the UIC Class VI program. 
Guidance needs to consider close collaboration with primacy programs, specifically states that 
will be issuing the permits, to ensure consistency with state regulations. 
 
2. Public Engagement and Interdisciplinary Research 
 
WDEQ does not have any comments on this section at this time.  The UIC Class VI program 
requires public notice prior to permit issuance as well as any permit modifications.  State 

White House Council on Environmental Quality’s 
Interim “Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration Guidance” 
Docket #: CEQ-2022-0001 
Page 3 of 3 
regulations outline the processes for public notice and public hearings (if requested) for a Class VI 
permit.   
3. Understanding Environmental Impacts
WDEQ does not have any comments on this section at this time. WDEQ has robust statutes and
rules in place as part of its Class VI permitting program to ensure protection of water quality, and
permits will include extensive data collection and reporting requirements.
4. Carbon Capture and Utilization and Carbon Dioxide Removal
WDEQ does not have any comments on this section at this time.
WDEQ appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments, and we would welcome the opportunity 
to meet with CEQ to discuss these issues in greater detail. 
Sincerely, 
Todd Parfitt, Director 
cc: 
Randall Luthi, Chief Energy Advisor, Office of the Governor 
Jennifer Zygmunt, WQD Administrator 
Lily Barkau, P.G., Groundwater Section Manager, WQD 
Tom Kropatsch, Wyoming Oil and Gas Conservation Commission 
Dr. Glen Murrell, Wyoming Energy Authority

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0023 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
From:
johnw@worldtradecenterorlando.org
To:
Coyle, Amy B. EOP/CEQ
Subject:
[EXTERNAL] Carbon Capture Utilization & Sequestration - What is Being Sought Already Exists to Large Extent
Date:
Wednesday, February 23, 2022 1:14:08 PM
Attachments:
AQSW DAC February 2022.pdf
Dear Ms. Coyle,
It is hard to get anyone at the Federal level to listen. Totally wonderful people but largely one way on
communications.
 
Nearly all of what is being sought for Public Comment in the Federal Register on Carbon Capture,
Utilization, and Sequestration large already exists. We’ve spent over two years attempting the
Federal Government to listen.
 
Air Quality Solutions Worldwide and Particulate Matter Solutions LLC engaged me in August of 2019
to help bring their US patented Direct Air Capture to market. The technology has been thoroughly
tested and once we find a manufacturer and someone to whom to transfer the US Patent rights we
will be ready to launch globally.
 
Attached is our technology information deck and below are more facts. I will call you to discuss. The
main thing we are currently seeking is someone at the Federal level who will listen thoroughly and
hopefully come to the conclusion that much of what is being sought, already exists. And instead of
doing all the planning, R&D, etc. lets all put our efforts into launching what already exists. I was head
of quality at FedEx where we had the saying: “Don’t let best stand in the way of better.” Is our the
best? No. BUT it is 10 times better than anything else that already exists.
 
Here is what we’re sending to prospective manufacturers and investors.
 
“Would you  like to discuss the possibility of adding about $50 billion in revenue in North America
and adding about another $100 Billion in revenue elsewhere globally?
 
This is a perfect large added revenue opportunity for your company . as our technology retrofits to
all commercial HVAC globally.
 
We at Air Quality Solutions Worldwide and Particulate Matter Solutions LLC have 2 US patents on a
leading edge Direct Air Capture (DAC) technology which retrofits to global, commercial HVAC Cooling
Towers and we are seeking a manufacturer. The prototype has been fully tested and found to do
everything we claim for it. Financially, this would be like having an automobile manufacturing
company  as it costs about $40,000 to manufacture each DAC. The average cost of a new car is now
about $47K.
 
To be effective in cleaning/capturing multiple greenhouse gas emissions in all global densely
populated areas, we would need to place about 1.5 million DAC units in North America and about
another 3 million DAC units elsewhere in the world.
 
Our DAC captures CO2, Methane, Ozone, and Heavy Particulates and is several years ahead of

anything else out there because our global infrastructure is already in place and it captures these
multiple types of emissions. The only 2 current serious competitors only have one location each –
one in British Columbia and one in Iceland – and only capture CO2. Further, our cost to capture is
only about $75/ton – with ‘no green premium’ as Bill Gates likes to say. It uses no new net energy.
 
There is already great demand for the large amounts of carbon we will capture by the trainload and
growing demand for methane we will capture. And there is already a great amount of funding
available so your companyl should not have to bear the full costs of manufacturing. For example, we
have successfully passed the first stage in Bill Gates’ Breakthrough Energy Catalyst program to be
eligible for a share of the intended $15 Billion in funding, as DAC is one of the required four
categories of eligibility. But we now need a manufacturer to qualify for the second stage and to
enter the round of funding which just began this month (February).
 
There are also $Billions of US Federal Funding from the Energy Act of 2020 which Trump signed into
law and from the Infrastructure bill which Biden signed into law. DAC qualifies for significant portions
of each.
 
There is also great demand for captured carbon and growing demand for captured methane. See
below demand and funding particulars.
 
Elon Musk wants CO2 for rocket fuel
>https://www.itechpost.com/articles/108631/20220110/elon-musk-captain-planet-spacex-turn-
carbon-dioxide-rocket-fuel.htm<
 
Twelve company has all sorts of products it has proved can be made from CO2, including jet fuel
which it made in conjunction with the US Air Force
>https://www.twelve.co/<
 
Further on Twelve
>https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/dec/05/carbon-dioxide-co2-capture-utilisation-
products-vodka-jet-fuel-protein<
 
Lanzatech is making products from CO2
>https://www.lanzatech.com/<
 
$3.5 Billion in US Infrastructure  bill for CO2 demonstration project and $2.5 Billion for Carbon
Storage
>https://www.jdsupra.com/legalnews/bipartisan-infrastructure-bill-invests-9111801/<
 
US Infrastructure Bill provides $Billions for capturing and removing CO2
>https://www.theverge.com/2021/8/3/22606395/pipeline-battle-co2-removal-carbon-capture-
bipartisan-infrastructure<
 
Energy Act of 2020 includes $Billions for  Carbon Capture and Storage (CCUS) and
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) which our DAC can also mitigate.

>https://www.aip.org/fyi/2021/congress-sets-new-goals-doe-technology-programs<
 
$Billions for Mitigating HFCs
>https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/congress-passes-major-climate-legislation-in-year-end-
omnibus/<
 
Purchases from existing direct air capture competition
>https://www.greenbiz.com/article/direct-air-capture-ready-its-closeup<
 
Now imagine a side business like Waste Management globally in all major cities with the new
company picking up full containers of captured CO2 and dropping empties.
 
And our Direct Air Capture captures methane. Just imagine the same side company also picking up
Methane containers and dropping empties – for processing methane into green hydrogen and green
natural gas.
 
In addition to manufacturing we are also seeking to transfer the US patent rights to someone else, as
our inventor, Rob Allison, has other inventions to get to market and does not want to start his own
company (although he will commit to significant time of being a key advisor to whoever does start
the company).
 
Attached is an executive summary of our DAC.
 
May we discuss at your convenience?
 
Thank you.
John
 
John R. West
Vice President of Programs
World Trade Center Orlando
Air Quality Solutions Worldwide Vice President
Particulate Matter Solutions LLC Management Representative
770-880-1918
johnw@worldtradecenterorlando.org
>www.worldtradecenterorlando.org<

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0041 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
Electrochaea Corporation • 500 Capitol Mall • Suite 1900 • Sacramento, CA 95814  
 
 
 
Page 1 of 11 
March 18, 2022 
Council on Environmental Quality 
730 Jackson Place, NW 
Washington, DC 20503  
Re:  Docket No. CEQ-2022-0001  
Electrochaea Corporation appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the interim 
guidance document, Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance (Report). 
Electrochaea Corporation is a subsidiary of Electrochaea GmbH, a growth-stage company that 
has developed a solution for the production of clean, synthetic methane.  Synthetic methane is 
a low carbon intensity (CI) replacement for fossil-based natural gas. 
 
To reach the President’s ambitious domestic climate goal of net-zero emissions economy-wide 
by 2050, all available and up and coming technologies should be employed.  Technologies 
which can “transform [CO2] for utilization in industrial processes or as feedstock for useful 
commercial products”1 should be exploited. 
 
These remarks provided by Electrochaea are on the importance of a technology called power-
to-gas as a carbon capture and utilization technology. Power-to-gas is a means to provide 
renewable gas for any current use of natural gas including industrial use and firm power 
generation, and a means to store renewable energy. This comment includes (1) a description of 
power-to-gas technologies and its benefits that are not currently included in the Report, (2) 
Electrochaea’s position on several aspects of the Report, and (3) corrections and additions to 
the background material on carbon utilization in the Report. 
 
I. 
Power-to-gas technology and its benefits 
 
A. What is power-to-gas? 
 
Power-to-gas is a technology in which the energy of a power source is stored in a gas. When 
power-to-gas is combined with methanation, a clean synthetic methane, is produced from CO2 
and hydrogen, which is a renewable and clean drop-in replacement for fossil natural gas.  
 
1 Council on Environmental Quality Report to Congress on Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration 
(Report) 
 

Page 2 of 11 
 
 
Power-to-gas methanation has many advantages, including production of low carbon intensity 
fuel, efficient use of power that would otherwise be curtailed, long-term and high capacity 
(TWh) energy storage. This long-term energy storage (weeks to months) cannot be 
accomplished with traditional batteries. This renewable energy provides a cost-effective 
resource for integrated resource planning, large capacity storage in existing infrastructure, and 
doubling production of renewable gas from biogas sites. 
 
B. Solutions driven by power-to-gas technologies 
 
1. Power-to-gas plays an important role in achieving a net-zero economy 
 
The power-to-gas methanation process produces clean, synthetic methane that can replace any 
use of natural gas, including renewable electricity production and transportation. When one 
volume of synthetic methane is used, one volume of fossil natural gas need not be removed 
from the fossil vaults. In this case the energy from one volume of renewable uses our existing 
infrastructure, with existing markets and replaces the same volume of fossil gas without a net 
increase in the release of greenhouse gases from a fossil energy source.  
 
As an example, Electrochaea has developed a grid-scale power-to-gas solution that stores 
renewable energy in grid-quality synthetic methane.  CO2 and clean hydrogen are combined by 
a microorganism called Archaea to produce clean, synthetic methane. Clean, synthetic methane 
has a carbon intensity that is significantly lower than fossil natural gas and it fully functions to 
replace all uses of fossil natural gas. Thus, use of low carbon intensity synthetic methane 
significantly reduces GHG emissions, utilizes investment in existing gas distribution and storage 
infrastructure, and contributes to the transition to a clean energy economy. Electrochaea’s two-
step power-to-gas biomethanation process is illustrated below in Figure 1.  
 
 

Page 3 of 11 
 
 
Figure 1. (1) Renewable energy is used to produce hydrogen by electrolysis, (2) hydrogen and carbon dioxide are 
delivered to the reactor (3) in which clean, synthetic methane is synthesized by the archaea. (4) Clean, synthetic 
methane (biomethane) is prepared for grid injection or use.  
 
The Electrochaea story started in the year 2006 with basic research and four years of proof-of-
concept work in Prof. Laurens Mets’ laboratory at the University of Chicago. De-risking of the 
process for commercialization began in 2011, using raw biogas to produce methane at a 
brewery digester in St. Louis, MO, and continued with field trials in 2013 in Foulum, Denmark. 
In 2016, an industrial scale plant was commissioned in Avedore, Denmark at a wastewater 
treatment plant. The power-to-gas methanation plant, in intermittent operation for 3.5 years, 
obtained 4,500 total operating hours. Grid quality methane (>97% methane) is produced by the 
self-sustaining biocatalyst, and has been injected onto the Danish gas grid. A second-generation 
plant, with automated remote operation, was commissioned in 2019 in Switzerland, and was 
injecting high quality methane onto the gas grid within 96 hours of startup. Both plants have 
demonstrated flexible operation with immediate recovery after different periods of shutdown. 
This flexibility is important to accept intermittent renewable power when it is available. Load 
factor tests have shown that the Electrochaea power-to-gas methanation system can be 
operated at 0-100% capacity.  
 
2. Storage of power that would be otherwise curtailed  
 
Electrochaea’s technology makes it possible to store renewable energy and recycle CO2 in a 
cost-effective way. This technology eliminates the temporal link between energy supply and 
demand, allowing efficient energy storage in methane. When renewable power is available but 
cannot be used immediately, the power must be curtailed.  If this otherwise curtailed power is 
available for the production of synthetic methane, the energy will not be lost and can be stored 
in the gas infrastructure. This enables full use of renewable energy production, even in the 
absence of available consumers, thus enabling continued growth of the market for renewable 
electric power, while providing an expanding source of renewable gas. In addition, clean 
methane produced using power-to-gas processes is capable of providing very-long-duration 

Page 4 of 11 
 
storage and can play a significant role in addressing the seasonal mismatch in supply and 
demand that makes it difficult to achieve 100% renewable electricity2.  The more intermittent 
renewable energy generated, the more valuable power-to-gas methanation technology 
becomes.  
 
3. Long-term energy storage which cannot be achieved with traditional batteries 
  
Power-to-gas adds a critical and additional advantage to renewable energy generation by 
providing seasonal storage of renewable energy. Analogous in many ways to pumped hydro or 
other forms of gravity-based storage, Electrochaea’s technology is able to convert wasted 
power generation into synthetic methane for much later future use. In this way, the existing gas 
grid and connected storage facilities become the largest battery in the US, storing renewable 
energy for use later in the day, month, or even year. The US has the design capacity to store 
~4,690 billion cubic feet of natural gas3, which is equivalent to 1.37 billion MW.  ~6,000 MW of 
battery storage capacity was planned for 20214. Thus, there is as much as 23,000 times the 
amount of storage in the natural gas infrastructure as in the 2021 battery storage capabilities.  
Unlike traditional battery technologies, the ‘state of charge’ of the gas grid is effectively 
insensitive to a charge/discharge cycle. The gas infrastructure would essentially never be full of 
renewable energy and would not degrade its state of charge during storage. Unlike the owner 
of a lithium-ion battery, the gas grid operator would never be compelled to discharge at the 
first anticipated best time to empty the battery to prepare for its next economic charge cycle.  
 
4. Integrated resource planning  
 
Low carbon intensity methane, when stored in the existing natural gas reservoirs, can provide 
reliability benefits to the power grid, while providing low carbon intensity electricity. A 
renewable gas reserve would enable continued use of current electricity generation assets to 
produce low carbon electricity, maintaining jobs and existing infrastructure with known 
reliability and performance metrics. Developing a low carbon intensity gas transmission system 
for power ramping needs is critical. For example, the recently projected load ramps in 
California, in excess of 25,000 MW by 2030, are unlikely to be met by solar and wind alone and 
cannot respond on demand. Increasing the intermittent renewable resources on the grid will 
exacerbate not only the ramping needs in the afternoon, but also the intermittency and 
curtailment issues seen throughout the day. The loss of renewable production for even short 
periods of time, due to weather conditions alone, could jeopardize the power grid in the 
absence of reliable, proven gas generations assets.  
 
It is likely that a synergy exists in the coupling of the renewable power sector with renewable 
gas production. As intermittent renewable electricity generation increases in the US, there will 
 
2 Denholm et al. 2021. The challenges of achieving a 100% renewable electricity system in the United States.  Joule 
5: 1331-1352 
3 https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=30632 
4 https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=49236 

Page 5 of 11 
 
necessarily be greater curtailment of electricity generation throughout the country. The power 
that is being curtailed could be stored in the hydrogen molecule using power-to-gas processes.  
By providing a buyer for economically curtailed power, production of low-cost renewable gas 
would be enabled and lost revenues for the renewable power producers would be recovered. 
In addition, clean fuels produced using power-to-gas processes are capable of providing very-
long-duration storage and can play a significant role in addressing the seasonal mismatch in 
supply and demand that makes it difficult to achieve 100% renewable electricity5. The power-
to-gas process can provide a perpetually sustainable fuel and stabilize economic returns for the 
developers of renewable power, while reducing the risk of the development of additional 
renewable generation assets. 
 
5. Storage in existing infrastructure  
 
Using existing infrastructure reduces capital investment, technology risk and land use concerns. 
Application of power-to-gas methanation produces clean methane which can be used for 
power generation in combined cycle gas turbine baseload and gas turbine peaker plants and 
prevents purchasing of traditional batteries for energy storage. 
 
6. Doubling the production of renewable gas from biogas sites 
 
The use of biogenic CO2 in the power-to-gas methanation process can double the amount of 
clean methane produced from biogas sites. The biomethanation process is compatible with any 
anaerobic digestion gas, including from landfills or the anaerobic digestion gas from projects 
focused on organic waste diversion from landfills. The renewable gas produced by power-to-gas 
and other technologies will initially cost more than our current natural gas. Like wind and solar 
and other nascent technologies, the cost of assets and the gas product will decrease with scale 
of production and market growth. In the interim, the higher value of this fuel will provide 
additional impetus to eliminate leaks from the gas grid and improve stewardship over the 
current gas to power infrastructure to meet climate goals and prevent economic losses to rate 
paying customers.  
 
Carbon capture technologies combined with power-to-gas methanation can reduce emissions 
of CO2, while increasing availability of clean, synthetic methane.  Such possibilities are enabled 
when carbon intensity (CI) is used as the metric for the reduction in GHG emissions. When CO2 
is captured from industries with unavoidable CO2 emissions, such as ethanol production, the 
availability of natural gas replacements can be significantly increased.  
 
7. Advantages over hydrogen storage 
 
Hydrogen is more difficult and expensive to store and transport than natural gas. Alternatively, 
hydrogen can be used to produce a natural gas replacement that can be easily stored and 
 
5 Denholm et al. 2021. The challenges of achieving a 100% renewable electricity system in the United States.  Joule 
5: 1331-1352 

Page 6 of 11 
 
transported in the existing gas infrastructure. When hydrogen is converted to methane, the 
existing gas infrastructure can be used for storage and distribution.  The production of methane 
from hydrogen is an efficient means to store hydrogen and the energy contained in the 
hydrogen molecule.  When hydrogen is produced by electrolysis using renewable energy, the 
energy is stored in the clean hydrogen molecule (<2kg CO2e/kg H2). When 4 moles of hydrogen 
are combusted with 2 moles of oxygen, 949 kJ/4 moles of hydrogen is released. When 1 mole of 
methane is combusted with 2 moles of oxygen, 818 kJ/mole of CH4 is released.  Thus, the 
methane molecule retains most of the combustion energy of hydrogen6, making it an ideal 
molecule for storage in the existing infrastructure. 
 
II. 
Electrochaea’s position on specific aspects of the report 
A. Comments on Section 6. Opportunities to Accelerate Efficient, Orderly, & Responsible 
CCUS Deployment under Existing Regimes  
Electrochaea’s comments on Section 6 are with respect to “where new or revised regulations 
may be required to ensure the efficient, orderly, and responsible development and deployment 
of CCUS.”  Many current regulations were made before technologies designed to capture 
carbon dioxide were developed.  Definitions and implementation strategies are too restrictive, 
preventing the intentions of these regulations to be fully realized.  Innovative technologies are 
currently available that can significantly advance the availability of fuels that can be used to 
transform our whole economy to a renewable economy.  Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
methodologies should be used to validate the global warming potential of renewable fuels. 
Electrochaea supports incentives for the production of renewable fuels to be used in all aspects 
of our economy, not only in transportation.  And, that all available means to produce these 
fuels should be employed.   
1. Standardized methods of Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) are a solution to understand 
reduction in GHG 
 
 
6 Thauer et al. 2010. Hydrogenases from Methanogenic Archaea, Nickel, a Novel Cofactor and H2 Storage.  Annual 
Review of Biochemistry 77:509-536). 

Page 7 of 11 
 
Electrochaea agrees that “LCA guidelines and 
provisions could be expanded and improved to 
address a broader range of technologies”7.  
Determining the climate value for different renewable 
fuels requires a method that is equitable to each 
product.  The scientific-based LCA approach can be 
used on a wide-array of technologies and products 
and can be applied with objectivity to compare 
benefits of different renewable fuels. To fairly 
evaluate the climate impact of different fuels, it is not 
sufficient to only evaluate the carbon intensity of the 
electricity input.  The end uses will vary considerably 
including transportation, building heat, industrial heat 
production and synthetic chemical production.  Thus, a 
full evaluation of the environmental impact from raw 
material extraction to disposal (Figure 2), which is 
commonly described as the cradle-to-grave approach8, must be completed. Multiple impact 
categories should be evaluated with the greatest attention given to the global warming 
potential (GWP).  It is likely that water use, land use impact and mineral resource scarcity 
should also be considered. 
 
2. EPA’s proposed definition of “produced from renewable biomass” may improperly 
preclude power-to-gas fuel technology  
 
EPA has proposed to add the following definition of “produced from renewable biomass” to 40 
C.F.R. § 80.1401:  “Produced from renewable biomass means that the energy in the finished 
fuel or biointermediate comes from renewable biomass.”9  The following are excerpts from 
Electrochaea’s letter to the EPA of February 4, 2022 in response to the proposed rule, 86 Fed. 
Reg. 72,436 (Dec. 21, 2021). 
This proposed definition would narrow the scope of what can be considered a “renewable fuel” 
under the RFS in a manner that is not consistent with either the text of Section 211(o) of the 
Clean Air Act (codified at 42 U.S.C. § 7545(o) or Congressional intent of increasing biofuel 
production through the RFS.10 EPA does not have authority to amend the statute via regulation, 
and Electrochaea does not support EPA’s proposed definition.   
Congress did not specify a particular meaning for “produce”.  When Congress does not provide 
a definition for a word, the word’s “ordinary or natural meaning” should be used.11  The Oxford 
 
7 Pg. 42 of the Report and pg. 24. Section 3.5 on enabling tools 
8 https://pre-sustainability.com/articles/life-cycle-assessment-lca-basics/ 
9 86 Fed. Reg. at 72,485; see also id. at 72,479. 
10 Id. at 72,439. 
11 HollyFrontier Cheyenne Ref., LLC v. Renewable Fuels Ass’n, 141 S. Ct. 2172, 2176 (2021) (quoting FDIC v. Meyer, 510 U. S. 471, 
476 (1994)). 
Figure 2.  A life cycle assessment commonly 
evaluates the beginning of life of the product to the 
end of life, or from cradle to grave8. 

Page 8 of 11 
 
English Dictionary defines “produce” as to “make or manufacture (a product or commodity) 
from components or raw materials” and to “bring (a thing) into existence from its raw materials 
or elements, or as the result of a process.”   
The EPA’s distinction between renewable biomass and the source of the energy in the finished 
renewable fuel aims to preclude fuel that is partly derived from non-renewable feedstock, a 
determination that we support and is consistent with the statutory language at 42 U.S.C. 
§ 7545(o). However, EPA’s rationale to exclude fuels derived from fossil sources has the 
consequence of improperly narrowing the scope of the RFS.  EPA is correct in its interpretation 
to exclude transportation fuel produced “by bonding carbon atoms obtained from biogenic 
carbon dioxide with hydrogen atoms obtained from fossil fuels.”12  Electrochaea agrees that 
using fossil fuels as the energy feedstock for another fuel would not render that other fuel a 
“renewable fuel” as it would neither replace or reduce the quantity of fossil fuel present in a 
transportation fuel nor achieve a significant GHG reduction from the baseline.  However, fossil 
fuels are not the only source of hydrogen; hydrogen can be generated from renewable energy.  
EPA also notes that a number of gallon-RINs cannot be calculated under 40 C.F.R. 
§ 80.1426(f)(4) for a fuel produced from “renewable biomass and non-renewable feedstocks” 
unless the renewable biomass feedstock contains energy.  As a result, EPA claims “produced 
from renewable biomass” must mean that the energy comes from the renewable biomass.  Of 
course, in EPA’s fossil fuel example, there is non-renewable feedstock.  However, if the 
hydrogen is generated from renewable energy, there is no non-renewable feedstock and 40 
C.F.R. § 80.1426(f)(4) is irrelevant.  Moreover, EPA’s regulations are to align with the statute, 
rather than narrow Congress’s broad scope of “renewable fuels” to fit EPA regulations, EPA 
should amend its regulations to align and fully implement Congressional intent.13 
EPA’s reasoning to exclude fossil fuel simply does not establish that energy must come from 
renewable biomass in order to be considered “produced from renewable biomass.”  
Unfortunately, EPA’s approach to preclude fuels comprised partly of non-renewable sources 
will impermissibly and entirely preclude certain renewable fuel made with renewable biomass. 
 
3. The EPA should approve fuel pathways that involve power-to-gas technologies 
 
Electrochaea has also noted that “[t]he RFS program does not currently have fuel pathways that 
include CCUS as part of the renewable fuel production process.“14  CCUS is an important means 
of producing renewable fuels at scale, although the full potential of this technology has not 
been realized.  To assist the increased production of these fuels, it is necessary that EPA 
approves pathways for the RFS program that allow production of renewable fuels using an 
expanded list of energy sources that have a low global warming potential.  As noted in the 
Section 1 above, power-to-gas holds many benefits that support our nation’s climate change 
 
12 86 Fed. Reg. at 72,479 (emphasis added). 
13 For the same reason, the reference to “energy basis” in 40 C.F.R. § 80.1415(c)(1) does not evidence that Congress intended 
to require that the energy must come from renewable biomass. 
14 Pg. 41 of the Report 

Page 9 of 11 
 
goals.  The EPA should approve power-to-gas pathways for the production of renewable fuels.  
When standardized procedures for life cycle assessment (LCA) are used, the climate value of 
these renewable fuels can be quantified, providing a means to validate the use of these fuels in 
our fight against climate change. 
 
4. Broaden the RFS beyond transportation 
 
Transportation contributes 29% of the US GHG emissions15.  While this is significant, it is 
important to tackle other sectors of our economy as well.  Incentives should be implemented 
that address energy use in all sectors of our economy.  Programs such as the RIN program were 
implemented when it was recognized that adding ethanol to gasoline would reduce GHG 
emissions.  It is now time to recognize that we must do much more than dilute our gasoline 
with ethanol.  We must promote means to fuel our net-zero economy with renewable fuels 
that are currently available and means that will become available.  Second guessing technology 
development stifles innovation instead of promoting it. 
 
5. Federal procurement power 
 
The Report states, “Although there are no Federal regulations that specifically govern CO2 
utilization, there is an opportunity for the Federal Government to use its procurement power to 
support early markets for CO2 utilization.”16  This is a powerful statement.  The Federal 
Government should support power-to-gas technologies in (1) recognizing that electricity 
generation system need not be co-localized with the CCUS project, (2) providing a nationwide 
means to purchase of renewable electricity which would otherwise be curtailed and (3) in the 
purchase of the renewable gas. 
 
Co-localization should not be required. A power purchase agreement with a renewable energy 
provider is a desirable method to provide power to CCUS. It may not always be practical to 
install solar, wind, or hydro adjacent to CCUS projects depending on land use and local 
environmental concerns.  There should be no requirement for co-localization of renewable 
power generation and utilization of CO2 since that approach may only be cost effective in 
specific locations. Power purchase agreements are a desirable method to provide power to 
CCUS projects at the lowest available price. 
 
Purchase otherwise curtailed power. In addition, a market mechanism is needed to trade 
renewable power that would be otherwise curtailed, wherever and whenever renewable 
production capacity is available.  As renewable power generation assets are increased 
throughout the U.S., more curtailment will occur.17 For example, in California, where there is 
 
15 c2es.org/content/u-s-
emissions/#:~:text=U.S.%20Greenhouse%20Gas%20Emissions%20by%20Gas%20and%20Sector%2C%202019&text
=Greenhouse%20gases%20are%20emitted%20by,%2C%20and%20agriculture%20(10%25). 
16 Pg. 42 of the Report  
17 Cole et al. 2021. Quantifying the challenge of reaching a 100% renewable energy power system for the United 
States. Joule 5:1732-1748. 

Page 10 of 11 
 
~33% renewable electricity generation, there was 1.5 TWh of curtailment in 2021, largely due 
to market dispatch of generators with economic bids to mitigate local congestion. In a scenario 
with 100% renewable energy in the United States, it is predicted that 7-8% of the variable 
renewable energy would be curtailed. This is an unnecessary waste of renewable energy and 
the assets used to produce it, especially when this curtailed renewable energy could have been 
stored through the production of hydrogen or methane.  The resulting clean methane could be 
stored and then distributed in the existing gas infrastructure and used for any future use, to 
replace fossil natural gas, including power generation.  A nation-wide mechanism to allow 
transparency for renewable energy availability is needed to prevent the waste of renewable 
electricity by economic curtailment.  
 
Purchase renewable gas. The Federal Government should lead the way in purchasing renewable 
methane at a price that will support growth of the power-to-gas industry.  This would be an 
invaluable lead-by-example support for the industry. 
 
III. 
Corrections to the CEQ Report on Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration 
 
Figure 2, pg. 14.  The figure should indicate that methane is a gaseous fuel. In addition, the 
statement, “Technologies that produce fuels and chemicals are generally at earlier stages of 
development and require additional research and development to improve process efficiencies 
and drive down costs.” is incorrect.  Electrochaea’s power-to-gas methanation technology is 
ready for commercialization.  Statements like this do not support the deployment of 
technologies that can make a strong impact in the nation’s net-zero goal. 
 
Pg. 16.  The statement, “One strategy for commercialization is to focus on higher-value 
specialty and fine products early in the development process, and then pivot toward larger-
volume commodity markets as the technology matures.”, does not encourage the deployment 
of technologies that are ready to provide replacement fuels for fossil natural gas.  Although the 
quoted strategy could be used, there is not time in our current climate crisis to give preference 
to the development of specialty chemicals that will not make a significant impact on the 
reduction of GHG emissions. 
Section 3.2.1. pg. 19.  This section could be updated to provide more accurate information on 
the potential for commercialization of nascent technologies. The statement: “Direct 
electrochemical processes that convert CO2 to fuels and chemicals have been demonstrated at 
laboratory-scale to generate a variety of products, including formic acid, methanol, methane, 
and ethylene. Challenges associated with direct electrochemical conversion processes include 
low selectivity in transferring charge (Faradaic efficiency), low current density that limits 
production rates, and poor stability the electrodes. R&D is needed to develop improved 
electrode materials and structures and improved process designs for practical applications. One 
other promising area of active research is “hybrid” microbial electrolysis cells, in which 
microbial communities living in the electrochemical cell convert CO2 to chemicals”, ignores a 
large body of relevant research that demonstrates that there is very high Faradaic efficiency 
with extraordinarily high selectivity (no byproducts), which has been demonstrated for the 

Page 11 of 11 
 
“hybrid” bioelectrochemical processes using well described monocultures of microbes, as 
compared to microbial communities.  These technologies rely on well-established monoculture, 
gas phase fermentation technologies that are not considered in the Report.  
Section 3.3. pg. 20-23.  The section should be updated to include the fixation of CO2 by archaea, 
which are methanogenic organisms that use CO2 and hydrogen for energy. This is a distinct 
process from carbon fixation by photosynthesis as the organisms live in an anaerobic 
environment. Organisms in anaerobic environments are remarkably more efficient in terms of 
energy use than aerobic organisms, like algae. These natural organisms produce 70% of the 
methane that is released into the environment18 and with very high Faradaic efficiencies. The 
hydrogenotrophic archaea take CO2 and H2 and produce methane, which is the biochemical 
mechanism that they use to obtain energy.  Electrochaea’s process uses one of these archaea19 
and renewable energy to produce methane in a reactor from which the methane can be 
collected and used to replace fossil natural gas. 
 
This section’s main focus is on algae, which is misleading because algae are only one of many 
means to provide clean fuels for use in our society.  Algae are not as efficient as the anaerobic 
organisms that use CO2 to generate fuel molecules. Algae require significantly more energy and 
carbon to maintain their biomass than the advanced anaerobic fermentation organisms. The 
2016 Billion-Ton Report: Advancing Domestic Resources for a Thriving Bioeconomy (BT16) takes 
a broad approach to the availability of biological resources for fuel production.  It is predicted 
that under a high yield scenario, there will be 1.5 billion tons of biomass available per year in 
204020.  And 230 billion ft3 of biogas available from landfills. Algae is included in this report, but 
it is not the main source of biomass.  
 
Electrochaea appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the interim guidance 
document, Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration Guidance. 
 
 
Submitted by, 
 
//Elizabeth Bray// 
Elizabeth Bray, Ph.D. 
Consultant for Electrochaea 
500 Capitol Mall Suite 1900 
Sacramento, CA 95814 
beth.bray@electrochaea.com 
 
 
 
18 Lyu, z. et al., Methanogenesis. Current Biology 28, R719–R736, July 9, 2018  
19 Electrochaea has exclusive rights to this organism which was patented by  
20 https://bioenergykdf.net/sites/default/files/2020-04/BillionTon_Report_2016_Chapter1.pdf

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0043 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
1
Comments of the Pipeline Safety Trust 
On Docket No. CEQ-2022-001
Carbon Capture, Utilization and Sequestration Guidance
March 18, 2022
The Pipeline Safety Trust is the only national public interest non-profit organization that focuses 
on pipeline safety. We do this by promoting pipeline safety through education and advocacy, by 
increasing access to information, and by building partnerships with residents, safety advocates, 
government, and industry, that result in safer communities and a healthier environment.  
We appreciate the opportunity to comment on this guidance from the Council on 
Environmental Quality intended to assist federal agencies with regulating and permitting of 
carbon capture and sequestration (CCS or CCUS).  As an initial matter, given the broad 
geographic area the CCS projects may involve, the numerous communities and regulatory 
schemes that it implicates, we believe the 30-day comment period provided on this guidance to 
be wholly inadequate.  More time should be provided if the Council is truly interested in getting 
responses from a broad group of stakeholders, many from historically disadvantaged 
communities.  
While we believe a thorough assessment of the efficacy of the full life cycle of CCUS projects as 
a means of reducing atmospheric carbon dioxide is imperative, we will limit our comments 
today to the part of that lifecycle in the middle: the transportation of extracted carbon dioxide 
by pipeline between its capture and processing and its permanent and verifiable sequestration. 
There are major gaps and inadequacies in the federal pipeline safety regulatory scheme that 
would govern a build-out of CO2 pipelines capable of transporting it from many industrial 
sources to sequestration sites that may be a long distance away.  That kind of build out is of 
entirely different risk profile than most of the existing CO2 lines that transport it from a single 
geologic source to an oil production field a relatively short distance away for use in enhanced 
oil recovery.  

2
The current inventory of just over 5000 miles of carbon dioxide pipelines is currently regulated 
under a set of rules established under the authority of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration, 49 CFR part 195, regulating the transport of hazardous liquids.  These 
pipelines transport CO2 in its supercritical fluid state, neither liquid nor gas, and that is the only
phase for which PHMSA has established regulations for the transport of CO2.  PHMSA has 
authority to adopt regulations governing the transport of CO2 in other phases but has not yet 
chosen to exercise those rules.  Moreover, the existing rules that apply to the transport of 
supercritical CO2 pipelines have major gaps, increasing the risk to communities through which 
the estimated 60,000 miles of new pipelines will travel.  PHMSA has statutory limitations on 
construction and design regulations, preventing the agency from forcing improvements on 
pipelines which have already been installed.  Therefore, it is imperative that the regulatory gaps 
be closed as quickly as possible.
Carbon dioxide is an intoxicant and an asphyxiant, it is heavier than air, and when it is released 
from a pipeline, it will hang close to the ground and spread and flow along the surface, finding 
valleys and low spots where it may linger for quite a long time.  How far it migrates and how 
long it stays at a lethal or intoxicating concentration depends on the terrain and atmospheric 
conditions.  In the 2020 failure of a Denbury CO2 line near Satartia, Mississippi, more than 40 
people needed hospital care, 300 people were evacuated, first responders were not equipped 
to respond, and vehicles in which people tried to evacuate would not operate for lack of 
oxygen.  See, https://www.huffpost.com/entry/gassing-satartia-mississippi-co2-
pipeline_n_60ddea9fe4b0ddef8b0ddc8f  
Another incident to look to is the Lake Nyos, Cameroon CO2 disaster of 1986.  A large natural 
release of CO2 from Lake Nyos displaced the air close to the ground and killed every person 
within 16 miles of the lake, over 1,700 people in all.
These pipelines are not low-risk; multiplying their numbers more than 10-fold should not be 
considered without significant changes and additions to the regulatory scheme to ensure safety
in siting, design, operation, and operator and community emergency response capabilities. 
The Guidance document states: In short, the successful widespread deployment of responsible 
CCUS will require strong and effective permitting, efficient regulatory regimes, meaningful 
public engagement early in the review and deployment process, and measures to safeguard 
public health and the environment. We could not agree more, but we are not at all confident 
that the Council appreciates the current state of CO2 pipeline safety regulations, and the urgent 
need for them to be augmented before significant additional CO2 infrastructure is built and 
grandfathered under the current regulations.  
PHMSA establishes minimum standards for pipeline safety, including design, construction, 
operations, maintenance, repair criteria and emergency response requirements.  The vast 
majority of the pipelines it regulates are natural gas distribution and transmission lines, 
regulated under part 192 of Title 49 of the CFR, and hazardous liquid lines, which 
predominantly carry crude oil and refined petroleum products and are regulated under part 

3
195. Carbon dioxide pipelines carrying CO2 are also regulated under part 195, but only in its 
supercritical fluid state and only when the product is 90% or more CO2.  There are no pipeline 
safety regulations for pipelines carrying gaseous CO2 or liquid CO2.  
PHMSA does not regulate or permit the siting and routing of pipelines, and therefore does not 
perform NEPA analyses to identify environmental harms or public safety risks they pose. Right 
now, anyone intending to build and operate a CO2 pipeline would only need to comply with the 
procedural requirements of those state pipeline agencies or commissions that regulate siting 
and routing, and not all of them do.  Many require only a finding of public good or necessity and 
do not constrain the location or routing of new pipelines: no safety distances from population 
centers, no minimum distances from schools or hospitals. No siting constraints, so no risk 
assessments are required to be performed.  
The current regulations also do not stipulate the quality of the CO2 that can be introduced into 
a regulated pipeline.  The introduction of contaminants, like those found in the emissions of 
many industrial processes, would create corrosive chemicals that will damage pipelines and 
increase the likelihood of pipeline failures, putting communities at risk.  Even water can be a 
destructive contaminant in a CO2 pipeline, easily forming carbonic acid which is highly 
corrosive.
Carbon dioxide pipelines can also be subject to a particular phenomenon when they fail.  
Ruptures can become running ductile fractures, effectively unzipping huge lengths of pipeline in 
an instant, allowing huge quantities of CO2 to be released all at once, as well as putting anyone 
in proximity to a rupturing line at risk of physical harm from the force. The current regulations 
do not prescribe that operators install any particular frequency of rupture arrestors that will 
stop a running ductile fracture.  
Similarly, the current regulations do not require specific emergency response training or 
equipment to be provided in communities that could be affected by a CO2 pipeline rupture.  
The incident in Satartia, MS should teach us that the current requirement for some sort of 
emergency response plan is simply not adequate for dealing with a large geographic area 
covered by an asphyxiant that also prevents non-electric vehicles from operating. 
The regulations also do not require an odorant to be added to CO2 pipelines.  In the case of a 
failure, after the initial release, dry ice crystals will thaw and the dangerous cloud will become 
both invisible and odorless.
There is a great deal of research and rulemaking that needs to happen before CCUS pipeline 
infrastructure should be built out. Unfortunately, there are already at least three pipelines 
planned for the Midwest, where proponents hope to extract CO2 from the emissions of ethanol 
plants and transport it many hundreds of miles to at least 2 separate sequestration locations.  
While the guidance document expresses an intent to “convene the relevant agencies to assess 
opportunities for improvement in carbon dioxide pipeline permitting”, we suspect that is 
intended to refer to ways to speed up the permitting rather than making it more deliberative, 

4
inclusive and safety-conscious.  We urge you to change that language, to acknowledge that 
current regulations have gaps in coverage and other inadequacies that must be fixed before the 
build out is too far along.  The recommendation that PHMSA consider updating criteria for 
geohazard risk evaluation in light of greater potential for risk to pipelines from climate change 
is well intended, but falls far short of recommending that PHMSA fill other major gaps in its 
regulations that would make it possible for CO2 lines to operate safely. The recommendations 
should be broadened to include an urgent recommendation that PHMSA enact necessary 
prescriptive regulations governing the operation of CO2 lines in all phases to reduce the risks to 
affected communities as much as possible. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.

--- COMMENT ID: CEQ-2022-0001-0044 AND DOCKET ID: CEQ-2022-0001 ---
Waterspirit ⸙ 4 E. River Road, Rumson, NJ 07760 ⸙ 732-923-9788 
water@waterspirit.org ⸙ www.waterspirit.org 
A Ministry of the Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace 
March 17, 2022 
Brenda Mallory, Chair  
United States Council on Environmental Quality 
730 Jackson Place NW 
Washington, DC 20503 
Via Electronic Submission 
 
Re: Docket ID Number: CEQ-2022-0001  
Dear, Chairperson Mallory: 
 
Waterspirit is a nonpartisan, nonprofit, spiritual ecology center based on occupied Lenni Lenape land in 
Rumson, New Jersey. Waterspirit is also a ministry of the Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace. We are grateful 
for the opportunity to comment on the “Council on Environmental Quality Report to Congress on 
Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Sequestration”1 from our aggregate experiences working with 
communities suffering through the most adverse physical and mental health realities resulting from 
unfettered air, water and land pollution.2   
 
It is our mission to hear the cry of Earth and the cry of the poor. We hope to connect future policy with 
the lived experiences of those residing in communities of most concern, devastatingly named “sacrifice 
zones.”3 Waterspirit offers the moral voice of people of faith across Turtle Island and our collective 
obligation to protect all Creation as humanity continues to experience disproportionate levels of 
emissions rooted in economic income inequality and environmental racism. We offer considerations 
based upon direct, indirect and cumulative impacts resulting from oil and natural4 gas operations, 
namely in the areas we serve in New Jersey, the northeast region and all across the land.  
 
Waterspirit’s recommendations are listed and detailed below:  
 Waterspirit recommends a significant direction of investments in renewable energy supply tech-
nologies with proven economic growth projections, i.e. solar, distributed energy resources 
(DERs), demand response (DR) programs, etc.  
 Waterspirit recommends this body independently scrutinize carbon capture, utilization, and se-
questration (“CCUS”), prior to any investment allocations.   
 Waterspirit recommends the Biden Administration look beyond Net Zero targets and, instead to 
Real Zero. 
 Waterspirit urges the Council on Environmental Quality to weigh the impacts on climate change 
of CCUS technologies and all related carbon schemes before providing investments in the same. 
                                                 
1 https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/CEQ-CCUS-Permitting-Report.pdf  
2 https://thesacrificezone.org/about  
3 https://vimeo.com/ondemand/thesacrificezone  
4 https://www.vox.com/22912760/natural-gas-methane-rename   

 
 
 
Waterspirit ⸙ 4 E. River Road, Rumson, NJ 07760 ⸙ 732-923-9788 
water@waterspirit.org ⸙ www.waterspirit.org 
A Ministry of the Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace 
 Waterspirit recommends the Council on Environmental Quality consider the need for invest-
ments in domestic renewable energy technologies in order to exhibit peaceful leadership through 
unequivocal domestic energy independence. 
Waterspirit recommends a significant direction of investments in renewable energy supply 
technologies with proven economic growth projections, i.e. solar, distributed energy resources 
(DERs), demand response (DR) programs, etc.  
 
“These calls for new fossil fuel investments in the name of reliability are a dangerous distortion of 
reality.”5 It is possible to transition our economy to 100% clean, renewable energy through rapid 
electrification, phasing out fossil fuels, and improved land management and restoration, keeping global 
warming at or below 1.5° C without utilizing CCUS. Our individual and collective energy needs must 
treat Earth with respect and longevity in mind. We need real climate solutions and humanity does not 
have time to spare when surveying and investing in community based solutions. Distributed energy 
resources (DERs) are enhancing grid hardening capabilities.6 Demand response (DR) will also help 
conserve energy informed by real time usage.7 “For reliability, we need reforms that force NERC to 
embrace both the reliability challenges and opportunities presented by renewable energy investments.”8  
 
Waterspirit recommends this body independently scrutinize carbon capture, utilization, and 
sequestration (“CCUS”), prior to any investment allocations.   
 
CCUS is a largely new, unproven technology. Our energy needs must be met; we also must treat Earth 
with respect and longevity in mind. The social costs of perpetuating carbon emissions are easily 
quantifiable and preventable. The federal government spending billions of taxpayer dollars on carbon 
schemes, especially on federal lands, is unjustifiable. As expressed in comments pertaining to and in 
writing thereafter the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) technical conference on 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions9, Waterspirit echoes that carbon capture and sequestration is not 
possible to be proven (1,000 years from now) and, in the short term, it is still confirming to be a 
financial fail.10   
 
Developing CCUS at a large scale would also require thousands of miles of new pipelines to transport 
liquefied carbon dioxide. These pipelines pose a grave threat to public safety. Vapor clouds of carbon 
dioxide can easily spread for miles and lead to hallucinations, intoxication, asphyxiation, and death. 
Humanity and all Creation would benefit from choosing a different path forward. Prevention of death by 
pollution is the best policy option to restrict perpetual emissions, given fugitive emissions are already 
posing known, preventable health hazards to surrounding communities.11 While cost of pollution is 
notable, with respect to humanity’s reproduction, “air pollution causes 16,000 premature births in the 
                                                 
5 https://news.bloomberglaw.com/us-law-week/clean-energy-is-grid-reliabilitys-best-hope-not-enemy  
6 https://finance.yahoo.com/news/voltus-coinmint-partner-reduce-energy-120000539.html 
7 https://www.eenews.net/articles/how-a-smarter-grid-can-prevent-blackouts/  
8 https://news.bloomberglaw.com/us-law-week/clean-energy-is-grid-reliabilitys-best-hope-not-enemy  
9 https://www.ferc.gov/GhG-mitigation  
10 https://www.upstreamonline.com/energy-transition/chevrons-flagship-gorgon-ccs-project-still-failing-to-live-up-to-expectations/2-1-
1166185  
11 https://www.ehn.org/fractured-series-on-fracking-pollution-2650624600.html  

 
 
 
Waterspirit ⸙ 4 E. River Road, Rumson, NJ 07760 ⸙ 732-923-9788 
water@waterspirit.org ⸙ www.waterspirit.org 
A Ministry of the Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace 
United States each year.”12 As Waterspirit’s Public Policy & Justice Organizer shared as part of the 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission’s technical conference on greenhouse gas emissions last year, 
there remain legal loopholes that allow for failed compliance with the Clean Water Act and the Safe 
Drinking Water Act.13 Fugitive emissions continue to escape with no oversight.14   
Waterspirit recommends the Biden Administration look beyond Net Zero targets and, instead to 
Real Zero. 
 
The best way to forge a new path for healthy future generations is to focus on the best long term 
planning options to serve with the least amount of pollution today. President Biden and members of his 
administration have regularly and correctly named climate change as an existential threat to humanity, 
while heavily subsidizing fossil fuel to the detriment of public health, in Pennsylvania, for example.15 
Investing CCUS is a dangerous distraction from genuine climate solutions. Regardless of the Biden 
Administration’s Executive Order 8th December, Catalyzing America’s Clean Energy Economy Through 
Federal Sustainability16, Net Zero is not the target upon which we should be focused. We need to strive 
for real zero. Friends of the Earth’s Chasing Carbon Unicorns17 report shares: “governments and other 
actors should set two distinct targets: to phase out use of fossil fuels, and invest in and support 
ecosystems and the people and livelihoods dependent on those ecosystems. First and foremost, they 
must adopt an emissions reduction target that leads to Real Zero.”  
 
Waterspirit urges the Council on Environmental Quality to weigh the impacts on climate change 
of CCUS technologies and all related carbon schemes before providing investments in the same. 
 
Under the heading in the report, “1. Facilitating Federal Decision Making on CCUS Projects and Carbon 
Dioxide Pipelines”18 monitoring sequestered carbon is presented as possible. Such monitoring can be 
avoided if we understand the risks involved in the process and prevent misuses of critical time and 
funding in the process in the first place. Capturing carbon dioxide is an energy intensive process, and it 
allows for continued extraction and burning of coal, oil, and gas. Utilizing pipelines for the flow of 
captured carbon dioxide will require compressor stations every 50 miles of each pipeline. Monitoring 
will not help the clear cutting and trenching done to install facilities to pump carbon dioxide through a 
pipeline system and into the ground. Fossil fuel operations have knowingly poisoned communities for 
decades19, and attempting to capture emissions at the final step of energy production does nothing to 
prevent the negative air, water, and health impacts associated with past and ongoing pollution without 
accountability. We agree in the report recommendations that suggest planning for and addressing the 
impacts of climate change in the “design, construction, and maintenance of carbon dioxide pipelines.”20 
If this assessment is done, the outcome will be to shift focus on renewable energy alternatives and 
                                                 
12Washington, Dr. Harriet A., A Terrible Thing to Waste: Environmental Racism and Its Assault on the American Mind, 2019; Little, Brown Spark, USA. 
(Justin Worland, “Air Pollution: This Toxic Pollutant Could Harm The Brain,” https://time.com/4480016/air-pollution-health-effects/ ; Justin Worland Pre-
term Births Costs Billions in the U.S. https://time.com/4274355/air-pollution-preterm-birth/)  
13 https://www.eenews.net/articles/fight-escalates-over-ferc-gas-climate-reviews/  
14 4th May, 2021 Congressional Briefing on the Abuses of FERC and Need for Legislative Reforms via YouTube https://youtu.be/tM3p-XfSOFs  
15 https://www.ehn.org/fractured-series-on-fracking-pollution-2650624600.html  
16 https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/08/fact-sheet-president-biden-signs-executive-order-catalyzing-americas-clean-
energy-economy-through-federal-sustainability/  
17 https://www.foei.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Friends-of-the-earth-international-carbon-unicorns-english.pdf  
18 https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/CEQ-CCUS-Permitting-Report.pdf 
19 https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/mar/18/oil-industry-fossil-fuels-air-pollution-documents  
20 https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/CEQ-CCUS-Permitting-Report.pdf 

 
 
 
Waterspirit ⸙ 4 E. River Road, Rumson, NJ 07760 ⸙ 732-923-9788 
water@waterspirit.org ⸙ www.waterspirit.org 
A Ministry of the Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace 
related investments in time and funding, commensurate with climate change’s mental health impacts on 
young people locally and across Earth. The December 2021 Lancet Planetary Health report on climate 
anxiety is a red alarm those in positions of impactful decision making power must address seriously.21 
 
Waterspirit recommends the Council on Environmental Quality consider the need for investments 
in domestic renewable energy technologies in order to exhibit peaceful leadership through une-
quivocal domestic energy independence.  
National Security Considerations: Water is the creator and sustainer of all life. Water is scarce and neces-
sary for survival. Fossil fuel energy and infrastructure is entangled in international power struggles, be-
ginning with an individual’s power struggle within themselves. As has been foreseen for many decades 
by purveyors of peace and promoters of localized economies – garnering renewable energy and reducing 
reliance on consumption would produce less strife, less conflict, less veterans. Reducing our domestic 
reliance on volatile energy is today’s charge. The debacle in Europe underway is a prime example of 
why such relations and reliance must end, as soon as possible. Known toxic emissions22 spewing into 
Earth’s atmosphere at a wild pace without oversight was the worst investment in time, money and hu-
man power.23 CCUS will not produce high quality jobs. Writer, activist and founder of Third Act, an ef-
fort to organize people over the age of 60, Bill McKibben wrote in the Guardian February 25th: 
“now is the moment to remind ourselves that, in the last decade, scientists and engineers have 
dropped the cost of solar and wind power by an order of magnitude, to the point where it is some 
of the cheapest power on Earth. The best reason to deploy it immediately is to ward off the 
existential crisis that is climate change, and the second best is to stop the killing of nine million 
people annually who die from breathing in the particulates that fossil fuel combustion 
 
In summation, sound science- independent science, free from ties to industry profiting from polluting, is 
necessary to invest appropriately toward the survival of our species. What we, as humans, do to Earth, 
we do to ourselves. Public engagement will prove to be the foremost precaution toward a future 
embedded in community regeneration, free from Earth’s perpetual exploitation and war. In the spirit of 
understanding equity and justice, concerns and ideas from frontline communities should be informing 
the cross-agency interdisciplinary approach to solutions toward forecasted stability and security.  
 
We appreciate the opportunity to comment and remain available should you wish to speak with us 
directly. Waterspirit has graciously hosted seasonal celebrations for over 20 years. We wish you all an 
enjoyable Spring Equinox!   
 
Kind regards, 
-- 
Rachel Dawn Davis 
Public Policy & Justice Organizer 
Pronouns: she/her 
                                                 
21 https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanplh/article/PIIS2542-5196(21)00278-3/fulltext  
22 https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/nov/18/the-forgotten-oil-ads-that-told-us-climate-change-was-nothing    
23 https://www.hottakepod.com/war-who-is-it-good-for-the-fossil-fuel-industry/
